
Indian Company Under Scrutiny Over U.S. Visas
The New York Times
June 22, 2011 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 1479 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON and VIKAS BAJAJ
Body


A giant Indian outsourcing company with thousands of employees in the United States is facing an expanding federal investigation prompted by claims from an American whistle-blower that it misused short-term visitors' visas to bring in low-cost workers from India.
Accusations that the company, Infosys Technologies, repeatedly violated the terms of business visitor visas were first raised in a lawsuit filed in February in Alabama by Jack Palmer, an Infosys project manager. Aside from Mr. Palmer, at least two other Infosys managers in the United States have submitted internal whistle-blower reports pointing to Indians on business visitor visas who were performing longer-term work not authorized under those visas, according to internal documents and current Infosys managers.
In May, Infosys acknowledged that it had received a subpoena from a federal grand jury in Texas seeking information about the company's use of the visitor documents, known as B-1 visas, which are easier to obtain. This month, N. R. Narayana Murthy, an Infosys founder, expressed his concern about that investigation at a board meeting in Bangalore, India, in his final address before he retired as company chairman.
''As I leave the board, I feel sad'' about the subpoena, he said. ''The issue will be decided on its merits in due course,'' said Mr. Murthy, who is something of a legend in global business for building the company over three decades from a $250 investment into an outsourcing powerhouse with $6 billion in revenues.
In papers filed in Mr. Palmer's lawsuit, Infosys denied all his accusations and asked a federal judge to remove the dispute from court and send it to arbitration. In a statement, Infosys said it was committed to ''absolute compliance'' with American visa requirements and had undertaken an internal review of its practices.
''Infosys is a large and rapidly growing company,'' the statement said. ''We have made changes over time to certain of our policies relating to the business visa program and we may continue to make improvements in those policies and controls.''
The Infosys inquiry coincides with a broader attack in Congress on longer-term visas, known as H-1B, that Infosys and other Indian companies rely on to bring Indian technology workers to the United States. With unemployment for Americans stubbornly high, lawmakers have become increasingly reluctant to defend H-1B visas, which give temporary residence to highly skilled foreigners. In recent years, the top companies receiving those visas were not American names, but Infosys and another big Indian outsourcing company, Wipro.
Last week, Representative Zoe Lofgren of California, the senior Democrat on the immigration subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, introduced a bill that would increase the wages employers would have to pay H-1B workers, in an effort to ensure they do not undercut Americans. The measure is specifically aimed at Indian outsourcing companies. Last year, Congress added an extra $2,000 to the fee for H-1B visas, in another move aimed at the Indian companies.
Yet the criminal investigation is perhaps the most worrisome development for Infosys, which enjoys a reputation as one of India's best-run and most respected companies. The events began with Mr. Palmer, 43, a project manager from Alabama who was hired by the company in 2008. In a sworn affidavit he submitted to the federal court, Mr. Palmer said his differences with Infosys management began after he was summoned to a meeting in Bangalore in March 2010. Top executives, he said, discussed ways to ''creatively'' get around H-1B visa limitations ''to fulfill the high demand for its customers at lower cost.''
In general, B-1 visas are granted to business visitors coming to the United States for short stays to attend meetings, conferences or training sessions, or to install specialized equipment. Visitors may not be employed for contract work like H-1B workers, nor can they be paid salaries in this country. There is no annual limit on business visitor visas, whereas H-1B visas are restricted to 85,000 a year.
Mr. Palmer said his supervisors asked him to write letters inviting workers to come from India for sales and training meetings, letters he believed were false. ''I refused to write the letters,'' he said.
After word got out of his refusal, Mr. Palmer said, he was chastised by his managers and began to receive threats by e-mail and telephone. In October, Infosys has confirmed, Mr. Palmer filed a whistle-blower report about B-1 visa holders from India assigned to projects he or others managed. His report said the B-1 visa holders were doing the same tasks as workers on H-1B visas, including writing and testing software code. Mr. Palmer said he personally knew of at least 60 Indian workers doing contract work on B-1 visas.
Mr. Palmer still works at Infosys. He feels isolated and besieged within the company, according to Kenneth Mendelsohn, his lawyer in Montgomery, who has instructed him not to speak publicly about his experience.
''I'm protecting him as best I can so Infosys doesn't fire him,'' Mr. Mendelsohn said. But Mr. Mendelsohn provided documents and e-mails that he said Mr. Palmer has shared with investigators from the State Department Bureau of Diplomatic Security, the Department of Homeland Security and the Justice Department.
In one e-mail, another Infosys manager confirmed to Mr. Palmer that three Indians on B-1 visas were ''working on client sites'' on a contract with Baker Hughes, an oil services company in Houston.
In an e-mail exchange with Jeffrey Friedel, a top lawyer for Infosys, Mr. Palmer described the work assigned to one B-1 visa holder on a project for Heidrick & Struggles, an executive search company in Chicago. ''His project task consists of reviewing designs and then to physically create and write test scripts,'' Mr. Palmer wrote. ''This process is repeated over many weeks.''
Referring to the same employee, another manager wrote that he was ''working on a B-1 visa'' and cautioned his colleagues not to include the man's name in any contracts. ''We can't put name on B-1 people for contract,'' the manager wrote.
In an e-mail in December, Mr. Friedel assured Mr. Palmer that the issues he had raised ''have made it clear to management that certain changes need to be made to our systems.'' Mr. Friedel enumerated seven steps the company would take to prevent misuse of visitor visas.
But only this month, another Infosys manager became alarmed after discovering by chance that B-1 workers were among the team members on a project under the manager's supervision. ''There was no significant difference between the B-1 and the H-1B employees in the type of work they did,'' the manager, who was granted anonymity out of fears of retaliation by the company, said in an interview.
At least one of Infosys' major clients, Wal-Mart, has been contacted by investigators about its contracts with Infosys. Greg Rossiter, a Wal-Mart spokesman, declined to comment. There has been no suggestion of wrongdoing by any Infosys client mentioned in the visa investigations.
A State Department official in India said Infosys and other Indian companies had made use in recent years of an exception in the complex visa guidelines that allows them to send workers to the United States on B-1 visas for up to six months for certain short-term projects that might otherwise have required an H-1B visa. Since last year, the State Department has clamped down on the use of that exception and is considering whether to eliminate it, the official and several outsourcing executives in India said.
Mr. Palmer, who is known as Jay, filed his lawsuit claiming that Infosys had failed to protect him from threats from within the company he received after submitting his whistle-blower report, and had unfairly withheld more than $100,000 in bonuses he was owed. Described by his lawyer, Mr. Mendelsohn, as ''on an emotional roller coaster,'' Mr. Palmer has reported receiving a new death threat against himself and his family as recently as April.
While denying Mr. Palmer's claims, Infosys has noted that Indian employees with business visitor visas are a small part -- less than 2 percent -- of its teams in the United States. The company reports a total of 15,500 employees in this country, including 10,100 on H-1B visas. North American clients account for 65 percent of the company's revenue.
At least one top Indian executive overseeing United States immigration procedures has resigned from the company, Infosys said.
But Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee who closely monitors United States visa programs, said he remained skeptical of Infosys's intentions.
''It appears the B-1 visa program has become a subterfuge for companies wanting to avoid the cap-and-wage requirements of the H-1B visa,'' Mr. Grassley said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: N. R. Narayana Murthy, a founder and recently retired chairman of Infosys. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AIJAZ RAHI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Employees in 2008 at Infosys in Bangalore, India. The company's visa practices are under scrutiny. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAMAS BHOJANI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                             

Load-Date: June 22, 2011


End of Document
Justice Dept. Suit Says Facebook Discriminates Against U.S. Workers
The New York Times 
December 3, 2020 Thursday 15:58 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1057 words
Byline: Cecilia Kang and Mike Isaac
Highlight: The complaint, which targets the company’s hiring of immigrants on temporary visas, opens a new front in Washington’s battle against Big Tech.
Body


The complaint, which targets the company’s hiring of immigrants on temporary visas, opens a new front in Washington’s battle against Big Tech.
WASHINGTON — The Justice Department sued Facebook on Thursday, accusing it of being un-American by favoring foreign workers with visas over those from the United States, in a new push against tech companies in the waning days of the Trump administration.
In the complaint, the department’s civil rights division said Facebook “refused to recruit, consider or hire qualified and available U.S. workers” for more than 2,600 positions, with an average salary of $156,000. Those jobs instead went to immigrant visa holders, according to the complaint.
The action followed a two-year investigation into whether Facebook intentionally favored so-called H1-B visa and other temporary immigrant workers over U.S. workers, the Justice Department said.
“Our message to workers is clear: If companies deny employment opportunities by illegally preferring temporary visa holders, the Department of Justice will hold them accountable,” said Eric S. Dreiband, the assistant attorney general for the civil rights division. “Our message to all employers — including those in the technology sector — is clear: You cannot illegally prefer to recruit, consider or hire temporary visa holders over U.S. workers.”
Andy Stone, a Facebook spokesman, said, “Facebook has been cooperating with the D.O.J. in its review of this issue, and while we dispute the allegations in the complaint, we cannot comment further on pending litigation.”
Bipartisan anger in Washington has mounted in recent years against Facebook, Google, Amazon and Apple — some of the world’s most valuable companies — for data privacy abuses, the spread of disinformation and other toxic content on their platforms, and complaints of anticompetitive practices that have harmed consumers and small businesses.
For months, regulators and lawmakers have homed in on Facebook for possible monopoly violations. The Federal Trade Commission and dozens of states are preparing antitrust lawsuits against the social network for maintaining its power through mergers of nascent competitors, such as Instagram and WhatsApp. They are expected to announce plans for legal action soon, people briefed on the cases have said.
The discrimination suit, which goes before an administrative law judge, opens a different front in Washington’s battle against Big Tech. Although President Trump has jabbed at the companies as recently as this week, when he threatened to revoke speech liability protections for internet platforms like Facebook and Twitter, it is the first time the administration has brought legal action claiming immigrant employment bias.
Skilled-worker visas in the technology industry have been a focus of debate for a decade. Facebook, Google, Microsoft, IBM and other companies have lobbied for years to expand H1-B visas, arguing the importance of getting the best engineers from overseas, particularly from China and India. Critics have called the visa program a crutch for tech companies to overlook U.S.-born talent and lure foreign workers at lower wages.
Mr. Trump has been a vocal critic of temporary worker visas. In October, his administration announced new rules for the H1-B program, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants.
The Justice Department has rarely sued tech companies on the issue, though other agencies have accused the firms of racial or gender bias. In 2016, the Labor Department sued the data firm Palantir, alleging bias against Asians. The Labor Department separately sued Google to reveal data on hiring based on gender, race, religion and sexual orientation.
According to its complaint, the Justice Department found that between Jan. 1 and Sept. 18 last year, Facebook routinely put H1-B and other immigrant temporary workers on a track for permanent employment that was not available to U.S. citizens. Facebook also used less effective methods to advertise jobs to U.S. workers, including declining to promote the positions on Facebook.com/careers, the department said.
The hiring spotlighted by the complaint made up just 0.5 percent of Facebook’s 50,000 employees. But the Justice Department said Facebook had violated federal labor laws that require employers to make permanent employment opportunities as easily available to U.S. workers as they are to foreign visa holders.
“Facebook’s discriminatory recruitment and hiring practice is routine, ongoing and widespread,” the complaint said.
Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, has for years made fighting for immigrants’ rights to work in the U.S. tech industry a pet issue. In 2013, he and several friends created Fwd.us, a nonprofit group that pushed for an overhaul of immigration laws and stumped for easing the immigration process for tech workers.
The issue has been a source of friction between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Trump. In 2015, leaders at Fwd.us chafed at Mr. Trump’s immigration proposals, which would have restricted H-1B visas for skilled, foreign-born employees. They claimed that the plan would “radically restrict” paths to the United States for immigrant tech workers.
When Mr. Trump signed an executive order in 2017 limiting immigration from majority-Muslim countries, Mr. Zuckerberg spoke out against it.
“We need to keep this country safe, but we should do that by focusing on people who actually pose a threat,” he said in a post to his Facebook page. “We should also keep our doors open to refugees and those who need help. That’s who we are.”
Kim Clarke, a lawyer at Varnum who advises employers on immigration and labor issues, said the Justice Department suit could have a chilling effect on tech hiring.
“In the long run, if broader tech companies can’t hire the skilled talent on which they rely, their competitive positions will be hindered,” Ms. Clarke said. “The trickle-down effect of this action could impact even smaller employers that hire only a handful of foreign workers.”
Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.
PHOTO: Outside the headquarters of Facebook, which the Justice Department accused of favoring immigrants over Americans when hiring. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Henry for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 19, 2021


End of Document
Changing Course, U.S. Allows Visas For Online Study
The New York Times
July 15, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1514 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan and Anemona Hartocollis
Body


The Trump administration said it would no longer require international students to attend in-person classes during the coronavirus pandemic in order to remain in the country.
In a rare and swift immigration policy reversal, the Trump administration on Tuesday bowed to snowballing opposition from universities, Silicon Valley and 20 states and abandoned a plan to strip international college students of their visas if they did not attend at least some classes in person. 
  The policy, which would have subjected foreign students to deportation if they did not show up for class on campus, had thrown the higher education world into turmoil at a time when universities are grappling with whether to reopen campuses during the coronavirus pandemic.
  The loss of international students could have cost universities millions of dollars in tuition and jeopardized the ability of U.S. companies to hire the highly skilled workers who often start their careers with an American education.
  Two days after the policy was announced on July 6, Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology filed the first of a litany of lawsuits seeking to block it.
  On Tuesday, minutes before a federal judge in Boston was to hear arguments on their challenge, the judge, Allison D. Burroughs, announced that the administration had agreed to rescind the policy and allow international students to remain in the country even if they are taking all their classes online.
  The government has argued that the requirement that students take at least one in-person class was actually more lenient than the rule that had been in effect for close to 20 years which required foreign students to take most of their classes in person.
  But that rule was temporarily suspended on March 13, when Mr. Trump declared a national emergency and campuses across the country began shutting down, with classes moving online. On July 6, the government made its announcement that foreign students could not remain in the United States if their studies were entirely online.
  ''If they're not going to be a student or they're going to be 100 percent online, then they don't have a basis to be here,'' Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said in an interview on CNN after the policy was announced. ''They should go home, and then they can return when the school opens.''
  Each year, about 1 million international students enroll in American universities. They contribute $41 billion to the economy annually and support more than 458,000 jobs.
  In addition to Harvard and M.I.T., the attorneys general of 20 states, including Massachusetts and California, also sued, charging that the policy was reckless, cruel and senseless. Scores of universities threw their support behind the litigation, along with organizations representing international students.
  The pressure grew on Monday, when more than a dozen technology companies, including Google, Facebook and Twitter, also came out in support of the lawsuit, arguing that the policy would harm their businesses. Then on Tuesday, 15 Republican members of Congress signed a letter urging the Trump administration to restore its previous policy on international students.
  Representative Rodney Davis, an Illinois Republican who had organized the letter, applauded the Trump administration's ''right decision'' to cancel its plan. ''These hardworking students are the best and brightest from their countries, and they help our communities grow both culturally and economically,'' he said.
  The policy about foreign students was one of a number of measures President Trump has taken to advance his agenda on immigration, using the coronavirus pandemic and the need to protect the country from health threats as justification.
  The administration has also stopped processing green cards for applicants abroad; closed the southwestern border to nonessential travel, allowing only Americans and legal permanent residents to enter while barring asylum seekers; and banned the entry of thousands of foreigners on work visas.
  The universities said in their court challenge to the latest policy that ''by all appearances,'' the government's attempt to force international students to study on campus had also been a political move, calculated to advance the Trump administration's agenda to force universities to reopen their gates with in-person classes.
  They said forcing students to return to their home countries would in many cases separate them from families in the United States, returning them to places where they no longer had a home. In some cases, they would be living under the thumb of repressive regimes, which policed or restricted internet access.
  Many international students from Asian countries would have to contend with a time difference that would mean taking classes between 2 a.m. and 7 a.m., if they had internet access.
  Foreign students attending elementary, middle and high schools on visas would have also had to depart the country if their classes went 100 percent online.
  In court filings, universities said that some arriving students already had been barred from entering the country by immigration officials at airports who told them that their institutions were going online.
  After the announcement on Tuesday that the policy had been rescinded, university officials praised the decision and warned that they would be prepared to go back to court should the administration make any further moves to restrict the ability of international students to study online when necessary.
  ''This is a significant victory,'' Harvard's president, Lawrence S. Bacow, said in a statement. ''The directive had disrupted all of American higher education. I have heard from countless international students who said that the July 6 directive had put them at serious risk. These students -- our students -- can now rest easier and focus on their education, which is all they ever wanted to do.''
  L. Rafael Reif, president of M.I.T., said the swift opposition was evidence of ''the important role international students play in our education, research and innovation enterprises here in the United States. These students make us stronger, and we hurt ourselves when we alienate them.''
  The University of Southern California, among the universities with the largest population of international students, said in a statement that it was ''thrilled that the government backed down and rescinded its rule that would have revoked visas for international students.''
  U.S.C., which led a coalition of 20 universities and colleges on the West Coast that sued the government, said its international students ''deserve the right to continue their education without risk of deportation.''
  After the announcement of the now-rescinded policy this month, international students had begun scrambling to figure out next steps. Some said they booked flights home. Others held out hope that their colleges might add classes with an in-person component to enable them to remain in the United States.
  Willow Cai, a rising junior at U.S.C. who is from China, said she had rushed last week to register for a golf class to ensure she had an in-person class. After hearing the administration had rescinded the new policy, she expressed relief and outrage at the government's initiative.
  ''I'm like really emotional right now. The July 6 directive should never have happened,'' said Ms. Cai, 20, a cinema major. She also said she planned to drop the golf class.
  ''All we want is to continue our education in peace during a global pandemic,'' she said on Tuesday in Los Angeles. ''It seems this administration has no concern for international students beyond our wallets.''
  Alexander Auster, 22, a second-year student at George Washington University Law School from Berlin, had already signed a lease on an apartment for the next academic year when the policy was announced. He had arrived in the United States when he was 17 to join the university's varsity swim team.
  ''It feels really good now,'' he said after hearing that the government had walked back its plan. ''Now I am hopeful and optimistic. I thought I had to go home.''
  An analysis of the government's earlier order by Moody's Analytics found that it could have had a serious economic impact. According to NAFSA: Association of International Educators, three jobs are created for every seven international students. In the 2019-20 school year there were over 1 million international students enrolled in the United States, which would translate to almost half a million jobs. ''ICE's policy would put many of those positions at risk,'' Moody's Analytics said.
  A third of all international students are from China, where travel restrictions could make it hard for them to return, Moody's said.
  College towns are heavily dependent on international students for their economic well-being, and the Partnership for a New American Economy and the American Enterprise Institute estimate that every H-1B visa, a foreign worker visa, leads to two jobs being created.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/14/us/coronavirus-international-foreign-student-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Harvard University last week, after the policy announcement that would have required foreign students to leave the United States if they did not take at least one in-person class. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MADDIE MEYER/GETTY IMAGES) (A6)               

Load-Date: July 15, 2020


End of Document
U.S. Curbs Visas, Putting Squeeze On Hiring Plans
The New York Times
September 3, 2018 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1697 words
Byline: By NELSON D. SCHWARTZ and STEVE LOHR
Body


The Trump administration is using the country's vast and nearly opaque immigration bureaucracy to constrict the flow of foreign workers into the United States by throwing up new roadblocks to limit legal arrivals.
The government is denying more work visas, asking applicants to provide additional information and delaying approvals more frequently than just a year earlier. Hospitals, hotels, technology companies and other businesses say they are now struggling to fill jobs with the foreign workers they need. 
  With foreign hires missing, the employees who remain are being forced to pick up the slack. Seasonal industries like hotels and landscaping are having to turn down customers or provide fewer services. Corporate executives worry about the long-term impact of losing talented engineers and programmers to countries like Canada that are laying out the welcome mat for skilled foreigners.
  At Northwell Health's pathology lab on Long Island, a new doctor's cubicle stands empty, her computer and microscope untouched. Other residents started on July 1, but she is stuck in India's Punjab State, held up by unexplained delays in her visa.
  ''There have been delays in processing that we have not felt before,'' said Dr. Andrew C. Yacht, chief academic officer at Northwell, which includes Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan and North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.
  In April 2017, President Trump signed a ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order, directing government officials to ''rigorously enforce'' immigration laws. The order did not get the kind of attention that followed the administration's decision to separate families at the Mexican border this summer.
  A few months later, the president endorsed legislation that would cut legal immigration by half. The bill was introduced by two Republican senators, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia. But Republican leaders in Congress have not advanced it.
  Some lawmakers say Mr. Trump is using administrative means to reshape immigration policy because those changes have stalled on Capitol Hill.
  ''If they want to have a proposal on immigration, they should send it to Congress,'' said Representative Ro Khanna, a Democrat whose district includes parts of Silicon Valley. ''The administration should engage in that conversation. To unilaterally and without any accountability change what Congress has authorized is not democratic.''
  In practice, businesses say the increased red tape has made it harder to secure employment-based visas. That has added to the difficulty of finding qualified workers with the unemployment rate falling to 3.9 percent.
  A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions for skilled foreign workers had increased 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the third quarter. Government requests for additional information for applications doubled in the fourth quarter, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his order.
  Experts say a sustained reduction in immigration could dampen growth over time as more baby boomers retire, leaving big gaps in the job market.
  That goes for high-skilled immigrants and low-skilled workers, said Francine D. Blau, an economist at Cornell. The latter will be vital in fields like elder care and child care, as well as construction and cleaning.
  ''A lot of our labor-force growth comes from immigrants and their children,'' Ms. Blau said. ''Without them, we'd suffer the problems associated with countries with an aging population, like Japan.''
  The Business Roundtable, a group of corporate leaders, recently challenged the Trump administration over changes that it says threaten the livelihoods of thousands of skilled foreign workers, and economic growth and competitiveness.
  In a statement, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the administration was ''relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move toward a merit-based system.'' It added that all petitions and applications were handled ''fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.''
  The H-1B program, which was created to bring in foreigners with skills that business leaders argued would strengthen the economy, has long been a target for some politicians. The visa program has been criticized because corporations have exploited it to replace American workers.
  Still, many economists say H-1B holders are valuable. Immigrants file patents at twice the rate of native-born Americans and start about 25 percent of high-tech companies in the United States.
  ''There's absolutely no research that supports the idea that cutting legal immigration is good for the economy,'' said Ethan Lewis, a Dartmouth economist.
  Hospitals in particular argue that they need foreign doctors who are more willing than native-born Americans to take jobs in less glamorous and lower-paying fields, like internal and family medicine. Of Northwell's 1,826 resident doctors, 165 came in under H1-B or J-1 student visas.
  Nearly one-third of pathology residents come from other countries, according to the National Resident Matching Program. But the number of overseas applicants in all specialties has dropped for two years in a row.
  ''The administration's policies are having a chilling effect on the interest of international medical graduates coming to the United States to train,'' said Mona M. Signer, chief executive of the matching program.
  The missing Indian pathologist's workload at Northwell has been spread among 11 residents, lengthening the time they are on call.
  ''Our nation's ability to care for patients is dependent on international medical graduates,'' Dr. Yacht said.
  The effect of lower-skilled immigrants is more debatable. George J. Borjas, a Harvard economist, has found that an influx of such workers reduced the incomes of people without a high school degree between 3 and 5 percent.
  Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis, agrees that individual workers can be hurt by competition from lower-paid foreigners. But he said the overall effect on wages was modest. Immigration also tends to bolster the incomes of college-educated Americans.
  Mr. Peri points to what happened when the government deported between 400,000 and 500,000 Mexicans between 1929 and 1934, most of whom worked in agriculture and construction. With fewer people to work the fields, farm owners and agricultural businesses cut administrative, sales and clerical jobs because there was not enough to do.
  ''Out of eight or 10 positions held by Mexicans, maybe one or two were taken by Americans,'' Mr. Peri said. ''The rest disappeared.''
  Rob Hurst is not concerned with the macroeconomics of immigration. He is just struggling to keep bathrooms clean.
  This summer, he has found himself on his hands and knees scrubbing toilets and tubs at Edgartown Commons, a hotel he manages on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts. Five Jamaican workers who had long worked at the property failed to get H2-B seasonal-work visas.
  ''I'm 65 years old, but you got to do what you got to do,'' he said. ''We did hire contract workers, but it's never going to be as good as people with years of experience.''
  In the past, returning H2-B visa workers were not counted against the program's annual cap of 66,000. Congress declined to renew that exemption in December 2016.
  Foreign workers are also growing frustrated about the clampdown on visas and rising anti-immigrant sentiment.
  Uday Verma is leaving after 12 years in Iowa, time he spent earning a graduate degree in computer science and working for a technology company.
  Mr. Verma, 37, who emigrated from India, has repeatedly renewed his H-1B visa while waiting fruitlessly for permanent resident status -- also known as a green card. Had he been successful, he could have easily switched employers or started his own business.
  ''I can't make a plan here,'' Mr. Verma said. ''You're perpetually in this state of limbo. It just doesn't make sense anymore to stay here and keep pursuing this American dream.''
  Mr. Verma, his wife and their 9-year-old son plan to be living in Toronto by the time their American visas expire in the second week of September.
  He is taking advantage of the Global Talent Stream initiative the Canadian government started last year. It lets companies in innovative fields, like artificial intelligence, quickly secure visas for workers with vital skills.
  With experience with A.I. programming tools, Mr. Verma got a visa in two weeks, and could become a permanent resident in six months or so.
  His employer, Kira Systems, makes software that reads and analyzes legal contracts. The company has more than doubled its employment in the past year, to 115 people. Noah Waisberg, a co-founder and the chief executive, said half of Kira's technical staff was from China, India, Russia and other countries.
  Canada has long welcomed immigrants. ''But that is even more so relative to the United States, given the climate in America now,'' Mr. Waisberg said. ''It's certainly helped us recruit.''
  Mr. Trump's ''hire American'' push is helping some domestic businesses. One of those is Nexient, which provides software services and competes with firms in India and elsewhere. Fearful of becoming too dependent on offshore firms, corporate customers are increasingly interested in having domestic partners, said Mark Orttung, Nexient's chief executive.
  ''You still have to win the business, but it has been an accelerator for us,'' he said.
  Nexient is based in Newark, Calif., but its programmers are mainly in Michigan and Indiana. The start-up employs more than 500 people, up from 400 last year.
  About 10 percent of Nexient's employees have H-1B visas, typically engineers who have mastered old software systems and other niche technologies in corporate data centers.
  Those foreign workers are fielding more government requests for information and waiting longer for visa renewals, Mr. Orttung said. ''It adds a great deal of uncertainty to the lives of some of our employees.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/02/business/trump-legal-immigration-h1b-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Uday Verma and his wife, Anamika Chandel, grew tired of waiting for a green card and are leaving Iowa City for a job in Toronto. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHRYN GAMBLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12)       

Load-Date: September 3, 2018


End of Document
Justice Dept. Says Facebook Shuns Americans in Hiring
The New York Times
December 4, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1046 words
Byline: By Cecilia Kang and Mike Isaac
Body


The complaint, which targets the company's hiring of immigrants on temporary visas, opens a new front in Washington's battle against Big Tech.
WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department sued Facebook on Thursday, accusing it of being un-American by favoring foreign workers with visas over those from the United States, in a new push against tech companies in the waning days of the Trump administration. 
  In the complaint, the department's civil rights division said Facebook ''refused to recruit, consider or hire qualified and available U.S. workers'' for more than 2,600 positions, with an average salary of $156,000. Those jobs instead went to immigrant visa holders, according to the complaint.
  The action followed a two-year investigation into whether Facebook intentionally favored so-called H1-B visa and other temporary immigrant workers over U.S. workers, the Justice Department said.
  ''Our message to workers is clear: If companies deny employment opportunities by illegally preferring temporary visa holders, the Department of Justice will hold them accountable,'' said Eric S. Dreiband, the assistant attorney general for the civil rights division. ''Our message to all employers -- including those in the technology sector -- is clear: You cannot illegally prefer to recruit, consider or hire temporary visa holders over U.S. workers.''
  Andy Stone, a Facebook spokesman, said, ''Facebook has been cooperating with the D.O.J. in its review of this issue, and while we dispute the allegations in the complaint, we cannot comment further on pending litigation.''
  Bipartisan anger in Washington has mounted in recent years against Facebook, Google, Amazon and Apple -- some of the world's most valuable companies -- for data privacy abuses, the spread of disinformation and other toxic content on their platforms, and complaints of anticompetitive practices that have harmed consumers and small businesses.
  For months, regulators and lawmakers have homed in on Facebook for possible monopoly violations. The Federal Trade Commission and dozens of states are preparing antitrust lawsuits against the social network for maintaining its power through mergers of nascent competitors, such as Instagram and WhatsApp. They are expected to announce plans for legal action soon, people briefed on the cases have said.
  The discrimination suit, which goes before an administrative law judge, opens a different front in Washington's battle against Big Tech. Although President Trump has jabbed at the companies as recently as this week, when he threatened to revoke speech liability protections for internet platforms like Facebook and Twitter, it is the first time the administration has brought legal action claiming immigrant employment bias.
  Skilled-worker visas in the technology industry have been a focus of debate for a decade. Facebook, Google, Microsoft, IBM and other companies have lobbied for years to expand H1-B visas, arguing the importance of getting the best engineers from overseas, particularly from China and India. Critics have called the visa program a crutch for tech companies to overlook U.S.-born talent and lure foreign workers at lower wages.
  Mr. Trump has been a vocal critic of temporary worker visas. In October, his administration announced new rules for the H1-B program, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants.
  The Justice Department has rarely sued tech companies on the issue, though other agencies have accused the firms of racial or gender bias. In 2016, the Labor Department sued the data firm Palantir, alleging bias against Asians. The Labor Department separately sued Google to reveal data on hiring based on gender, race, religion and sexual orientation.
  According to its complaint, the Justice Department found that between Jan. 1 and Sept. 18 last year, Facebook routinely put H1-B and other immigrant temporary workers on a track for permanent employment that was not available to U.S. citizens. Facebook also used less effective methods to advertise jobs to U.S. workers, including declining to promote the positions on Facebook.com/careers, the department said.
  The hiring spotlighted by the complaint made up just 0.5 percent of Facebook's 50,000 employees. But the Justice Department said Facebook had violated federal labor laws that require employers to make permanent employment opportunities as easily available to U.S. workers as they are to foreign visa holders.
  ''Facebook's discriminatory recruitment and hiring practice is routine, ongoing and widespread,'' the complaint said.
  Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, has for years made fighting for immigrants' rights to work in the U.S. tech industry a pet issue. In 2013, he and several friends created Fwd.us, a nonprofit group that pushed for an overhaul of immigration laws and stumped for easing the immigration process for tech workers.
  The issue has been a source of friction between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Trump. In 2015, leaders at Fwd.us chafed at Mr. Trump's immigration proposals, which would have restricted H-1B visas for skilled, foreign-born employees. They claimed that the plan would ''radically restrict'' paths to the United States for immigrant tech workers.
  When Mr. Trump signed an executive order in 2017 limiting immigration from majority-Muslim countries, Mr. Zuckerberg spoke out against it.
  ''We need to keep this country safe, but we should do that by focusing on people who actually pose a threat,'' he said in a post to his Facebook page. ''We should also keep our doors open to refugees and those who need help. That's who we are.''
  Kim Clarke, a lawyer at Varnum who advises employers on immigration and labor issues, said the Justice Department suit could have a chilling effect on tech hiring.
  ''In the long run, if broader tech companies can't hire the skilled talent on which they rely, their competitive positions will be hindered,'' Ms. Clarke said. ''The trickle-down effect of this action could impact even smaller employers that hire only a handful of foreign workers.''
  Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/03/technology/facebook-hiring-discrimination-suit.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Outside the headquarters of Facebook, which the Justice Department accused of favoring immigrants over Americans when hiring. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Henry for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: December 4, 2020


End of Document
U.S. Freeze Of Tech Visas May Benefit Indian Firms
The New York Times
October 5, 2020 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1533 words
Byline: By Maria Abi-Habib and Karan Deep Singh
Body


As the president clashes with the courts, some companies and investors say tougher limits on temporary work visas will help push jobs overseas.
When President Trump suspended a raft of visa programs in June, including temporary permits for highly technical foreign workers known as H-1B visas, he portrayed the order as a victory for the American work force. Further overhauls were in the works, he said weeks later, ''so that no American worker is replaced ever again.'' 
  The order is now in front of the courts, after a judge on Thursday blocked the order and ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority. The move will allow some companies, like Microsoft and Exxon Mobil, to bring temporary workers into the United States again. The issue will now go to an appeals court, which may rule in favor of Mr. Trump's sweeping order.
  But the fate of the program still remains in doubt. The Department of Homeland Security has submitted a new regulation for federal review that would toughen H-1B eligibility and impose new obligations on the companies trying to bring in foreign workers.
  The uncertainty has thrown the plans of major companies in doubt and has already disrupted the lives of thousands of foreign workers, particularly those from India, who claim more than two-thirds of the H-1B visas issued each year.
  The confusion might all be in vain, however. Experts say restrictions will do little to accomplish their stated goal of encouraging companies to hire Americans instead of workers from abroad. In fact, limits on H-1B visas may have the unintended effect of spurring American companies to shift even more work abroad.
  Already, Indian outsourcing companies are working to cast the new restrictions as an opportunity to do just that.
  ''In America, there is a genius mix of homegrown and transplanted talent. The high level of global competition gives America its tech edge,'' said Sandeep Kishore, the chief executive officer of Zensar Technologies, an Indian firm that employs more than 9,500 people globally.
  More than 400 are on work visas in Zensar's offices in the United States, he said, but more work could drift to India if companies cannot hire who they want.
  The United States ''risks giving up its edge,'' Mr. Kishore said. ''If we can't bring this talent into the U.S., we'll place them in our offices overseas.''
  The pandemic, which has forced millions to work from home, could reinforce the idea that more American jobs can be done remotely.
  The June suspension did not affect the foreign workers already in the United States on H-1B visas. But it upended the lives of those who were outside the country when the president issued his suspension.
  Sonal Thakkar, a lead consultant at an Indian information technology firm in San Jose, Calif., rushed back to India last year to apply for an extension of her visa.
  In March, her visa interview was canceled after India's government imposed a nationwide lockdown to stop the coronavirus. Then, Mr. Trump's suspension came.
  This week, Ms. Thakkar received an email from the office of the U.S. Consulate General in Mumbai, saying her visa application had been ''refused'' and sent for ''mandatory administrative processing.'' It's a process that could take months and she fears she could still be denied a visa after that.
  Now, Ms. Thakkar is not sure when she can return to the United States and her husband, who is still in San Jose on an H-1B visa.
  ''I can't sleep at night,'' she said. ''We've been together for six years. I am losing so many memories and I'm unable to create new ones.''
  An executive at Infosys, one of India's biggest technology companies, said in a LinkedIn post that it arranged a chartered flight to bring back more than 200 workers and their families to India, after their American visas expired. The company declined to comment.
  Even before Mr. Trump's election, limiting the H-1B program had won some bipartisan support. The program allows companies to bring in well-educated or technically skilled workers from abroad temporarily. About 65,000 candidates are selected each year by lottery. The workers can bring their families, but they must apply for green cards separately if they want to remain in the United States once their work ends.
  Some labor groups say companies use the program to bring in cheap labor. Often, they say, H-1B visa holders are not stars in their fields but hold skills that can be easily found domestically.
  ''There are very few people in this world who are truly innovative, and our economy depends on them,'' said Russell Harrison, the director of government relations for the IEEE-USA, an association representing more than 170,000 technology professionals that supports H-1B restrictions.
  Sensitive to the criticism, Indian outsourcing companies have long stressed plans to hire in the United States. In early September, Infosys announced it would hire 12,000 more Americans over the next two years.
  Indian outsourcing companies dominated the H-1B lottery a decade ago, but sponsors now include some of the biggest names in American technology. Seven of the top 10 sponsors last year were American, including Amazon and Google, according to official citizenship data. About 15 percent of Facebook's employees are H-1B holders.
  If the government considerably limits the number of H-1B workers they can bring in, companies may send the work overseas instead.
  ''The work will go to India more because there is an abundance of high-quality college-educated tech labor in India,'' said William Lazonick, an economist and professor emeritus at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business. ''It is obviously an advantage if that higher-quality labor force is less expensive to employ than workers in the company's home country.''
  Research is scant, but at least one study has found that limits on H-1B visas lead to more hiring overseas. The study, by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, compared periods of tightened H-1B restrictions with hiring by major firms and found greater hiring in places like China and India, which have a large pool of skilled workers, and Canada, which has looser immigration policies.
  Like industries around the globe, the outsourcing business took a substantial hit during the coronavirus pandemic. The troubles were particularly acute in India, where many workers lack the equipment or the internet connections to work from home.
  Tech companies struggled to source hundreds of thousands of laptops in the early weeks of the pandemic. They sent desktop computers to workers' homes and enabled firewalls to fend off cyberattacks.
  At Tata Consultancy Services, India's largest information technology firm with more than 400,000 workers globally, these responsibilities fell on the shoulders of Amit Jain, the global head of I.T. infrastructure, based in Mumbai.
  Mr. Jain, who worked at the company for 32 years, died in March after suffering a heart attack.
  ''He was overworked and extremely exhausted,'' said his brother, Mukul Jain. ''He told me he hadn't slept in two to three days because he was helping employees in India, Europe and the U.S. to work from home.''
  T.C.S. declined to comment about Mr. Jain's death. A public relations firm that represents the company said that about 95 percent of T.C.S. employees were now working remotely.
  Now India's outsourcing companies are seeing their results stabilize. Share prices have risen as investors bet that companies looking to trim costs and reduce head count seek their services.
  Indeed, companies have resumed looking toward outsourcing companies. In July, Vanguard, the mutual fund company, said it struck a deal with Infosys of India to assume 1,300 back office positions, like record keeping and technology services. Workers would be offered comparable jobs at Infosys, said a spokeswoman for Vanguard, adding that the decision was unrelated to the pandemic or the shifts in the H1-B program.
  India's outsourcing companies face long-term challenges. Cutting-edge technologies like artificial intelligence could eventually take over some of their tasks. The companies themselves are trying to move up the value chain to do more of the innovative technology work done in Silicon Valley and China.
  ''Most of the larger Indian I.T. companies haven't expanded in that direction. They haven't expanded to semiconductors, e-commerce, gaming and other technologies,'' said Nitin Soni, a Singapore-based analyst and senior director at Fitch Ratings, a credit rating firm. ''They have stuck to their core strengths, which are all in the realm of automation of organizational stuff.''
  But companies rethinking the future of the office could offer them new opportunities.
  ''If you can get the same or better talent at lower cost, which allows you to do your business 24 hours, then that's a good value proposition,'' said Ajay Gupta, a Mumbai-based partner at global consulting firm Kearney.
  Of traditional offices, he added, ''even companies within India are saying, 'We don't need this rigid infrastructure.'''
  Vindu Goel contributed reporting.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/02/technology/trump-india-hib-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sonal Thakkar, a tech consultant whose visa extension has been refused, is unsure when she can return to America. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SONAL THAKKAR) (B3)               

Load-Date: October 5, 2020


End of Document
Foreign Doctors Could Help Fight Coronavirus. But U.S. Blocks Many.
The New York Times 
July 3, 2020 Friday 18:46 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1796 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Annie Correal
Highlight: Nurses and doctors are ensnared by red tape and visa rules that prevent them from working in U.S. hospitals, where they are needed to respond to the coronavirus.
Body


Nurses and doctors are ensnared by red tape and visa rules that prevent them from working in U.S. hospitals, where they are needed to respond to the coronavirus.
LOS ANGELES — Visa and airline ticket in hand, a Filipina nurse named Maria checked in recently for her flight from London to the United States, where a job awaited her as an intensive care nurse at a North Carolina hospital on the front lines of the coronavirus crisis.
But under the travel restrictions imposed by President Trump to help prevent new exposure to the virus, she was not allowed to board. “I was told that my visa is valid, and I would be allowed to travel once the restrictions are lifted,” she reported to the company that has been trying to bring her into the United States.
Hospitals in coronavirus hot spots are scrambling to address a shortage of medical professionals to help care for patients, as the number of cases continues to grow and as maintaining a full supply of health care workers, who are themselves falling ill, is challenging.
“I am asking health care professionals across the country, if you don’t have a health care crisis in your community, please come help us in New York right now,” New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo, said on March 30.
In California, Gov. Gavin Newsom issued an urgent call at the end of March for additional health care workers to help fight the coronavirus outbreak, suggesting that recently retired physicians and medical students awaiting licensing could be brought in to help. “We need you,” he said.
Foreign health workers have been lining up to take jobs at American hospitals, but many are running into roadblocks. Some are having difficulty securing appointments for visas at U.S. consulates overseas that are hobbled by skeletal staffing. Others, like Maria, are running into travel restrictions imposed in the midst of the pandemic.
Still others are already working in the United States, but under the terms of their visas cannot leave the states they are in to work in cities heavily affected by the coronavirus.
“The protective gear and ventilators are slowly but surely getting to the system. But if the number of cases goes up dramatically, we will have equipment and no one to operate it,” said Ron Hoppe, chief executive officer of WorldWide HealthStaff Solutions, which matches medical professionals with facilities across the United States.
“The great supply and demand imbalance that existed before is being laid bare by the crisis,” he said.
Governors have called on retired physicians to return to work and asked medical schools to allow students to graduate ahead of schedule. Some hospitals are offering top dollar to woo nurses from other states.
Medical staff providers are also trying to speed up the import of qualified foreign health care workers, many of whom have been waiting years for permission to enter the United States — but the process has been full of logjams.
The State Department issued guidance late last month calling for foreign medical professionals with approved visas or certificates of eligibility for exchange visitor programs to make appointments at their nearest embassy to expedite processing, “particularly those working to treat or mitigate the effects of Covid-19.”
But many of those working to get medical help from overseas said there was an apparent lack of coordination between the various government agencies involved, including Citizenship and Immigration Services, the Department of Homeland Security and the State Department.
“There are gaps in communication at a time when they need to pull this together quickly,” said Beth Vanderwalker, vice president of operations at WorldWide HealthStaff Solutions. “We have hundreds of nurses who we could get here in a matter of weeks.”
Maria, the nurse in London, who feared that publishing her last name could jeopardize her green card, was turned away by American officials a second time when she tried to board a plane early this month, even though she said that she would be treating Covid-19 patients.
A few states that are facing major outbreaks have issued executive orders that allow some foreign health care workers who are already in the state to see patients. New Jersey, for example, is granting temporary licenses to doctors residing there who are licensed and in good standing in foreign countries. In New York, graduates of foreign medical schools are being permitted to treat patients after completing one year of residency, instead of the usual three.
However, the federal government has not broadly opened the way for foreign-trained workers to begin working.
Even before the coronavirus pandemic, demand for registered nurses in the United States was projected to grow from 2.9 to 3.4 million between 2016 and 2026, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The bureau had said an additional 203,700 nurses would be needed each year to fill new positions and replace retiring workers. However, only about 170,000 new nurses were licensed in the United States in 2018, the latest year for which data is available.
There is no guest-worker or nonimmigrant visa category for nurses. As a result, they must come to the United States with approved legal permanent residency, or a green card, a process that can take years to complete.
Meanwhile, hospitals in New York, New Orleans and elsewhere have been overwhelmed with patients, a backlog that sometimes forces people to wait hours to be admitted or to be sent home, potentially with life-threatening consequences.
“There are easy fixes that the administration should be willing to make in the face of a national emergency,” said Ian Wagreich, an attorney in Chicago who chairs the Government Liaison Committee of the International Medical Graduate Taskforce. The committee has been pushing various government agencies to take steps that would enable more foreign doctors to assist during the pandemic.
More than 25 percent of physicians in the United States are foreign-born, but a large share of them are in the country on visas that bar them from changing employers or moving to another state, even temporarily, a restriction that is making it difficult for them to move to virus hot spots.
For instance, there are more than 10,000 doctors on skilled-worker visas, or H1-B visas, who are only allowed to practice at the specific facility that sponsored them for their visas.
Ram Sanjeev Alur, an internist from India practicing at a veterans hospital in the small town of Marion, Ill., has watched as the pandemic has ravaged cities like New York.
Dr. Alur, the president of Physicians for American Healthcare Access, a nonprofit association representing foreign-trained doctors working in rural or underserved areas, said there were fewer than 10 confirmed coronavirus cases in the county where he works.
Dr. Alur said he was willing to relocate temporarily to a hospital where the need was greater. However, as an H1-B visa holder, “they restrict me to working only for my employer. I want to go work in New York; I can’t,” he said.
“In New York, they are asking retired physicians to come to work, medical school students to step up — I just think it’s a matter of no one realizing there is a way to boost the work force immediately,” said Dr. Alur, who came to the United States in 2007 for his residency training.
Raghuveer Kura, a nephrologist in Poplar Bluff, Mo., and a co-founder of the foreign doctors’ organization, said the group had compiled a list of doctors willing to go to New York and New Jersey to assist. But because of the rigidity of the government visa policies, nearly all of them are unable to do so.
“We are physicians trained at top U.S. institutions,” said Dr. Kura, who has been in the United States for 19 years. “People like me are not able to go to help in hot spots even though we can manage ventilators and we can manage I.C.U. patients.”
Varun Malayalah, an internal medicine hospitalist who practices in rural Delaware, said that he had been inundated with calls, texts and emails from recruiters representing hospitals that are grappling with the contagion.
“I would be there tomorrow, if it were possible,” said Dr. Malayalah.
He is 35, single and has a staggered schedule, one week on and the next off, the norm for hospitalists, or doctors who exclusively treat patients in hospitals.
“In the last month, instead of sitting home when I was off, I could have gone and worked where they needed me,” he said, were it not for the visa restrictions.
Representatives Tony Cárdenas and Zoe Lofgren of California sent a letter to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Chad F. Wolf, the acting homeland security secretary, urging their departments to allow foreign-born physicians and health care workers to practice freely during the crisis. The letter, sent April 6, was signed by 63 members of Congress.
“Many of these workers stand ready to serve our country but are unable to do so because of a lack of flexibility in their visa categories and other limitations in our immigration system,” the letter said.
It called on immigration-related agencies to expedite visa applications and provide emergency processing or other accommodations for some 4,000 foreign physicians scheduled to start residencies in the United States on July 1.
All told, there are about 1.5 million immigrants employed in health care in the United States as doctors, nurses and pharmacists. Another 263,000 immigrants and refugees with degrees in health-related fields are either performing low-level jobs or are out of work, according to a recent report from the Migration Policy Institute.
While two-thirds of them are proficient in English, their credentials may not be aligned with those required by the United States, and it can be difficult to pass exams and obtain licenses to become eligible to practice. The International Rescue Committee on Sunday launched an online platform for refugees and immigrants interested in obtaining health care accreditation.
Underutilized foreign-trained professionals have valuable linguistic and cultural skills that could be put to use, said José Ramón Fernández-Peña, president-elect of the American Public Health Association, and a doctor now advising students at Northwestern University.
They could consult with patients over the phone or by video, screen patients at hospitals or work at testing sites, and help with case management on the data side, he suggested.
Because these professionals might also speak the languages of underserved populations, he said, “we could reach the communities that are typically served last.”
PHOTOS: Left, entering the urgent care center at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center on Friday in Brooklyn. Right, Varun Malayalah, an internal medicine hospitalist who practices in rural Delaware. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW SENG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Do Restrictions on H-1B Visas Create American Jobs?; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
May 8, 2021 Saturday 13:11 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1579 words
Byline: Youyou Zhou
Highlight: Demand for the visas has increased despite Trump administration policies that made them less likely to be approved.
Body


Demand for the visas has increased despite Trump administration policies that made them less likely to be approved.
The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, providing reporting and analysis that offers a better understanding of an important issue in the news. If you don’t already receive the daily newsletter, sign up here.
There are millions fewer jobs in the United States than there were at the start of the pandemic, and data released on Friday showed an unexpected slowdown in hiring. In a speech to a joint session of Congress last month, President Biden said a priority of his economic rescue plan was to create “good-paying jobs that can’t be outsourced.”
Also last month, Madhur Parashar moved to Vancouver, British Columbia — and took with him his job as a product manager at a company based in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving a master’s degree from the University of Rochester, Mr. Parashar, who emigrated from India, had worked in the United States on an H-1B visa for almost 11 years.
Mr. Parashar decided to leave the United States after his wife, who is also Indian, lost her job as a corporate lawyer in April last year. Her application for the work permit granted to spouses of immigrants working legally in the United States is still pending, part of a backlog that emerged after the Trump administration changed the approval process and that grew during pandemic-related office closures.
Canada approved Mr. Parashar and his family for permanent residency through Express Entry, an immigration program for skilled workers. He asked his employer to let him work from Canada, and the company agreed.
“They kept saying that H-1Bs take away jobs from Americans,” Mr. Parashar told DealBook. “They have kind of pushed us to the point where we have to leave,” he said, noting that he works with the same clients as before.
Efforts to restrict the H-1B program, which is intended for workers with special skills though has in some cases been exploited by companies to hire cheaper labor, are often framed as a way to protect American jobs. The visas “should never, ever be used to replace American workers,” President Donald J. Trump said in 2017 when he signed a “Buy American and Hire American” executive order, which increased scrutiny of H-1B visa applications.
But does making it harder to obtain an H-1B visa result in more American jobs?
Interviews with immigration lawyers and H-1B visa applicants suggest that when the Trump administration introduced additional scrutiny of H-1B applications, companies often shifted workers or hired elsewhere instead of filling the roles with American workers.
This is consistent with research by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. In a working paper last year, she analyzed the data on U.S.-based multinational companies between 2004 and 2014 and found that those dependent on H-1B visas were more likely to expand overseas when facing immigration restrictions, like when the cap on visas was lowered in 2004.
Ms. Glennon calculated that for every 10 unfilled H-1B positions, an equivalent of three jobs were created overseas. The work that would have been done in the other seven jobs was spread around. Some was outsourced to other companies, some was done by industry-university partnerships, and a “much, much smaller” amount was done by newly hired American workers, she said.
The chances of getting an H-1B visa have never been lower. In a randomized lottery each year, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services chooses 85,000 applicants to receive the visa, a cap that has remained unchanged since 2004. This year, the lottery pool contained about 308,000 applicants, meaning only one in four applicants was selected.
Meanwhile, the chances of an application’s approval after it has been selected in the lottery have also gone down. After the “Buy American and Hire American” executive order went into effect in 2017, Citizenship and Immigration Services issued policy memos that took a stricter stance on the qualifications of workers in computer-related jobs and on requirements for consultants who typically work at client sites.
From 2016 to 2019, the percentage of H-1B applicants asked to submit additional supporting materials after being selected in the lottery increased from 21 to 40, while the approval rate dropped from 94 percent to 85 percent, according to Citizenship and Immigration Services. (The agency accounts for some denials in the lottery so that all 85,000 visas are granted regardless of the approval rate.)
The additional scrutiny of applications hit Indian outsourcing companies that operate in the United States — six of the top 15 H-1B sponsors — the hardest. But within a couple of years they recovered and hired even more H-1B workers. All but two of the top H-1B visa sponsors followed a similar pattern: The number of visas they sponsored decreased in 2018, after the new policy, but then recovered.
Lauren Jo, an immigration lawyer in New York, told DealBook that when one of her former clients, an information technology consulting company, tried to avoid compliance requirements for H-1B workers on third-party client sites by hiring only American workers for these positions, the company couldn’t make it work.
“Two or three years went by, and they just couldn’t find the right qualified workers for these jobs for U.S. workers and said, ‘OK, we have to start hiring H-1B workers for these positions,’” Ms. Jo said.
Like large outsourcing companies, tech companies are particularly reliant on H-1B visas. Foreign students make up almost half of graduates with advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering and math in the United States, and many foreign nationals who apply for U.S. work visas are already working at tech companies with student work permits, which allow them to work in the United States for up to 36 months after graduation. After that period, not getting a work visa means the company has to either let the employee go or find another way to retain the person.
Seven current and former employees of Amazon, Facebook and Google, which are among the top H-1B users, told DealBook that if they weren’t chosen in the lottery, the company would provide the option of transferring them to an overseas office and asking them to apply for an H-1B visa again the next year. Six immigration lawyers and immigration consultants confirmed that this was a typical strategy. Amazon and Google declined a request to comment on the practice, and Facebook did not respond to a request to comment.
DealBook obtained an internal training video played for foreign workers at Cerner, a medical software provider and the largest H-1B visa user in Kansas City, Mo. In the video, the company provided three options for employees who didn’t win the H-1B visa lottery: Re-enroll in a degree program and work for the company on a student visa, a practice embraced by companies and universities in recent years; move to India if they had authorization to work there; or leave the company. Cerner declined to comment on the training video.
Obtaining a work visa is getting marginally easier. The Biden administration has already lifted some of the Trump administration’s changes to the application process. Spouses of immigrants applying for work permits will no longer need to be fingerprinted and photographed, a requirement that was put in place in 2019 and lengthened processing time, forcing tens of thousands of workers, like Mr. Parashar’s wife, to wait in visa backlogs during the pandemic.
In late April, the Biden administration issued policy guidance that asked immigration officers to defer to prior decisions when reviewing visa extension cases, a long-existing practice that was rescinded in 2017. The policy memo that made it more difficult for entry-level computer programmers to get a work visa was also rescinded in January.
These changes are taking place against a backdrop of a long-term trend in work force globalization that is driven by many factors, including the availability of skills and the relative cost of labor in other countries. For example, according to a review of jobs posted on top H-1B users’ websites by the data provider Thinknum, since 2018 the share of job openings outside the United States at Accenture, Capgemini and Cognizant has grown while the share of advertised U.S. jobs has shrunk.
If companies can’t get the visas they want to sponsor foreign workers in the United States, there is little stopping them from hiring workers outside the United States. And the increasing acceptance of remote work after the pandemic may mean even more types of jobs can be filled anywhere in the world.
Ben Wright, the chief executive of Velocity Global, a professional employer organization that hires workers overseas for clients while they wait for U.S. visas, said companies had been willing to accommodate foreign workers who could not come to the United States because of pandemic restrictions.
“You’re also seeing hiring managers say, ‘My gosh, my eyes are opened to the fact that we really can work from anywhere,’” he said. “That’s pulling these companies globally in a way that has never happened.”
This article was reported with support from the McGraw Center for Business Journalism at the City University of New York’s Newmark Graduate School of Journalism.
What do you think? Let us know: dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 11, 2021


End of Document
Foreign Doctors Could Help Fight the Pandemic, but the U.S. Blocks Many
The New York Times
April 16, 2020 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 1775 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan and Annie Correal
Body


Nurses and doctors are ensnared by red tape and visa rules that prevent them from working in U.S. hospitals, where they are needed to respond to the coronavirus.
LOS ANGELES -- Visa and airline ticket in hand, a Filipina nurse named Maria checked in recently for her flight from London to the United States, where a job awaited her as an intensive care nurse at a North Carolina hospital on the front lines of the coronavirus crisis. 
  But under the travel restrictions imposed by President Trump to help prevent new exposure to the virus, she was not allowed to board. ''I was told that my visa is valid, and I would be allowed to travel once the restrictions are lifted,'' she reported to the company that has been trying to bring her into the United States.
  Hospitals in coronavirus hot spots are scrambling to address a shortage of medical professionals to help care for patients, as the number of cases continues to grow and as maintaining a full supply of health care workers, who are themselves falling ill, is challenging.
  ''I am asking health care professionals across the country, if you don't have a health care crisis in your community, please come help us in New York right now,'' New York's governor, Andrew Cuomo, said on March 30.
  In California, Gov. Gavin Newsom issued an urgent call at the end of March for additional health care workers to help fight the coronavirus outbreak, suggesting that recently retired physicians and medical students awaiting licensing could be brought in to help. ''We need you,'' he said.
  Foreign health workers have been lining up to take jobs at American hospitals, but many are running into roadblocks. Some are having difficulty securing appointments for visas at U.S. consulates overseas that are hobbled by skeletal staffing. Others, like Maria, are running into travel restrictions imposed in the midst of the pandemic.
  Still others are already working in the United States, but under the terms of their visas cannot leave the states they are in to work in cities heavily affected by the coronavirus.
  ''The protective gear and ventilators are slowly but surely getting to the system. But if the number of cases goes up dramatically, we will have equipment and no one to operate it,'' said Ron Hoppe, chief executive officer of WorldWide HealthStaff Solutions, which matches medical professionals with facilities across the United States.
  ''The great supply and demand imbalance that existed before is being laid bare by the crisis,'' he said.
  Governors have called on retired physicians to return to work and asked medical schools to allow students to graduate ahead of schedule. Some hospitals are offering top dollar to woo nurses from other states.
  Medical staff providers are also trying to speed up the import of qualified foreign health care workers, many of whom have been waiting years for permission to enter the United States -- but the process has been full of logjams.
  The State Department issued guidance late last month calling for foreign medical professionals with approved visas or certificates of eligibility for exchange visitor programs to make appointments at their nearest embassy to expedite processing, ''particularly those working to treat or mitigate the effects of Covid-19.''
  But many of those working to get medical help from overseas said there was an apparent lack of coordination between the various government agencies involved, including Citizenship and Immigration Services, the Department of Homeland Security and the State Department.
  ''There are gaps in communication at a time when they need to pull this together quickly,'' said Beth Vanderwalker, vice president of operations at WorldWide HealthStaff Solutions. ''We have hundreds of nurses who we could get here in a matter of weeks.''
  Maria, the nurse in London, who feared that publishing her last name could jeopardize her green card, was turned away by American officials a second time when she tried to board a plane early this month, even though she said that she would be treating Covid-19 patients.
  A few states that are facing major outbreaks have issued executive orders that allow some foreign health care workers who are already in the state to see patients. New Jersey, for example, is granting temporary licenses to doctors residing there who are licensed and in good standing in foreign countries. In New York, graduates of foreign medical schools are being permitted to treat patients after completing one year of residency, instead of the usual three.
  However, the federal government has not broadly opened the way for foreign-trained workers to begin working.
  Even before the coronavirus pandemic, demand for registered nurses in the United States was projected to grow from 2.9 to 3.4 million between 2016 and 2026, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
  The bureau had said an additional 203,700 nurses would be needed each year to fill new positions and replace retiring workers. However, only about 170,000 new nurses were licensed in the United States in 2018, the latest year for which data is available.
  There is no guest-worker or nonimmigrant visa category for nurses. As a result, they must come to the United States with approved legal permanent residency, or a green card, a process that can take years to complete.
  Meanwhile, hospitals in New York, New Orleans and elsewhere have been overwhelmed with patients, a backlog that sometimes forces people to wait hours to be admitted or to be sent home, potentially with life-threatening consequences.
  ''There are easy fixes that the administration should be willing to make in the face of a national emergency,'' said Ian Wagreich, an attorney in Chicago who chairs the Government Liaison Committee of the International Medical Graduate Taskforce. The committee has been pushing various government agencies to take steps that would enable more foreign doctors to assist during the pandemic.
  More than 25 percent of physicians in the United States are foreign-born, but a large share of them are in the country on visas that bar them from changing employers or moving to another state, even temporarily, a restriction that is making it difficult for them to move to virus hot spots.
  For instance, there are more than 10,000 doctors on skilled-worker visas, or H1-B visas, who are only allowed to practice at the specific facility that sponsored them for their visas.
  Ram Sanjeev Alur, an internist from India practicing at a veterans hospital in the small town of Marion, Ill., has watched as the pandemic has ravaged cities like New York.
  Dr. Alur, the president of Physicians for American Healthcare Access, a nonprofit association representing foreign-trained doctors working in rural or underserved areas, said there were fewer than 10 confirmed coronavirus cases in the county where he works.
  Dr. Alur said he was willing to relocate temporarily to a hospital where the need was greater. However, as an H1-B visa holder, ''they restrict me to working only for my employer. I want to go work in New York; I can't,'' he said.
  ''In New York, they are asking retired physicians to come to work, medical school students to step up -- I just think it's a matter of no one realizing there is a way to boost the work force immediately,'' said Dr. Alur, who came to the United States in 2007 for his residency training.
  Raghuveer Kura, a nephrologist in Poplar Bluff, Mo., and a co-founder of the foreign doctors' organization, said the group had compiled a list of doctors willing to go to New York and New Jersey to assist. But because of the rigidity of the government visa policies, nearly all of them are unable to do so.
  ''We are physicians trained at top U.S. institutions,'' said Dr. Kura, who has been in the United States for 19 years. ''People like me are not able to go to help in hot spots even though we can manage ventilators and we can manage I.C.U. patients.''
  Varun Malayalah, an internal medicine hospitalist who practices in rural Delaware, said that he had been inundated with calls, texts and emails from recruiters representing hospitals that are grappling with the contagion.
  ''I would be there tomorrow, if it were possible,'' said Dr. Malayalah.
  He is 35, single and has a staggered schedule, one week on and the next off, the norm for hospitalists, or doctors who exclusively treat patients in hospitals.
  ''In the last month, instead of sitting home when I was off, I could have gone and worked where they needed me,'' he said, were it not for the visa restrictions.
  Representatives Tony Cárdenas and Zoe Lofgren of California sent a letter to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and Chad F. Wolf, the acting homeland security secretary, urging their departments to allow foreign-born physicians and health care workers to practice freely during the crisis. The letter, sent April 6, was signed by 63 members of Congress.
  ''Many of these workers stand ready to serve our country but are unable to do so because of a lack of flexibility in their visa categories and other limitations in our immigration system,'' the letter said.
  It called on immigration-related agencies to expedite visa applications and provide emergency processing or other accommodations for some 4,000 foreign physicians scheduled to start residencies in the United States on July 1.
  All told, there are about 1.5 million immigrants employed in health care in the United States as doctors, nurses and pharmacists. Another 263,000 immigrants and refugees with degrees in health-related fields are either performing low-level jobs or are out of work, according to a recent report from the Migration Policy Institute.
  While two-thirds of them are proficient in English, their credentials may not be aligned with those required by the United States, and it can be difficult to pass exams and obtain licenses to become eligible to practice. The International Rescue Committee on Sunday launched an online platform for refugees and immigrants interested in obtaining health care accreditation.
  Underutilized foreign-trained professionals have valuable linguistic and cultural skills that could be put to use, said José Ramón Fernández-Peña, president-elect of the American Public Health Association, and a doctor now advising students at Northwestern University.
  They could consult with patients over the phone or by video, screen patients at hospitals or work at testing sites, and help with case management on the data side, he suggested.
  Because these professionals might also speak the languages of underserved populations, he said, ''we could reach the communities that are typically served last.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/13/us/coronavirus-foreign-doctors-nurses-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Left, entering the urgent care center at Brookdale Hospital Medical Center on Friday in Brooklyn. Right, Varun Malayalah, an internal medicine hospitalist who practices in rural Delaware. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW SENG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: April 16, 2020


End of Document
Restrictions on H-1B Visas May Not Actually Create Lots of American Jobs
The New York Times
May 10, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2; DEALBOOK NEWSLETTER
Length: 1582 words
Byline: By Youyou Zhou
Body


Demand for the visas has increased despite Trump administration policies that made them less likely to be approved.
The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, providing reporting and analysis that offers a better understanding of an important issue in the news. If you don't already receive the daily newsletter, sign up here. 
  There are millions fewer jobs in the United States than there were at the start of the pandemic, and data released on Friday showed an unexpected slowdown in hiring. In a speech to a joint session of Congress last month, President Biden said a priority of his economic rescue plan was to create ''good-paying jobs that can't be outsourced.''
  Also last month, Madhur Parashar moved to Vancouver, British Columbia -- and took with him his job as a product manager at a company based in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving a master's degree from Rochester University, Mr. Parashar, who emigrated from India, had worked in the United States on an H-1B visa for almost 11 years.
  Mr. Parashar decided to leave the United States after his wife, who is also Indian, lost her job as a corporate lawyer in April last year. Her application for the work permit granted to spouses of immigrants working legally in the United States is still pending, part of a backlog that emerged after the Trump administration changed the approval process and that grew during pandemic-related office closures.
  Canada approved Mr. Parashar and his family for permanent residency through Express Entry, an immigration program for skilled workers. He asked his employer to let him work from Canada, and the company agreed.
  ''They kept saying that H-1Bs take away jobs from Americans,'' Mr. Parashar told DealBook. ''They have kind of pushed us to the point where we have to leave,'' he said, noting that he works with the same clients as before.
  Efforts to restrict the H-1B program, which is intended for workers with special skills though has in some cases been exploited by companies to hire cheaper labor, are often framed as a way to protect American jobs. The visas ''should never, ever be used to replace American workers,'' President Donald J. Trump said in 2017 when he signed a ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order, which increased scrutiny of H-1B visa applications.
  But does making it harder to obtain an H-1B visa result in more American jobs?
  Interviews with immigration lawyers and H-1B visa applicants suggest that when the Trump administration introduced additional scrutiny of H-1B applications, companies often shifted workers or hired elsewhere instead of filling the roles with American workers.
  This is consistent with research by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. In a working paper last year, she analyzed the data on U.S.-based multinational companies between 2004 and 2014 and found that those dependent on H-1B visas were more likely to expand overseas when facing immigration restrictions, like when the cap on visas was lowered in 2004.
  Ms. Glennon calculated that for every 10 unfilled H-1B positions, an equivalent of three jobs were created overseas. The work that would have been done in the other seven jobs was spread around. Some was outsourced to other companies, some was done by industry-university partnerships, and a ''much, much smaller'' amount was done by newly hired American workers, she said.
  The chances of getting an H-1B visa have never been lower. In a randomized lottery each year, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services chooses 85,000 applicants to receive the visa, a cap that has remained unchanged since 2004. This year, the lottery pool contained about 308,000 applicants, meaning only one in four applicants was selected.
  Meanwhile, the chances of an application's approval after it has been selected in the lottery have also gone down. After the ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order went into effect in 2017, Citizenship and Immigration Services issued policy memos that took a stricter stance on the qualifications of workers in computer-related jobs and on requirements for consultants who typically work at client sites.
  From 2016 to 2019, the percentage of H-1B applicants asked to submit additional supporting materials after being selected in the lottery increased from 21 to 40, while the approval rate dropped from 94 percent to 85 percent, according to Citizenship and Immigration Services. (The agency accounts for some denials in the lottery so that all 85,000 visas are granted regardless of the approval rate.)
  The additional scrutiny of applications hit Indian outsourcing companies that operate in the United States -- six of the top 15 H-1B sponsors -- the hardest. But within a couple of years they recovered and hired even more H-1B workers. All but two of the top H-1B visa sponsors followed a similar pattern: The number of visas they sponsored decreased in 2018, after the new policy, but then recovered.
  Lauren Jo, an immigration lawyer in New York, told DealBook that when one of her former clients, an information technology consulting company, tried to avoid compliance requirements for H-1B workers on third-party client sites by hiring only American workers for these positions, the company couldn't make it work.
  ''Two or three years went by, and they just couldn't find the right qualified workers for these jobs for U.S. workers and said, 'OK, we have to start hiring H-1B workers for these positions,''' Ms. Jo said.
  Like large outsourcing companies, tech companies are particularly reliant on H-1B visas. Foreign students make up almost half of graduates with advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering and math in the United States, and many foreign nationals who apply for U.S. work visas are already working at tech companies with student work permits, which allow them to work in the United States for up to 36 months after graduation. After that period, not getting a work visa means the company has to either let the employee go or find another way to retain the person.
  Seven current and former employees of Amazon, Facebook and Google, which are among the top H-1B users, told DealBook that if they weren't chosen in the lottery, the company would provide the option of transferring them to an overseas office and asking them to apply for an H-1B visa again the next year. Six immigration lawyers and immigration consultants confirmed that this was a typical strategy. Amazon and Google declined a request to comment on the practice, and Facebook did not respond to a request to comment.
  DealBook obtained an internal training video played for foreign workers at Cerner, a medical software provider and the largest H-1B visa user in Kansas City, Mo. In the video, the company provided three options for employees who didn't win the H-1B visa lottery: Re-enroll in a degree program and work for the company on a student visa, a practice embraced by companies and universities in recent years; move to India if they had authorization to work there; or leave the company. Cerner declined to comment on the training video.
  Obtaining a work visa is getting marginally easier. The Biden administration has already lifted some of the Trump administration's changes to the application process. Spouses of immigrants applying for work permits will no longer need to be fingerprinted and photographed, a requirement that was put in place in 2019 and lengthened processing time, forcing tens of thousands of workers, like Mr. Parashar's wife, to wait in visa backlogs during the pandemic.
  In late April, the Biden administration issued policy guidance that asked immigration officers to defer to prior decisions when reviewing visa extension cases, a long-existing practice that was rescinded in 2017. The policy memo that made it more difficult for entry-level computer programmers to get a work visa was also rescinded in January.
  These changes are taking place against a backdrop of a long-term trend in work force globalization that is driven by many factors, including the availability of skills and the relative cost of labor in other countries. For example, according to a review of jobs posted on top H-1B users' websites by the data provider Thinknum, since 2018 the share of job openings outside the United States at Accenture, Capgemini and Cognizant has grown while the share of advertised U.S. jobs has shrunk.
  If companies can't get the visas they want to sponsor foreign workers in the United States, there is little stopping them from hiring workers outside the United States. And the increasing acceptance of remote work after the pandemic may mean even more types of jobs can be filled anywhere in the world.
  Ben Wright, the chief executive of Velocity Global, a professional employer organization that hires workers overseas for clients while they wait for U.S. visas, said companies had been willing to accommodate foreign workers who could not come to the United States because of pandemic restrictions.
  ''You're also seeing hiring managers say, 'My gosh, my eyes are opened to the fact that we really can work from anywhere,''' he said. ''That's pulling these companies globally in a way that has never happened.''
  This article was reported with support from the McGraw Center for Business Journalism at the City University of New York's Newmark Graduate School of Journalism.
  What do you think? Let us know: dealbook@nytimes.com

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/08/business/dealbook/h1b-visas-us-jobs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: May 10, 2021


End of Document
Trump Cracks Down on Visas. Indian Firms May Benefit.
The New York Times 
October 2, 2020 Friday 23:10 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1540 words
Byline: Maria Abi-Habib and Karan Deep Singh
Highlight: As the president clashes with the courts, some companies and investors say tougher limits on temporary work visas will help push jobs overseas.
Body


As the president clashes with the courts, some companies and investors say tougher limits on temporary work visas will help push jobs overseas.
When President Trump suspended a raft of visaprograms in June, including temporary permits for highly technical foreign workers known as H-1B visas, he portrayed the order as a victory for the American work force. Further overhauls were in the works, he said weeks later, “so that no American worker is replaced ever again.”
The order is now in front of the courts, after a judge on Thursday blocked the order and ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority. The move will allow some companies, like Microsoft and Exxon Mobil, to bring temporary workers into the United States again. The issue will now go to an appeals court, which may rule in favor of Mr. Trump’s sweeping order.
But the fate of the program still remains in doubt. The Department of Homeland Security has submitted a new regulation for federal review that would toughen H-1B eligibility and impose new obligations on the companies trying to bring in foreign workers.
The uncertainty has thrown the plans of major companies in doubt and has already disrupted the lives of thousands of foreign workers, particularly those from India, who claim more than two-thirds of the H-1B visas issued each year.
The confusion might all be in vain, however. Experts say restrictions will do little to accomplish their stated goal of encouraging companies to hire Americans instead of workers from abroad. In fact, limits on H-1B visas may have the unintended effect of spurring American companies to shift even more work abroad.
Already, Indian outsourcing companies are working to cast the new restrictions as an opportunity to do just that.
“In America, there is a genius mix of homegrown and transplanted talent. The high level of global competition gives America its tech edge,” said Sandeep Kishore, the chief executive officer of Zensar Technologies, an Indian firm that employs more than 9,500 people globally.
More than 400 are on work visas in Zensar’s offices in the United States, he said, but more work could drift to India if companies cannot hire who they want.
The United States “risks giving up its edge,” Mr. Kishore said. “If we can’t bring this talent into the U.S., we’ll place them in our offices overseas.”
The pandemic, which has forced millions to work from home, could reinforce the idea that more American jobs can be done remotely.
The June suspension did not affect the foreign workers already in the United States on H-1B visas. But it upended the lives of those who were outside the country when the president issued his suspension.
Sonal Thakkar, a lead consultant at an Indian information technology firm in San Jose, Calif., rushed back to India last year to apply for an extension of her visa.
In March, her visa interview was canceled after India’s government imposed a nationwide lockdown to stop the coronavirus. Then, Mr. Trump’s suspension came.
This week, Ms. Thakkar received an email from the office of the U.S. Consulate General in Mumbai, saying her visa application had been “refused” and sent for “mandatory administrative processing.” It’s a process that could take months and she fears she could still be denied a visa after that.
Now, Ms. Thakkar is not sure when she can return to the United States and her husband, who is still in San Jose on an H-1B visa.
“I can’t sleep at night,” she said. “We’ve been together for six years. I am losing so many memories and I’m unable to create new ones.”
An executive at Infosys, one of India’s biggest technology companies, said in a LinkedIn post that it arranged a chartered flight to bring back more than 200 workers and their families to India, after their American visas expired. The company declined to comment.
Even before Mr. Trump’s election, limiting the H-1B program had won some bipartisan support. The program allows companies to bring in well-educated or technically skilled workers from abroad temporarily. About 65,000 candidates are selected each year by lottery. The workers can bring their families, but they must apply for green cards separately if they want to remain in the United States once their work ends.
Some labor groups say companies use the program to bring in cheap labor. Often, they say, H-1B visa holders are not stars in their fields but hold skills that can be easily found domestically.
“There are very few people in this world who are truly innovative, and our economy depends on them,” said Russell Harrison, the director of government relations for the IEEE-USA, an association representing more than 170,000 technology professionals that supports H-1B restrictions.
Sensitive to the criticism, Indian outsourcing companies have long stressed plans to hire in the United States. In early September, Infosys announced it would hire 12,000 more Americans over the next two years.
Indian outsourcing companies dominated the H-1B lottery a decade ago, but sponsors now include some of the biggest names in American technology. Seven of the top 10 sponsors last year were American, including Amazon and Google, according to official citizenship data. About 15 percent of Facebook’s employees are H-1B holders.
If the government considerably limits the number of H-1B workers they can bring in, companies may send the work overseas instead.
“The work will go to India more because there is an abundance of high-quality college-educated tech labor in India,” said William Lazonick, an economist and professor emeritus at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business. “It is obviously an advantage if that higher-quality labor force is less expensive to employ than workers in the company’s home country.”
Research is scant, but at least one study has found that limits on H-1B visas lead to more hiring overseas. The study, by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, compared periods of tightened H-1B restrictions with hiring by major firms and found greater hiring in places like China and India, which have a large pool of skilled workers, and Canada, which has looser immigration policies.
Like industries around the globe, the outsourcing business took a substantial hit during the coronavirus pandemic. The troubles were particularly acute in India, where many workers lack the equipment or the internet connections to work from home.
Tech companies struggled to source hundreds of thousands of laptops in the early weeks of the pandemic. They sent desktop computers to workers’ homes and enabled firewalls to fend off cyberattacks.
At Tata Consultancy Services, India’s largest information technology firm with more than 400,000 workers globally, these responsibilities fell on the shoulders of Amit Jain, the global head of I.T. infrastructure, based in Mumbai.
Mr. Jain, who worked at the company for 32 years, died in March after suffering a heart attack.
“He was overworked and extremely exhausted,” said his brother, Mukul Jain. “He told me he hadn’t slept in two to three days because he was helping employees in India, Europe and the U.S. to work from home.”
T.C.S. declined to comment about Mr. Jain’s death. A public relations firm that represents the company said that about 95 percent of T.C.S. employees were now working remotely.
Now India’s outsourcing companies are seeing their results stabilize. Share prices have risen as investors bet that companies looking to trim costs and reduce head count seek their services.
Indeed, companies have resumed looking toward outsourcing companies. In July, Vanguard, the mutual fund company, said it struck a deal with Infosys of India to assume 1,300 back office positions, like record keeping and technology services. Workers would be offered comparable jobs at Infosys, said a spokeswoman for Vanguard, adding that the decision was unrelated to the pandemic or the shifts in the H1-B program.
India’s outsourcing companies face long-term challenges. Cutting-edge technologies like artificial intelligence could eventually take over some of their tasks. The companies themselves are trying to move up the value chain to do more of the innovative technology work done in Silicon Valley and China.
“Most of the larger Indian I.T. companies haven’t expanded in that direction. They haven’t expanded to semiconductors, e-commerce, gaming and other technologies,” said Nitin Soni, a Singapore-based analyst and senior director at Fitch Ratings, a credit rating firm. “They have stuck to their core strengths, which are all in the realm of automation of organizational stuff.”
But companies rethinking the future of the office could offer them new opportunities.
“If you can get the same or better talent at lower cost, which allows you to do your business 24 hours, then that’s a good value proposition,” said Ajay Gupta, a Mumbai-based partner at global consulting firm Kearney.
Of traditional offices, he added, “even companies within India are saying, ‘We don’t need this rigid infrastructure.’”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting.
PHOTO: Sonal Thakkar, a tech consultant whose visa extension has been refused, is unsure when she can return to America. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SONAL THAKKAR) (B3)

Load-Date: October 4, 2020


End of Document
Tech Layoffs in U.S. Send Foreign Workers Scrambling to Find New Jobs
The New York Times 
December 9, 2022 Friday 16:54 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1510 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Workers on visas, many of them waiting years for green cards, now face having to leave the country unless they get hired within 60 days.
Body


Workers on visas, many of them waiting years for green cards, now face having to leave the country unless they get hired within 60 days.
Since Microsoft brought him to the United States 14 years ago, Abhishikt Jain has excelled professionally, raised a family and settled into a four-bedroom house with a garage “full of unnecessary stuff,” he said.
“You could say I achieved the American dream,” said the software engineer, now 43, who is from India and lives in Bellevue, Wash.
But in October, Mr. Jain fell victim to layoffs battering the tech industry, and suddenly his family’s future was thrust into uncertainty. On the cusp of securing permanent U.S. residency after a 12-year wait, Mr. Jain instead faced the prospect of packing up and leaving the United States unless he quickly found another job or finally received his green card.
After years of galloping growth, the U.S. tech sector has slammed on the brakes amid rising inflation and worries about a recession. A hiring bonanza has given way to drastic head count reductions to slash costs.
Getting sacked during the holiday season is a blow to any worker. But for foreigners on temporary work visas, the challenges go far beyond managing without paychecks. They must find jobs within 60 days at another company willing to sponsor them for a visa, or they must leave the country. And many stand to lose their shot at U.S. permanent residency after spending years in a green-card backlog.
So far this year, more than 146,000 tech workers have been laid off, according to Layoffs.fyi, which tracks them, including 51,000 in November alone. A substantial share of those terminated were foreigners, even though employers have not disclosed how many workers on temporary visas have been let go.
The cutbacks have sent anxious foreign workers scrambling to find new jobs, and as the clock ticks, looking for possible workarounds, such as transferring to temporary visitor status to buy a little more time to job hunt.
“The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before. There is chaos and confusion,” said Tahmina Watson, an immigration lawyer in Seattle who has been barraged with queries from laid-off foreign workers.
“Not only are tech companies laying people off in unprecedented numbers, but they are also implementing hiring freezes,” she said, “and thus, there are likely few alternative jobs for immigrant workers.”
Mr. Jain, who lost his job at Microsoft in October, is among tens of thousands of Indian engineers who for years have been creating software at information technology companies like Cisco, social-media platforms like Meta and online retailers like Amazon. Because of their crucial role, and a dearth of American STEM graduates, many foreign workers are being sponsored by their employers for U.S. permanent residency.
While parked in the backlog waiting for approval, the immigrants have built lives in the United States: They have had American children, taken out mortgages and become rooted in their communities.
Most are on high-skilled worker visas known as H-1Bs. More than 500,000 people are in the United States under the visas, the largest number hailing from India, followed by China, with the majority in science and technology fields.
Demand for such talent has soared as the U.S. economy has become increasingly reliant on technology. Between 2000 and 2019, the number of tech workers in the United States jumped by 44 percent, to 10.8 million from 7.5 million. For their programming, coding and other skills, many receive six-figure salaries.
As of 2019, foreign-born workers made up almost a quarter of all STEM workers in the country, up from about 16 percent in the year 2000, according to an analysis of census data by the American Immigration Council.
The visa holders are concentrated in California, home to Twitter, Meta and Apple, and in Washington State, home to Amazon, Microsoft, Zillow and Expedia. But they are also in states like Arkansas, toiling at the headquarters of Tyson, the poultry processor, to improve production efficiencies, and at Walmart, to design systems for self-checkouts.
This year, U.S. employers filed more than 480,000 petitions for the 85,000 H-1B visas available, and as in previous years, the government turned to a lottery to allocate them because of the large volume of applications.
But recent layoffs in the tech industry have abruptly upended the lives of workers already here.
After completing his acquisition of Twitter, Elon Musk slashed half the staff, or 3,700 employees, leaving many foreign workers on visas in urgent need of new employment.
“I am on an H-1B visa and have only 60 days to start a new job,” Yiwei Zhuang, a Chinese software engineer, wrote on LinkedIn.
After losing her job at Twitter, Sujatha Krishnaswamy, an Indian national, took to the platform to voice her angst at her precarious situation.
This year, while pregnant, “I worked day and night to successfully deliver a critical user-facing privacy feature to meet Twitter’s regulatory obligations,” she wrote. “I gave my heart and soul every day to meet Twitter’s Security and Privacy promises to users and regulators.”
Her H-1B status, she noted, was “exacerbating my situation.”
(Reached by phone recently, Ms. Krishnaswamy declined to answer any questions, saying she was focused on her job search.)
If H-1B workers and their families return to their country of origin after being laid off, their employer is obligated to pay for their airfare home.
To stay in the United States, they must find a company willing to shoulder the costs of renewing their H-1B visa, and to pay fees associated with their green-card applications, if they are in process, which are employment-based.
“A new employer has to agree to spend up to $20,000 extra for an H-1B worker,” said Jonathan Grode, a lawyer in Philadelphia who specializes in employment-based immigration.
“It makes you less attractive for an employer” than workers who are U.S. citizens or green-card holders, who also may have been laid off and are looking for work, he said. “That’s the conundrum.”
An informal database set up by two Indian tech workers on LinkedIn to help fellow H-1B visa holders find jobs has attracted more than 500 people, who have shared their information with hopes of being connected to prospective employers.
“We expected 40 to 50 people. But as soon as we created the database, it exploded,” said Shruti Anand, who launched the effort last month with a friend, Vidhi Agrawal.
The women quickly realized that the reach of the layoffs extended beyond the software industry. “It’s all over, anywhere that tech touches,” said Ms. Anand, “people in health care, food industry are losing their jobs.”
After introducing hiring freezes, many companies have moved to shrink their staffs as they brace for the impact of supply-chain issues, as well as rising interest rates and costs on their bottom lines.
Layoffs have occurred steadily at tech titans and midsize firms but also at smaller companies and start-ups.
Many companies that boomed during the coronavirus pandemic, such as Amazon, DoorDash and Netflix, have seen lower demand as consumer behavior returns to pre-pandemic patterns.
After The Times reported that Amazon planned to lay off 10,000 workers, its chief executive, Andy Jassy, confirmed in a message to employees last month that the job cuts were happening, but he did not specify how many. Computerworld reported last week that 20,000 workers could get pink slips in coming months.
Last month, Mark Zuckerberg announced that Meta, the parent of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, was laying off more than 11,000 employees to reduce its work force by 13 percent, and the company extended a hiring freeze through the first quarter of next year.
Some employers have offered generous severance packages. DoorDash, for example, which announced on Nov. 30 that it was laying off about 1,250 workers, has set the termination date of workers for March 1, to give people on visas more time to find a new job if they choose to remain in the United States.
Back in Washington State, Microsoft gave Mr. Jain severance that provides him a cushion, and he took pains to emphasize that the company had been a good employer for 17 years, three of them while he worked in India.
Yet even with his deep experience, finding a new job has been challenging, he said, because the wave of layoffs coupled with hiring freezes has created stiff competition.
This week he won a major reprieve: After more than a decade of waiting, his green card suddenly arrived in the mail. His ability to live in the United States no longer depended on his employment. 
“Now the stress is much less,” said Mr. Jain, who is married and has two sons. “I just have to find a job.”
PHOTOS: Abhishikt Jain, originally from India, worked at Microsoft for 14 years until he was laid off this fall.; “The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before,” said Tahmina Watson, a Seattle immigration lawyer. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOVELLE TAMAYO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) This article appeared in print on page A15.

Load-Date: December 10, 2022


End of Document
Russia's Brain Drain Could Benefit the World
The New York Times
May 4, 2022 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24; PETER COY
Length: 1017 words
Byline: By Peter Coy
Body


Since Russia's war on Ukraine began, press reports have focused on the exodus from Russia of antiwar scientists, engineers and information technology experts. But the vast majority of the Russian people are staying put and rallying behind President Vladimir Putin. 
  According to Levada, Russia's most respected independent pollster, the share of all Russians who said they would like to relocate outside Russia fell in late March to 10 percent, from an average of 19 percent in three earlier polls since 2019.
  Even among people with higher education, the percentage who would like to relocate was the same, 10 percent, according to a spreadsheet that Levada sent me. (Some people may have been afraid to tell the pollsters of their dissatisfaction, given Putin's crackdown on dissent, but I'm betting the numbers are directionally right.)
  Why does this matter? Because Putin may be betting that as long as a strong majority of Russians support him, he can afford to lose the malcontents. He may even be glad that some are going. The autocrat is not erecting barriers to keep the intelligentsia from leaving, although he has offered tax breaks, subsidized mortgages and postponement of conscription into the armed forces to keep tech workers at home.
  He may live to regret his nonchalance. ''There is no doubt that there is long-lasting damage. The whole wave of recent emigration is the most productive slice of the Russian society,'' said Konstantin Sonin, an economist with the University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy who moved from Russia.
  ''Putin has a very specific worldview'' that opposes globalization, Sonin told me. Putin believes ''that an autarkic, centralized economy is sort of a strong economy. When Russia is cut from the international trade, when people are leaving, it seems to him that this is going in the right direction, the acceptable direction.''
  If Russia achieves political stability by ridding itself of smart people who oppose Putin's rule, Sonin said, ''the stability will be achieved at a very low level of production and consumption.''
  Russia has suffered from brain drain for at least a century, in part because it produces top-notch university graduates but usually hasn't had an economy capable of putting their skills to good use. The United States and other countries have long benefited from immigrants from what was the Russian Empire, including some from what are now independent nations. In the United States that includes such giants as Igor Sikorsky, a pioneer in helicopters; Simon Kuznets, a Nobel laureate in economics; composers and authors such as Irving Berlin, Sergei Rachmaninoff and Vladimir Nabokov; and businesspeople such as the Wonskolaser brothers, better known by their Americanized name, the Warner brothers.
  Around 2010 the brain drain started to ease because the Russian economy was performing well. Some Russians even went home. But the invasion of Ukraine has once again yanked the plug out of the drain hole. Most of the exiles today are going to nearby countries, including Turkey, Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan and the Baltic nations.
  The United States has been tougher to get into because visas are scarce. In March the Department of Homeland Security granted Ukrainians temporary protected status for 18 months, enabling them to stay and work in the United States without a visa -- but it has not done so for Russians.
  In a shift, however, the Biden administration asked Congress last week to suspend for four years the requirement that Russian scientists applying for H1-B visas have a sponsoring employer. The measure would apply only to Russian citizens with master's or doctoral degrees in science or engineering fields such as artificial intelligence, nuclear engineering and quantum physics. They would have to undergo security vetting.
  That's a smart move. Western nations are making a mistake if they don't hold the door open to Russian scientists because of opposition to Putin, said Alexandra Vacroux, who is executive director of the Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies at Harvard. ''If they're leaving, they're the best and the brightest and the bravest,'' she said. ''It's important not to brand all the Russians as the baddies in the world.''
  Mara Kuvaldina, a Russian with a doctorate in experimental cognitive psychology who works at Columbia University Medical Center, has protested against Putin and said she fears going home to St. Petersburg to visit her mother. She participates in a network of scholars in the cognitive sciences who help fellow academics fleeing Russia, Ukraine and Belarus find jobs in the West.
  One goal is to help the scholars ''integrate into a new social environment abroad and give them opportunity to get back to normal life,'' Kuvaldina wrote in an email.
  John Holdren, who was Barack Obama's science adviser for all eight years of his presidency, told me he worked with the State Department to ''reduce obstacles on our side to people with very valuable skills from many countries.'' He said some of those efforts were rolled back by the Trump administration. ''It's an important part of U.S. science policy to be welcoming,'' Holdren said.
  For Putin to drive away some of his nation's greatest minds is lunatic. But as someone once said, never interrupt your enemy while he is making a mistake.
  Number of the week
  --2.1 percent
  This decrease is the median estimate of the change in industrial production in Brazil in the 12 months through March, according to a survey of forecasters by FactSet. The median forecast for economic growth for all of 2022 is 0.7 percent. Strengthening growth is a high priority for President Jair Bolsonaro, who is being challenged for re-election by the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. The official industrial production number is set to be released by the government on Tuesday.
  Quote of the day
  ''I see the world through equilibrium glasses; I don't think they fail me very often.''
  -- Fischer Black, ''Exploring General Equilibrium'' (1995)
  Have feedback? Send me a note at coy-newsletter@nytimes.com

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/02/opinion/russia-brain-drain.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by The New York Times
 Images by Bardocz Peter, and Petro Bevz, via Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: May 4, 2022


End of Document
Suddenly Hunting for Work, and a Chance to Stay in the U.S.
The New York Times
December 10, 2022 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1473 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


Workers on visas, many of them waiting years for green cards, now face having to leave the country unless they get hired within 60 days.
Since Microsoft brought him to the United States 14 years ago, Abhishikt Jain has excelled professionally, raised a family and settled into a four-bedroom house with a garage ''full of unnecessary stuff,'' he said. 
  ''You could say I achieved the American dream,'' said the software engineer, now 43, who is from India and lives in Bellevue, Wash.
  But in October, Mr. Jain fell victim to layoffs battering the tech industry, and suddenly his family's future was thrust into uncertainty. On the cusp of securing permanent U.S. residency after a 12-year wait, Mr. Jain instead faced the prospect of packing up and leaving the United States unless he quickly found another job or finally received his green card.
  After years of galloping growth, the U.S. tech sector has slammed on the brakes amid rising inflation and worries about a recession. A hiring bonanza has given way to drastic head count reductions to slash costs.
  Getting sacked during the holiday season is a blow to any worker. But for foreigners on temporary work visas, the challenges go far beyond managing without paychecks. They must find jobs within 60 days at another company willing to sponsor them for a visa, or they must leave the country. And many stand to lose their shot at U.S. permanent residency after spending years in a green-card backlog.
  So far this year, more than 146,000 tech workers have been laid off, according to Layoffs.fyi, which tracks them, including 51,000 in November alone. A substantial share of those terminated were foreigners, even though employers have not disclosed how many workers on temporary visas have been let go.
  The cutbacks have sent anxious foreign workers scrambling to find new jobs, and as the clock ticks, looking for possible workarounds, such as transferring to temporary visitor status to buy a little more time to job hunt.
  ''The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before. There is chaos and confusion,'' said Tahmina Watson, an immigration lawyer in Seattle who has been barraged with queries from laid-off foreign workers.
  ''Not only are tech companies laying people off in unprecedented numbers, but they are also implementing hiring freezes,'' she said, ''and thus, there are likely few alternative jobs for immigrant workers.''
  Mr. Jain, who lost his job at Microsoft in October, is among tens of thousands of Indian engineers who for years have been creating software at information technology companies like Cisco, social-media platforms like Meta and online retailers like Amazon. Because of their crucial role, and a dearth of American STEM graduates, many foreign workers are being sponsored by their employers for U.S. permanent residency.
  While parked in the backlog waiting for approval, the immigrants have built lives in the United States: They have had American children, taken out mortgages and become rooted in their communities.
  Most are on high-skilled worker visas known as H-1Bs. More than 500,000 people are in the United States under the visas, the largest number hailing from India, followed by China, with the majority in science and technology fields.
  Demand for such talent has soared as the U.S. economy has become increasingly reliant on technology. Between 2000 and 2019, the number of tech workers in the United States jumped by 44 percent, to 10.8 million from 7.5 million. For their programming, coding and other skills, many receive six-figure salaries.
  As of 2019, foreign-born workers made up almost a quarter of all STEM workers in the country, up from about 16 percent in the year 2000, according to an analysis of census data by the American Immigration Council.
  The visa holders are concentrated in California, home to Twitter, Meta and Apple, and in Washington State, home to Amazon, Microsoft, Zillow and Expedia. But they are also in states like Arkansas, toiling at the headquarters of Tyson, the poultry processor, to improve production efficiencies, and at Walmart, to design systems for self-checkouts.
  This year, U.S. employers filed more than 480,000 petitions for the 85,000 H-1B visas available, and as in previous years, the government turned to a lottery to allocate them because of the large volume of applications.
  But recent layoffs in the tech industry have abruptly upended the lives of workers already here.
  After completing his acquisition of Twitter, Elon Musk slashed half the staff, or 3,700 employees, leaving many foreign workers on visas in urgent need of new employment.
  ''I am on an H-1B visa and have only 60 days to start a new job,'' Yiwei Zhuang, a Chinese software engineer, wrote on LinkedIn.
  After losing her job at Twitter, Sujatha Krishnaswamy, an Indian national, took to the platform to voice her angst at her precarious situation.
  This year, while pregnant, ''I worked day and night to successfully deliver a critical user-facing privacy feature to meet Twitter's regulatory obligations,'' she wrote. ''I gave my heart and soul every day to meet Twitter's Security and Privacy promises to users and regulators.''
  Her H-1B status, she noted, was ''exacerbating my situation.''
  (Reached by phone recently, Ms. Krishnaswamy declined to answer any questions, saying she was focused on her job search.)
  If H-1B workers and their families return to their country of origin after being laid off, their employer is obligated to pay for their airfare home.
  To stay in the United States, they must find a company willing to shoulder the costs of renewing their H-1B visa, and to pay fees associated with their green-card applications, if they are in process, which are employment-based.
  ''A new employer has to agree to spend up to $20,000 extra for an H-1B worker,'' said Jonathan Grode, a lawyer in Philadelphia who specializes in employment-based immigration.
  ''It makes you less attractive for an employer'' than workers who are U.S. citizens or green-card holders, who also may have been laid off and are looking for work, he said. ''That's the conundrum.''
  An informal database set up by two Indian tech workers on LinkedIn to help fellow H-1B visa holders find jobs has attracted more than 500 people, who have shared their information with hopes of being connected to prospective employers.
  ''We expected 40 to 50 people. But as soon as we created the database, it exploded,'' said Shruti Anand, who launched the effort last month with a friend, Vidhi Agrawal.
  The women quickly realized that the reach of the layoffs extended beyond the software industry. ''It's all over, anywhere that tech touches,'' said Ms. Anand, ''people in health care, food industry are losing their jobs.''
  After introducing hiring freezes, many companies have moved to shrink their staffs as they brace for the impact of supply-chain issues, as well as rising interest rates and costs on their bottom lines.
  Layoffs have occurred steadily at tech titans and midsize firms but also at smaller companies and start-ups.
  Many companies that boomed during the coronavirus pandemic, such as Amazon, DoorDash and Netflix, have seen lower demand as consumer behavior returns to pre-pandemic patterns.
  After The Times reported that Amazon planned to lay off 10,000 workers, its chief executive, Andy Jassy, confirmed in a message to employees last month that the job cuts were happening, but he did not specify how many. Computerworld reported last week that 20,000 workers could get pink slips in coming months.
  Last month, Mark Zuckerberg announced that Meta, the parent of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, was laying off more than 11,000 employees to reduce its work force by 13 percent, and the company extended a hiring freeze through the first quarter of next year.
  Some employers have offered generous severance packages. DoorDash, for example, which announced on Nov. 30 that it was laying off about 1,250 workers, has set the termination date of workers for March 1, to give people on visas more time to find a new job if they choose to remain in the United States.
  Back in Washington State, Microsoft gave Mr. Jain severance that provides him a cushion, and he took pains to emphasize that the company had been a good employer for 17 years, three of them while he worked in India.
  Yet even with his deep experience, finding a new job has been challenging, he said, because the wave of layoffs coupled with hiring freezes has created stiff competition.
  This week he won a major reprieve: After more than a decade of waiting, his green card suddenly arrived in the mail. His ability to live in the United States no longer depended on his employment. 
  ''Now the stress is much less,'' said Mr. Jain, who is married and has two sons. ''I just have to find a job.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/09/us/tech-immigrant-workers-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Abhishikt Jain, originally from India, worked at Microsoft for 14 years until he was laid off this fall.
 ''The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before,'' said Tahmina Watson, a Seattle immigration lawyer. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOVELLE TAMAYO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) This article appeared in print on page A15.               

Load-Date: December 10, 2022


End of Document
Judge Blocks President's Visa Ban for Foreign Workers
The New York Times
October 2, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1015 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


The court overruled limits on visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers during the coronavirus pandemic.
LOS ANGELES -- A federal judge ruled on Thursday that President Trump overstepped his authority in suspending new visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers amid the coronavirus pandemic, enabling major companies like Microsoft, Goodyear Tire and Exxon Mobil to resume bringing employees from abroad. 
  Judge Jeffrey S. White of U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California temporarily blocked further implementation of the sweeping order, issued in June, as it applied to thousands of companies seeking to bring workers to the United States on a wide array of visas, including the H-1B for high-skilled workers, seasonal employees on guest-worker visas and others, such as au pairs, who enter the country on cultural exchange visas.
  ''Congress' delegation of authority in the immigration context does not afford the President unbridled authority to set domestic policy regarding employment of nonimmigrant foreigners,'' the judge wrote in his 25-page decision.
  ''Indeed, there must be some measure of constraint on Presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power in the immigration context, an area within clear legislative prerogative,'' said Judge White, who was appointed by President George W. Bush.
  The president had said that his proclamation, initially effective until Dec. 31, would protect Americans from foreign competition for jobs amid soaring unemployment caused by the coronavirus pandemic. In his proclamation, he described the entry of additional workers under work visas as an ''unusual threat to the employment of American workers.''
  The proclamation also restricted the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for extended stints. And it blocked visas for the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
  In a scathing opinion, Judge White said the proclamation did not address the problem it purported to tackle, namely to lift the economy by providing job opportunities for Americans.
  ''The proclamation completely disregards both economic reality and the pre-existing statutory framework,'' he wrote. ''Furthermore, without any consideration of the impact on American firms and their business planning, the proclamation changes the scope of immigration policy in the United States.''
  The judge's order is at odds with an earlier decision reached by a federal judge in Washington, D.C., which ensures that the ultimate determination will be made by an appeals court.
  Still, it immediately sets aside the visa ban for the plaintiffs who brought the case. They include the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Retail Federation and groups representing tech giants like Microsoft and Amazon; their members include hundreds of thousands of American businesses of all sizes from a cross-section of sectors.
  ''We are competing with the rest of the world to find and develop top talent to support innovation in our industry,'' said Linda Kelly, a senior vice president and general counsel at the manufacturers' association. ''Today's decision is a temporary win for manufacturers committed to building that innovation in the United States.''
  ''The restrictions both undermined our industry at a critical time and conflicted with the law,'' she said.
  The judge's ruling was a lifeline, said Marcie Schneider, the president of Intrax, a cultural-exchange company that brings au pairs to the United States.
  ''This decision means that our staff can continue to do the important work that they do to bring cultural exchange participants on our programs and to remain employed in this vital field,'' she said.
  The administration did not immediately comment on the ruling.
  Stephen Miller, the White House aide who is the architect of Mr. Trump's immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate many foreign worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. In recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
  While the president's pledge to build a ''big, beautiful wall'' to prevent illegal immigrants from swarming the border has garnered the most attention, his moves to slow legal immigration have been ongoing and even more effective.
  And as the election nears, Mr. Trump has doubled down on his commitment to curb immigration of all kinds.
  This week, the federal government said it would admit 15,000 refugees, an all-time low, during the coming fiscal year. That number is even fewer than the 18,000 refugees authorized for resettlement last year and a sliver of the 110,000 slots approved by President Barack Obama in 2016.
  In April, Mr. Trump signed an executive order that suspended new permanent residence authorization, or green cards, to most foreigners looking to live in the United States.
  Under another policy that took effect early this year, known as the public-charge rule, immigrants applying for green cards can be disqualified based on their likelihood of using public benefits and their English proficiency.
  This week, Judge White issued a preliminary injunction blocking a series of fee hikes for visas and other immigration benefits that were to go into effect on Friday, saying they would irreparably harm poor immigrants.
  The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services had planned to increase the cost of naturalization applications to $1,170 from $725 for most applicants; it would have also charged asylum seekers, who have never paid for refuge, a $50 application fee. The cost of applying for a deportation suspension or expulsion cancellation would have jumped to $1,810 from $285.
  Most fee waivers for immigrants who are unable to afford paying the full cost would have been eliminated.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/01/us/foreign-workers-visas-h-1b-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The majority of H1-B visas are given out to Indians who work in information technology jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Atul Loke for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: October 2, 2020


End of Document
They Grew Up in the U.S., but Can't Stay After They Turn 21
The New York Times
May 1, 2022 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1764 words
Byline: By Aishvarya Kavi
Body


Children of temporary visa holders who can't gain permanent residency are one of several groups urging the Biden administration to act on an immigration overhaul.
WASHINGTON -- In 2011, after five years of working and living with his family in the United States on a temporary visa, Barathimohan Ganesan submitted green card applications for his wife, his 5-year-old daughter and his 11-year-old son. 
  Mr. Ganesan, who was born in India and has also lived in Singapore and Australia, was nervous about when his wife and children might gain permanent residency. He knew the waiting list was especially long for Indians on his kind of visa, an H-1B, which allows American companies to employ skilled foreign workers. Because of chronic backlogs, it can take years to process those on work visas who apply for permanent residency.
  Last year, a decade after he applied, Mr. Ganesan, his wife and his daughter received their green cards. But his son had turned 21 and missed the cutoff by months, leaving him scrambling for a visa that would allow him to stay in the United States.
  Mr. Ganesan's son is among more than 200,000 children who grew up in the country under the protection of their parents' temporary visas, which can be renewed indefinitely. But the children risk losing their legal status when they turn 21. Unable to become permanent residents because of the backlogs or because they were never eligible, they must obtain a different visa, remain in the United States without legal status or leave entirely. According to the Cato Institute, more than 10,000 children age out of green card eligibility each year; untold numbers eventually depart, often leaving their families behind.
  These young people do not qualify for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. Created by executive action during the Obama administration, the DACA program protects from deportation about 650,000 youths, or Dreamers, who were brought into the United States and have remained without legal status. Because the program requires applicants to be undocumented, it does not offer those with legal status a way to stay.
  A comprehensive immigration overhaul is highly unlikely to pass a deadlocked Congress in a midterm election year. The Biden administration has been under increasing pressure as a Trump-era public health order, known as Title 42, is set to be lifted in late May, a move that is expected to create a surge of migration across the southwestern border. A bipartisan group of senators restarted immigration discussions on Thursday to try to identify stand-alone proposals that would have the support of both parties.
  When asked on Thursday whether the administration -- which is updating DACA -- was considering extending protections to documented youths, Alejandro N. Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, told the House Judiciary Committee that the department did not plan to do so. Its focus was ''to fortify the existing DACA program'' and shift responsibility for documented youths to Congress, he said, adding that their situation spoke to ''the imperative to pass immigration reform.''
  In interviews, more than a dozen people who lived in the United States on temporary visas from a young age described their struggles with anxiety and the financial burden of navigating how to remain in the country they considered home. They are urging the Biden administration, if it will not provide a path to citizenship, to offer a way for them to legally remain in the country.
  Mr. Ganesan's son, Niranjan Barathimohan, is able to stay in the United States until November only because immigration officials extended his dependent visa. Mr. Barathimohan, a student at the University of Texas at Dallas, will have to go to Singapore, where he was born, to apply for a student visa that will allow him to return and finish his degree.
  His application might be rejected; since he previously tried for a green card, he has shown an intent to immigrate to the United States, which is not allowed. Applicants may be asked to show that they intend to leave the country after completing their courses. Mr. Barathimohan faces the prospect of being stuck in Singapore, where he has no family or roots.
  ''How is he going to manage alone?'' Mr. Ganesan said. ''I was really devastated that just because of my country of birth, my son's opportunities are very limited.''
  While there are protections to keep families together when parents move to the United States on temporary work visas, those end when children turn 21 because they are no longer considered part of the family unit.
  ''I don't think people who originally wrote the laws foresaw a situation where children brought here on visas would be raised and educated here, but not have a clear opportunity to stay and become Americans,'' said Dip Patel, the founder of Improve the Dream, an organization that campaigns for a path to citizenship for those children. ''Delay in taking action will not only lead to tearing more families apart, but also continue the immense emotional turmoil faced by thousands of families.''
  Other families face similar situations. Like Mr. Ganesan, Deva and her husband moved their children to the United States from India when they were young. For more than a decade, the children and Deva, who asked to be identified by a nickname, lived as dependents on her husband's indefinite work visa.
  Deva said her husband's employer, an American automaker, could decide at any point not to extend his visa, which must be renewed every three years. She said she feared antagonizing the employer if she was identified speaking publicly about her family's situation.
  The family's hopes of staying together in the United States ended in December, when Deva's daughter turned 21. Having exhausted appeals for an extension and unable to apply for a different visa, the daughter moved to Canada days later.
  The effects on the family were far-reaching. A week before her daughter was set to leave, Deva said, her son, now 17, tried to hurt himself, alarming his sister. She postponed her departure by a week while the family sought counseling for him.
  Her son said during counseling that he had struggled with his mental health for months while watching his family navigate their legal status, Deva said. Her daughter, who enrolled in a master's program in Canada, is less than an hour's drive from her friends and family, but cannot enter the United States while she waits for a tourist visa.
  At a Senate hearing in March, Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, and Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the top Republican on the panel's immigration subcommittee, vowed to work on legislation to help people who had grown up in the United States without a clear path to citizenship.
  In emotional testimony at the hearing, Athulya Rajakumar, 23, spoke of the toll of growing up in Seattle as a dependent of her single mother, who had a temporary work visa. She described how she and her brother struggled with depression and how her family's status as temporary visa holders hindered him from receiving the treatment he needed. He later took his own life.
  ''We didn't know how badly it was going to affect us,'' Ms. Rajakumar, who lives in Texas on a work visa, said in an interview.
  Muzaffar Chishti, the director of the Migration Policy Institute at the N.Y.U. School of Law, described the issue as one of many in a system that has not been truly updated since the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which established the pathways for legal immigration that are still in place.
  ''Immigration is not a set of policies -- it's a system,'' Mr. Chishti said, adding, ''If one part of the system gets problematic, it affects other parts of the system.''
  Those who grew up in the United States on certain temporary visas are not eligible to apply for permanent residency. That was the case for Summer Rusher, who was born in Britain and moved to Florida at age 1 with her parents, who arrived on an investor visa, which allows some foreign citizens to reside in the country indefinitely if they invest in an American business. The program does not offer a path to citizenship, meaning that children have no way to become permanent residents.
  Ms. Rusher, 23, was able to stay on a student visa after she turned 21. She graduated from Southeastern University at the top of her class in a master's program for exceptional-student education, a certification in Florida for instructors of students with disabilities.
  Now a teacher in Winter Haven, Fla., Ms. Rusher was among a large pool of applicants for a limited number of work visas. But she learned in March that she was not chosen in the randomized process used by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. If she cannot obtain another visa before her work authorization expires in June, she will have to return to Britain, where her qualifications are not recognized.
  Short of a legislative overhaul of the system, Improve the Dream, the advocacy group, has worked to increase awareness of the issue and is urging the Biden administration to make changes. But children of nonimmigrant visa holders have criticized the administration for being too slow or unwilling to take action on proposed changes, such as the expansion of DACA to include documented youths.
  Among the proposals is one that would modify how U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services determines whether an applicant qualifies for a green card, allowing more minors to remain eligible as they near 21. Another would classify applicants as children beyond their 21st birthday to keep them in line for a green card, which is the policy for those who are refugees or asylum seekers or are sponsored by relatives who are U.S. citizens.
  Matthew D. Bourke, a spokesman for the immigration agency, said the Department of Homeland Security was ''keenly aware'' of the challenges for documented youths and was ''exploring legal methods to provide immigration relief to this population where possible.''
  As Deva and her husband await their green cards, which they applied for in 2016, she said they were struggling with their finances. She now hopes that her children can build a future in Canada.
  Ms. Rusher said she was on the verge of having to leave her family, students and career. Her brother, who was born in the United States, does not face the same restrictions.
  ''I got to do everything that a typical American kid would dream of,'' Ms. Rusher said. ''I don't want that to end just because of where I was born.''

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Mr. Ganesan and his son, Niranjan Barathimohan, who is among over 200,000 children in the U.S. under the protection of their parents' temporary visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMIL LIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
For over a decade, Deva and the children lived as dependents on her husband's work visa. Her daughter exhausted appeals for an extension. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARAH RICE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Ms. Rusher stayed in the U.S. on a student visa after she turned 21, but her work authorization expires soon and she may have to return to Britain. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVE EDELHEIT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: May 3, 2022


End of Document
Putin’s Failure to Hold On to the Educated Could Be the World’s Gain; Peter Coy
The New York Times 
May 2, 2022 Monday 19:17 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1029 words
Byline: Peter Coy
Highlight: Russians who oppose the war enough to leave should be welcomed as a boon to productivity.
Body


Since Russia’s war on Ukraine began, press reports have focused on the exodus from Russia of antiwar scientists, engineers and information technology experts. But the vast majority of the Russian people are staying put and rallying behind President Vladimir Putin.
According to Levada, Russia’s most respected independent pollster, the share of all Russians who said they would like to relocate outside Russia fell in late March to 10 percent, from an average of 19 percent in three earlier polls since 2019.
Even among people with higher education, the percentage who would like to relocate was the same, 10 percent, according to a spreadsheet that Levada sent me. (Some people may have been afraid to tell the pollsters of their dissatisfaction, given Putin’s crackdown on dissent, but I’m betting the numbers are directionally right.)
Why does this matter? Because Putin may be betting that as long as a strong majority of Russians support him, he can afford to lose the malcontents. He may even be glad that some are going. The autocrat is not erecting barriers to keep the intelligentsia from leaving, although he has offered tax breaks, subsidized mortgages and postponement of conscription into the armed forces to keep tech workers at home.
He may live to regret his nonchalance. “There is no doubt that there is long-lasting damage. The whole wave of recent emigration is the most productive slice of the Russian society,” said Konstantin Sonin, an economist with the University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy who moved from Russia.
“Putin has a very specific worldview” that opposes globalization, Sonin told me. Putin believes “that an autarkic, centralized economy is sort of a strong economy. When Russia is cut from the international trade, when people are leaving, it seems to him that this is going in the right direction, the acceptable direction.”
If Russia achieves political stability by ridding itself of smart people who oppose Putin’s rule, Sonin said, “the stability will be achieved at a very low level of production and consumption.”
Russia has suffered from brain drain for at least a century, in part because it produces top-notch university graduates but usually hasn’t had an economy capable of putting their skills to good use. The United States and other countries have long benefited from immigrants from what was the Russian Empire, including some from what are now independent nations. In the United States that includes such giants as Igor Sikorsky, a pioneer in helicopters; Simon Kuznets, a Nobel laureate in economics; composers and authors such as Irving Berlin, Sergei Rachmaninoff and Vladimir Nabokov; and businesspeople such as the Wonskolaser brothers, better known by their Americanized name, the Warner brothers.
Around 2010 the brain drain started to ease because the Russian economy was performing well. Some Russians even went home. But the invasion of Ukraine has once again yanked the plug out of the drain hole. Most of the exiles today are going to nearby countries, including Turkey, Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan and the Baltic nations.
The United States has been tougher to get into because visas are scarce. In March the Department of Homeland Security granted Ukrainians temporary protected status for 18 months, enabling them to stay and work in the United States without a visa — but it has not done so for Russians.
In a shift, however, the Biden administration asked Congress last week to suspend for four years the requirement that Russian scientists applying for H1-B visas have a sponsoring employer. The measure would apply only to Russian citizens with master’s or doctoral degrees in science or engineering fields such as artificial intelligence, nuclear engineering and quantum physics. They would have to undergo security vetting.
That’s a smart move. Western nations are making a mistake if they don’t hold the door open to Russian scientists because of opposition to Putin, said Alexandra Vacroux, who is executive director of the Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies at Harvard. “If they’re leaving, they’re the best and the brightest and the bravest,” she said. “It’s important not to brand all the Russians as the baddies in the world.”
Mara Kuvaldina, a Russian with a doctorate in experimental cognitive psychology who works at Columbia University Medical Center, has protested against Putin and said she fears going home to St. Petersburg to visit her mother. She participates in a network of scholars in the cognitive sciences who help fellow academics fleeing Russia, Ukraine and Belarus find jobs in the West.
One goal is to help the scholars “integrate into a new social environment abroad and give them opportunity to get back to normal life,” Kuvaldina wrote in an email.
John Holdren, who was Barack Obama’s science adviser for all eight years of his presidency, told me he worked with the State Department to “reduce obstacles on our side to people with very valuable skills from many countries.” He said some of those efforts were rolled back by the Trump administration. “It’s an important part of U.S. science policy to be welcoming,” Holdren said.
For Putin to drive away some of his nation’s greatest minds is lunatic. But as someone once said, never interrupt your enemy while he is making a mistake.
Number of the week
–2.1 percent
This decrease is the median estimate of the change in industrial production in Brazil in the 12 months through March, according to a survey of forecasters by FactSet. The median forecast for economic growth for all of 2022 is 0.7 percent. Strengthening growth is a high priority for President Jair Bolsonaro, who is being challenged for re-election by the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. The official industrial production number is set to be released by the government on Tuesday.
Quote of the day
“I see the world through equilibrium glasses; I don’t think they fail me very often.”
— Fischer Black, “Exploring General Equilibrium” (1995)
Have feedback? Send me a note at coy-newsletter@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Illustration by The New York Times; Images by Bardocz Peter, and Petro Bevz, via Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 8, 2022


End of Document
They Grew Up Legally in the U.S., but Can’t Stay After They Turn 21
The New York Times 
April 30, 2022 Saturday 11:43 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1848 words
Byline: Aishvarya Kavi
Highlight: Children of temporary visa holders who can’t gain permanent residency are one of several groups urging the Biden administration to act on an immigration overhaul.
Body


Children of temporary visa holders who can’t gain permanent residency are one of several groups urging the Biden administration to act on an immigration overhaul.
WASHINGTON — In 2011, after five years of working and living with his family in the United States on a temporary visa, Barathimohan Ganesan submitted green card applications for his wife, his 5-year-old daughter and his 11-year-old son.
Mr. Ganesan, who was born in India and has also lived in Singapore and Australia, was nervous about when his wife and children might gain permanent residency. He knew the waiting list was especially long for Indians on his kind of visa, an H-1B, which allows American companies to employ skilled foreign workers. Because of chronic backlogs, it can take years to process those on work visas who apply for permanent residency.
Last year, a decade after he applied, Mr. Ganesan, his wife and his daughter received their green cards. But his son had turned 21 and missed the cutoff by months, leaving him scrambling for a visa that would allow him to stay in the United States.
Mr. Ganesan’s son is among more than 200,000 children who grew up in the country under the protection of their parents’ temporary visas, which can be renewed indefinitely. But the children risk losing their legal status when they turn 21. Unable to become permanent residents because of the backlogs or because they were never eligible, they must obtain a different visa, remain in the United States without legal status or leave entirely. According to the Cato Institute, more than 10,000 children age out of green card eligibility each year; untold numbers eventually depart, often leaving their families behind.
These young people do not qualify for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. Created by executive action during the Obama administration, the DACA program protects from deportation about 650,000 youths, or Dreamers, who were brought into the United States and have remained without legal status. Because the program requires applicants to be undocumented, it does not offer those with legal status a way to stay.
A comprehensive immigration overhaul is highly unlikely to pass a deadlocked Congress in a midterm election year. The Biden administration has been under increasing pressure as a Trump-era public health order, known as Title 42, is set to be lifted in late May, a move that is expected to create a surge of migration across the southwestern border. A bipartisan group of senators restarted immigration discussions on Thursday to try to identify stand-alone proposals that would have the support of both parties.
When asked on Thursday whether the administration — which is updating DACA — was considering extending protections to documented youths, Alejandro N. Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, told the House Judiciary Committee that the department did not plan to do so. Its focus was “to fortify the existing DACA program” and shift responsibility for documented youths to Congress, he said, adding that their situation spoke to “the imperative to pass immigration reform.”
In interviews, more than a dozen people who lived in the United States on temporary visas from a young age described their struggles with anxiety and the financial burden of navigating how to remain in the country they considered home. They are urging the Biden administration, if it will not provide a path to citizenship, to offer a way for them to legally remain in the country.
Mr. Ganesan’s son, Niranjan Barathimohan, is able to stay in the United States until November only because immigration officials extended his dependent visa. Mr. Barathimohan, a student at the University of Texas at Dallas, will have to go to Singapore, where he was born, to apply for a student visa that will allow him to return and finish his degree.
His application might be rejected; since he previously tried for a green card, he has shown an intent to immigrate to the United States, which is not allowed. Applicants may be asked to show that they intend to leave the country after completing their courses. Mr. Barathimohan faces the prospect of being stuck in Singapore, where he has no family or roots.
“How is he going to manage alone?” Mr. Ganesan said. “I was really devastated that just because of my country of birth, my son’s opportunities are very limited.”
While there are protections to keep families together when parents move to the United States on temporary work visas, those end when children turn 21 because they are no longer considered part of the family unit.
“I don’t think people who originally wrote the laws foresaw a situation where children brought here on visas would be raised and educated here, but not have a clear opportunity to stay and become Americans,” said Dip Patel, the founder of Improve the Dream, an organization that campaigns for a path to citizenship for those children. “Delay in taking action will not only lead to tearing more families apart, but also continue the immense emotional turmoil faced by thousands of families.”
Other families face similar situations. Like Mr. Ganesan, Deva and her husband moved their children to the United States from India when they were young. For more than a decade, the children and Deva, who asked to be identified by a nickname, lived as dependents on her husband’s indefinite work visa.
Deva said her husband’s employer, an American automaker, could decide at any point not to extend his visa, which must be renewed every three years. She said she feared antagonizing the employer if she was identified speaking publicly about her family’s situation.
The family’s hopes of staying together in the United States ended in December, when Deva’s daughter turned 21. Having exhausted appeals for an extension and unable to apply for a different visa, the daughter moved to Canada days later.
The effects on the family were far-reaching. A week before her daughter was set to leave, Deva said, her son, now 17, tried to hurt himself, alarming his sister. She postponed her departure by a week while the family sought counseling for him.
Her son said during counseling that he had struggled with his mental health for months while watching his family navigate their legal status, Deva said. Her daughter, who enrolled in a master’s program in Canada, is less than an hour’s drive from her friends and family, but cannot enter the United States while she waits for a tourist visa.
At a Senate hearing in March, Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, and Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the top Republican on the panel’s immigration subcommittee, vowed to work on legislation to help people who had grown up in the United States without a clear path to citizenship.
In emotional testimony at the hearing, Athulya Rajakumar, 23, spoke of the toll of growing up in Seattle as a dependent of her single mother, who had a temporary work visa. She described how she and her brother struggled with depression and how her family’s status as temporary visa holders hindered him from receiving the treatment he needed. He later took his own life.
“We didn’t know how badly it was going to affect us,” Ms. Rajakumar, who lives in Texas on a work visa, said in an interview.
Muzaffar Chishti, the director of the Migration Policy Institute at the N.Y.U. School of Law, described the issue as one of many in a system that has not been truly updated since the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which established the pathways for legal immigration that are still in place.
“Immigration is not a set of policies — it’s a system,” Mr. Chishti said, adding, “If one part of the system gets problematic, it affects other parts of the system.”
Those who grew up in the United States on certain temporary visas are not eligible to apply for permanent residency. That was the case for Summer Rusher, who was born in Britain and moved to Florida at age 1 with her parents, who arrived on an investor visa, which allows some foreign citizens to reside in the country indefinitely if they invest in an American business. The program does not offer a path to citizenship, meaning that children have no way to become permanent residents.
Ms. Rusher, 23, was able to stay on a student visa after she turned 21. She graduated from Southeastern University at the top of her class in a master’s program for exceptional-student education, a certification in Florida for instructors of students with disabilities.
Now a teacher in Winter Haven, Fla., Ms. Rusher was among a large pool of applicants for a limited number of work visas. But she learned in March that she was not chosen in the randomized process used by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. If she cannot obtain another visa before her work authorization expires in June, she will have to return to Britain, where her qualifications are not recognized.
Short of a legislative overhaul of the system, Improve the Dream, the advocacy group, has worked to increase awareness of the issue and is urging the Biden administration to make changes. But children of nonimmigrant visa holders have criticized the administration for being too slow or unwilling to take action on proposed changes, such as the expansion of DACA to include documented youths.
Among the proposals is one that would modify how U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services determines whether an applicant qualifies for a green card, allowing more minors to remain eligible as they near 21. Another would classify applicants as children beyond their 21st birthday to keep them in line for a green card, which is the policy for those who are refugees or asylum seekers or are sponsored by relatives who are U.S. citizens.
Matthew D. Bourke, a spokesman for the immigration agency, said the Department of Homeland Security was “keenly aware” of the challenges for documented youths and was “exploring legal methods to provide immigration relief to this population where possible.”
As Deva and her husband await their green cards, which they applied for in 2016, she said they were struggling with their finances. She now hopes that her children can build a future in Canada.
Ms. Rusher said she was on the verge of having to leave her family, students and career. Her brother, who was born in the United States, does not face the same restrictions.
“I got to do everything that a typical American kid would dream of,” Ms. Rusher said. “I don’t want that to end just because of where I was born.”
PHOTOS: Mr. Ganesan and his son, Niranjan Barathimohan, who is among over 200,000 children in the U.S. under the protection of their parents’ temporary visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMIL LIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); For over a decade, Deva and the children lived as dependents on her husband’s work visa. Her daughter exhausted appeals for an extension. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARAH RICE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Ms. Rusher stayed in the U.S. on a student visa after she turned 21, but her work authorization expires soon and she may have to return to Britain. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVE EDELHEIT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 1, 2022


End of Document
In an Immigrant Family, the Tension Between Freedom and Duty; Ties
The New York Times 
March 19, 2021 Friday 17:44 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WELL; family
Length: 1261 words
Byline: Shilpi Malinowski
Highlight: I lived without the societal pressures that would have existed for me in India. But when my father died, my sense of duty was profound.
Body


I lived without the societal pressures that would have existed for me in India. But when my father died, my sense of duty was profound.
First I saw his head, his white hair combed up. He was peaceful and still, in his coffin at the funeral home. It was the first time I had seen him in almost a year, since we had spent a joyful Christmas together in 2019.
We were all very careful during this pandemic. I thought I could save my parents by not visiting. But in the end, it was not Covid that took him. It was sudden cardiac arrest.
The priest arrived at the covered patio of the funeral home in Charlotte, N.C., a Hindu priest who may have spoken English but never did with me. He ordered us to buy bags of food and sweets, ghee, sandalwood powder. At first, I couldn’t bear to look at my father’s body: handsome face, cool to touch, unbearably still. A peaceful expression, no tension in his face, no sign of any fear. Unblemished, except for a purple bruise on his forehead; after losing consciousness, he fell with a “terrible thump,” as my mother said, and hit his head on the way down. Dressed in his favorite red blazer, socked feet falling to the sides, because in our grief we forgot to bring shoes.
The priest — gesturing to communicate across our language barrier — insisted that I look at my father’s body, touch him and care for him. He walked me down the path, instructing me to put apples in his hands, sweets beside him, and surround his body with rice and barley. To pour a few spoonfuls of water in his mouth, and lay a tiny mint leaf on his lips.
Would that help keep him cool in the fire of cremation? Or was it just for his soul’s final journey, to wet his throat as his soul walked to unknown places? I performed the duties not quite knowing what meaning I was bringing to him, or to myself.
In my final task of the ceremony, I was instructed to light a candle and place it on his chest. If we had been in India, I imagine we might have had a more visible pyre, the ability to see his body reduced. Here, the funeral director pushed him into an oven, closed a door and asked me to push a button. I immediately heard a powerful whoosh, maybe many whooshes, and imagined flames engulfing him on all sides. “He always was so afraid of fire,” said my mother, as we held each other.
As an immigrant, my father came to this country seeking a new kind of life. The typical narrative of an immigrant is that they live a life of self-sacrifice, that they come to build a better life for their children, and that their every action is steeped in duty. Stories of immigrants working 12-hour days to send their kids to a good school, or living in tiny apartments as they send money back to their struggling parents — those are the popular immigrant tales. They live for another generation.
But my father didn’t exactly fit the stereotype. He was a doctor’s son who had every privilege in India, and none of his siblings chose to emigrate. He first landed in Britain for grad school and then lived a bachelor life in Scotland. His photos don’t reflect a life of sacrifice. There he is, drinking whiskey in a pub, wearing a kilt and dancing on a table. He told stories of going to see Elton John in concert, of winning tennis tournaments, of traveling through Europe. Was his journey really about duty? Or was it about freedom? I never asked him, but it seemed to me that immigrating was actually an act of self-definition.
Eventually a business trip to the United States in 1982 brought him a job offer and his H1 visa. Within the next decade, we would all become U.S. citizens.
While my parents missed their parents and siblings, they were also free — from expectations, from society’s eyes.
Free to wear whatever they wanted, to worship however they wanted, to raise their kids however they wanted. Like the original pilgrims, they were drawn to America by that promise, of freedom.
In our small town in upstate New York, there was no temple, so our religious education happened at home, or in others’ homes. My parents read the texts and picked the parts that they liked. They found friends who shared their language and gathered with them often, but they also sent me to a Christian camp, encouraged my friendships with a wide variety of people.
And I was free. I made so many decisions without any regard to the societal pressures that would have existed for me in India. Instead of marrying within my caste or even culture, I fell in love with a kind Polish engineer who understood feeling like an outsider, as I do — a marriage my parents supported. Instead of pursuing the sciences, I found my way as a reporter.
As a member of the second generation, I wasn’t raised with the traditional standards of responsibility to my parents.
But now that my father was gone, my sense of duty toward him was profound.
At least for the week after my father’s death, my path was clear, and that was a comfort. I performed rites and rituals for his body and soul, accepting the reality of his final stage of life. I sat with another Hindu priest a few days after the cremation and performed a puja — a ceremonial ritual — for his soul. We called out to all his ancestors to take him with them, and we asked for forgiveness for him and for us, so that his soul could be at peace, with all the tensions and worries of his life put to rest. I could feel their presence in my family room. The candle in front of my father’s picture burned for hours.
If I had been in India, I likely would have been pushed to the side, as those rites are traditionally performed by a son or a nephew — a male descendant. But here, I did them without facing a fight from anyone.
Some Americans know the word “dharma” from the show “Dharma and Greg.” It is a Sanskrit word not exactly translatable into English, though it does encompass the word duty — to your parents, your children, your society. It also encompasses the idea of following certain rules while living through each stage of life — as a student, a parent, or in your work — and the idea that if you do, you will be rewarded in your next life, or as you enter “the beyond.”
My father may have come to the Western world to enjoy the freedom, but he certainly lived his dharma. He cared for his children and grandchildren with constant joy, anticipating our needs and wants and providing them, while cutting grapefruits for me every morning during my grapefruit-obsessed teenage years or laying down a blanket for his baby grandson, always with a delighted and gentle smile. He worked for the same tool company for 50 years, up until his death, performing his responsibilities with constancy and integrity, saving money to ensure that his widow could live without stress.
As I performed all his last rites, I thought about his dharma-laden life, and hoped that he was receiving the rewards.
A few days later, I carried my father’s ashes to a nearby river.
After a mile or so, I saw a tree that curved, bending over the river. I left the path and walked down the slope, stepping on the strong tree roots to keep from sliding into the water, clutching the box of ashes, desperate not to drop them. I got to the tree, climbed up a few feet until I could see that the water was rushing directly below me. I tore open the box and the plastic bag that held the ashes and poured them in, watching my father wash away toward the ocean. Now, he was truly free.
Shilpi Malinowski is a writer living in Washington, D.C. Her first book, a chronicle of gentrification in D.C., is coming out in late 2021.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Lucy Jones FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: March 19, 2021


End of Document
U.S. Rescinds Plan to Strip Visas From International Students in Online Classes
The New York Times 
July 16, 2020 Thursday 08:30 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1535 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Anemona Hartocollis
Highlight: The Trump administration said it would no longer require foreign students to attend in-person classes during the coronavirus pandemic in order to remain in the country.
Body


The Trump administration said it would no longer require foreign students to attend in-person classes during the coronavirus pandemic in order to remain in the country.
In a rare and swift immigration policy reversal, the Trump administration on Tuesday bowed to snowballing opposition from universities, Silicon Valley and 20 states and abandoned a plan to strip international college students of their visas if they did not attend at least some classes in person.
The policy, which would have subjected foreign students to deportation if they did not show up for class on campus, had thrown the higher education world into turmoil at a time when universities are grappling with whether to reopen campuses during the coronavirus pandemic.
The loss of international students could have cost universities millions of dollars in tuition and jeopardized the ability of U.S. companies to hire the highly skilled workers who often start their careers with an American education.
Two days after the policy was announced on July 6, Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology filed the first of a litany of lawsuits seeking to block it.
On Tuesday, minutes before a federal judge in Boston was to hear arguments on their challenge, the judge, Allison D. Burroughs, announced that the administration had agreed to rescind the policy and allow international students to remain in the country even if they are taking all their classes online.
The government has argued that the requirement that students take at least one in-person class was actually more lenient than the rule that had been in effect for close to 20 years which required foreign students to take most of their classes in person.
But that rule was temporarily suspended on March 13, when Mr. Trump declared a national emergency and campuses across the country began shutting down, with classes moving online. On July 6, the government made its announcement that foreign students could not remain in the United States if their studies were entirely online.
“If they’re not going to be a student or they’re going to be 100 percent online, then they don’t have a basis to be here,” Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said in an interview on CNN after the policy was announced. “They should go home, and then they can return when the school opens.”
Each year, about 1 million international students enroll in American universities. They contribute $41 billion to the economy annually and support more than 458,000 jobs.
In addition to Harvard and M.I.T., the attorneys general of 20 states, including Massachusetts and California, also sued, charging that the policy was reckless, cruel and senseless. Scores of universities threw their support behind the litigation, along with organizations representing international students.
The pressure grew on Monday, when more than a dozen technology companies, including Google, Facebook and Twitter, also came out in support of the lawsuit, arguing that the policy would harm their businesses. Then on Tuesday, 15 Republican members of Congress signed a letter urging the Trump administration to restore its previous policy on international students.
Representative Rodney Davis, an Illinois Republican who had organized the letter, applauded the Trump administration’s “right decision” to cancel its plan. “These hardworking students are the best and brightest from their countries, and they help our communities grow both culturally and economically,” he said.
The policy about foreign students was one of a number of measures President Trump has taken to advance his agenda on immigration, using the coronavirus pandemic and the need to protect the country from health threats as justification.
The administration has also stopped processing green cards for applicants abroad; closed the southwestern border to nonessential travel, allowing only Americans and legal permanent residents to enter while barring asylum seekers; and banned the entry of thousands of foreigners on work visas.
The universities said in their court challenge to the latest policy that “by all appearances,” the government’s attempt to force international students to study on campus had also been a political move, calculated to advance the Trump administration’s agenda to force universities to reopen their gates with in-person classes.
They said forcing students to return to their home countries would in many cases separate them from families in the United States, returning them to places where they no longer had a home. In some cases, they would be living under the thumb of repressive regimes, which policed or restricted internet access.
Many international students from Asian countries would have to contend with a time difference that would mean taking classes between 2 a.m. and 7 a.m., if they had internet access.
Foreign students attending elementary, middle and high schools on visas would have also had to depart the country if their classes went 100 percent online.
In court filings, universities said that some arriving students already had been barred from entering the country by immigration officials at airports who told them that their institutions were going online.
After the announcement on Tuesday that the policy had been rescinded, university officials praised the decision and warned that they would be prepared to go back to court should the administration make any further moves to restrict the ability of international students to study online when necessary.
“This is a significant victory,” Harvard’s president, Lawrence S. Bacow, said in a statement. “The directive had disrupted all of American higher education. I have heard from countless international students who said that the July 6 directive had put them at serious risk. These students — our students — can now rest easier and focus on their education, which is all they ever wanted to do.”
L. Rafael Reif, president of M.I.T., said the swift opposition was evidence of “the important role international students play in our education, research and innovation enterprises here in the United States. These students make us stronger, and we hurt ourselves when we alienate them.”
The University of Southern California, among the universities with the largest population of international students, said in a statement that it was “thrilled that the government backed down and rescinded its rule that would have revoked visas for international students.”
U.S.C., which led a coalition of 20 universities and colleges on the West Coast that sued the government, said its international students “deserve the right to continue their education without risk of deportation.”
After the announcement of the now-rescinded policy this month, international students had begun scrambling to figure out next steps. Some said they booked flights home. Others held out hope that their colleges might add classes with an in-person component to enable them to remain in the United States.
Willow Cai, a rising junior at U.S.C. who is from China, said she had rushed last week to register for a golf class to ensure she had an in-person class. After hearing the administration had rescinded the new policy, she expressed relief and outrage at the government’s initiative.
“I’m like really emotional right now. The July 6 directive should never have happened,” said Ms. Cai, 20, a cinema major. She also said she planned to drop the golf class.
“All we want is to continue our education in peace during a global pandemic,” she said on Tuesday in Los Angeles. “It seems this administration has no concern for international students beyond our wallets.”
Alexander Auster, 22, a second-year student at George Washington University Law School from Berlin, had already signed a lease on an apartment for the next academic year when the policy was announced. He had arrived in the United States when he was 17 to join the university’s varsity swim team.
“It feels really good now,” he said after hearing that the government had walked back its plan. “Now I am hopeful and optimistic. I thought I had to go home.”
An analysis of the government’s earlier order by Moody’s Analytics found that it could have had a serious economic impact. According to NAFSA: Association of International Educators, three jobs are created for every seven international students. In the 2019-20 school year there were over 1 million international students enrolled in the United States, which would translate to almost half a million jobs. “ICE’s policy would put many of those positions at risk,” Moody’s Analytics said.
A third of all international students are from China, where travel restrictions could make it hard for them to return, Moody’s said.
College towns are heavily dependent on international students for their economic well-being, and the Partnership for a New American Economy and the American Enterprise Institute estimate that every H-1B visa, a foreign worker visa, leads to two jobs being created.
PHOTO: Harvard University last week, after the policy announcement that would have required foreign students to leave the United States if they did not take at least one in-person class. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MADDIE MEYER/GETTY IMAGES) (A6)

Load-Date: July 16, 2020


End of Document
Trump Suspends Visas Allowing Hundreds of Thousands of Foreigners to Work in the U.S.
The New York Times 
June 22, 2020 Monday 21:07 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1608 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear and Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The move is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas.
Body


The move is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas.
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday temporarily suspended new work visas and barred hundreds of thousands of foreigners from seeking employment in the United States, part of a broad effort to limit the entry of immigrants into the country.
In a sweeping order, which will be in place at least until the end of the year, Mr. Trump blocked visas for a wide variety of jobs, including those for computer programmers and other skilled workers who enter the country under the H-1B visa, as well as those for seasonal workers in the hospitality industry, students on work-study summer programs and au pairs who arrive under other auspices.
The order also restricts the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for months or yearslong stints. And it blocks the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
Officials said the ban on worker visas, combined with extending restrictions on the issuance of new green cards, would keep as many as 525,000 foreign workers out of the country for the rest of the year.
Stephen Miller, the White House aide and the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate the worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. And in recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
But the directive, which has been expected for several weeks, is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas for jobs that Americans are not willing to do or are not capable of performing.
“This is a full-frontal attack on American innovation and our nation’s ability to benefit from attracting talent from around the world,” said Todd Schulte, the president of FWD.us, a pro-immigration group supported by technology companies.
“Putting up a ‘not welcome’ sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won’t help our country, it will hold us back,” said Thomas J. Donohue, the chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. “Restrictive changes to our nation’s immigration system will push investment and economic activity abroad, slow growth and reduce job creation.”
Administration officials said the president’s order would not affect people outside the United States who already have valid visas or seasonal farm workers, whose annual numbers have ranged from a low of about 50,000 to a high of about 250,000 in the past 15 years. There will also be a narrow exception for certain medical workers dealing specifically with coronavirus research, officials said.
The order will ban au pairs who come to the United States to care for children, though officials initially told reporters they would be exempt. Later, two senior administration officials said parents could seek waivers to the ban on a case-by-case basis, with no assurance that they would be approved.
In the order, Mr. Trump described suspension of the visas as a way to ensure that Americans are first in line for scarce jobs — an assertion that immigration advocates say does not reflect the reality of a dynamic and changing work force.
“Under the extraordinary circumstances of the economic contraction resulting from the Covid-19 outbreak, certain nonimmigrant visa programs authorizing such employment pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers,” Mr. Trump wrote in the order.
The effort to restrict entry from foreigners into the United States was at the heart of one of the president’s key promises during the 2016 campaign and is certain to play a central role as Mr. Trump seeks to energize his core supporters during his re-election campaign this year.
While the president’s pledge to build a “big, beautiful wall” to prevent illegal border crossings has attracted more attention, his efforts to slow down the flow of legal immigration have been even more effective and potentially long-lasting.
In April, the president signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards to most foreigners looking to live in the United States. But at the time, Mr. Miller and the president bowed to pressure from the business community to avoid imposing limits on the worker visas.
Monday’s order extends the green-card prohibition in addition to suspending the issuance of many of the worker visas.
Immigration restrictionists who have had the ear of the Trump administration applauded the announcement. Combined with recent measures, “the work visa suspensions will put the thumb on the labor market scale in favor of U.S. workers,” said Jessica Vaughan, the policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates curbing immigration.
“It’s really heartening to see the president stand up to the special interests that pull out the stops to lobby for these visa programs,” said Ms. Vaughan, who said she had been regularly consulted by White House aides on the issue.
In addition to the temporary suspensions, administration officials said Mr. Trump was directing the government to make permanent changes to a broad array of immigration regulations in order to discourage what they said was unfair competition for American jobs from foreigners looking to come to the United States.
Among those changes will be new methods of ensuring that high-skill visas in the future are awarded to the highest-paid workers and of preventing companies from contracting large numbers of midlevel foreign workers to perform accounting, programming and other technology-assisted jobs that Americans might be able to do.
Other changes would be aimed at discouraging immigrants from applying for asylum as a way of obtaining a work permit in the United States. It was unclear when those regulatory changes would go into effect.
The administration could try to issue emergency rules to expedite such changes rather than go through the normal process, which can take months or even years because the public must be allowed to comment before a final rule is enacted.
But fast-tracking the rule-making process on foreign workers could invite legal challenges from opponents who say the administration did not follow the rules. Last week, the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump violated the Administrative Procedure Act when he tried to terminate an Obama-era program aimed at protecting young immigrants from deportation.
“The government could try and fast-track that process by not allowing the public to weigh in on the changes before they go into effect, but it is difficult to see that process surviving court review,” said Lynden Melmed, an immigration lawyer and the former chief counsel of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
Amid the pandemic, the Trump administration has seized on the threat to public health as a pretext to issue a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system, including asylum and green cards. While many changes have been announced as temporary, they could remain in place indefinitely.
But critics say the administration has used the health crisis and the economic meltdown it has caused as pretext to put in place restrictions that further its immigration agenda.
While Mr. Trump and his aides said the suspension of visas was in response to the pandemic, the administration has been pursuing the same broad reductions to legal immigration policies for years, including during times when unemployment was at its lowest in decades. In 2017, the president endorsed the RAISE Act, a Republican Senate bill that would have cut legal immigration, including business visas, by about 50 percent.
In the weeks leading up to the announcement on Monday, a diverse coalition of businesses and research universities had lobbied fiercely, flooding the White House with letters and phone calls, in an attempt to limit the scope of the executive order.
“It’s the largest crackdown on work visas that I have seen in my 35 years of practice,” said Steve Yale-Loehr, a Cornell law professor. “Thousands of businesses and universities will be hurt by these restrictions. Similarly, individuals will be stuck overseas unable to help the U.S. economy recover.”
But the opponents failed to block the measures, which they had argued were counterproductive to economic recovery.
“The Trump administration has argued that it wants to create a merit-based immigration system that prioritizes educated immigrants with skills,” said Alex Nowrasteh, the director of immigration studies at the libertarian Cato Institute. “With this suspension of the H-1B visa program, they have shown, once again, that they really mean they want fewer immigrants.”
“These immigration bans are more red meat and not jobs for the base,” said Rebecca Shi from the American Business Immigration Coalition in Chicago. “They don’t even serve Trump’s own business interests.”
Mr. Trump has used H-2B visas to hire seasonal staff for his resorts to work as cooks and waiters.
Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles.
Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles. 
PHOTO: Amid the coronavirus pandemic, the Trump administration has issued a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 23, 2020


End of Document
Diversity Visa Lottery Winners Defend and Critique Maligned Program
The New York Times 
November 3, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: READER-CENTER
Length: 1412 words
Byline: KELLY VIRELLA
Highlight: Readers share their personal stories about winning the visa lottery.
Body


Correction Appended
The Reader Center is a newsroom initiative that is helping The Times build deeper ties with our audience.
In a week full of grim news about Tuesday’s terrorist attack in New York — including the revelation that the suspect, Sayfullo Saipov, gained admission to the United States through a program known as the diversity visa lottery — tensions flared between readers            in our comments section over the screening of immigrants.            President Trump on Wednesday called on Congress to end the program in favor of the “merit based” selection of immigrants.
The Times’s Miriam Jordan reports that while Congress has been debating the visa lottery for years, according to a 2011 Congressional Service Report, federal agencies have failed to reach a consensus about the safety of the program.
One comment from a reader frustrated about his own immigration status as others win the visa lottery and secure permanent residency in the United States resonated with hundreds of people, rising to our most popular comment among 1,254 on a story about the attack.
I’m a high skilled immigrant from a populous country waiting to get my green card for the last seven years. I serve American people in a rural under served area. And there is this guy who got lucky via ‘diversity lottery program’. High time America shed identity politics and reward the talent and performance.
Karl, California
Another reader’s letter to the editor, offering a different take on the visa lottery, landed in our inboxes Thursday. The letter’s author, Livia Ungur, told us that she was an emerging filmmaker who had won the diversity visa lottery, too, and urged us to listen to people like her.
We asked our readers who had experience with the lottery to tell us about the program, and how, if at all, they thought it could be improved. We heard from about two dozen readers. Here is a selection of the responses, which have been edited for length and clarity.
Geographic Diversity
In the early years of the program, many lottery winners were Irish, because the lottery had been designed to revive dwindling European immigration.
I’m from Ireland. My uncle applied in the early 90s. The late 80s were very grim here, lots of unemployment. In my first year in college we learned that only one graduate had got a job the year before. We were educated for emigration, mostly the U.K. I just chose the U.S., loved the idea of the place.
I do not really think the diversity visa was ever abused. I know illegal Irish dodged tax, simply because they had no way to pay. Legals never messed about, there really was no abuse among legals.
I’m back home in Ireland. Lost my job in N.Y. after 9-11 and the dot com crash. Got offered others but couldn’t settle so we came home.
Aidan O’Connor, Ireland
Now, about half the winners are from Africa.
I immigrated from Nigeria to the United States in 2007 having won the DV lottery visa. Prior to that, I had made a trip to the United States as a practicing visual artist. My experience of winning the lottery visa was life changing because I also coincidentally won a three month African arts fellowship at the UCLA at the same time.
Previously, I graduated with a bachelor’s degree in Fine arts in 1986 and was a cartoonist and illustrator at the Daily Times of Nigeria before leaving for a stint in advertising. In 1996, I decided to to engage myself as a full-time studio artist and painter.
Winston Salem, N.C.
Lottery Winners With Ph.D.s and Silicon Valley Jobs
To be elible for the lottery, applicants must have a high school education or its equivalent, or two years of work experience. But some have much more.
I am originally from Venezuela. I applied for the DV lottery over 12 times before being selected. When I was selected I was living in the U.S. with my wife (also Venezuelan), we both had H1-B visas. By that time, we had already been in the U.S. for seven years. We came initially with student visas and we both completed Ph.D.s in chemical engineering. Being selected for the DV saved us a lot of time, effort, money and uncertainty in getting our green cards (as compared with going through an employment based process).
Simon Albo, Evanston, Ill.
I’m from Indonesia. I was already here on a student visa then work visa H1-B. I had been working in a software/tech company. I could only get my H1-B visa renewed one more time, then I need a company to sponsor my green card. As my first H1-B was near expiration, I won the lottery (diversity visa). So my company decided to help process the green card instead of renewing my H1-B. Win-win situation for us.
Inge, Pewaukee, Wis.
Adventure Seekers and Career Builders
I’m from New Zealand, by way of Australia (where I was working at the time). Life was good. But I wanted to chase career opportunities in America, switch up my lifestyle and enjoy a different cultural immersion.
Pat Rowley, Brooklyn, N.Y.
I’m from Australia — I always wanted to move to NYC, so the DV Lottery was a no-brainer, and it seemed to be common for Australians to be selected. I wasn’t living through any hardships, but wanted to come to the U.S. to pursue career advancement.
Benn Finn, New York, N.Y.
The Vetting Process
I’m originally from France. I entered the lottery in 2015, won in 2016 and got my green card in June of this year. The application itself is very simple and requires only a name, basic demographic information and a recent photo. However, once I “won” and received a lottery number, I had to provide the same documentation as any other green card applicant.
This includes past employment for the last 10 years and all addresses since I was 16. I had to provide copies of all visas and passports used to enter and leave the U.S. and dates for those trips, as well as copies of all supporting visa documentation for my student and work visas. I had to submit transcripts and copies of diplomas from my undergraduate and graduate programs, copies of my tax returns for the last three years, six months’ worth of paystubs, multiple versions of similar forms asking for demographic, work, residential information for different time periods.
I was also fingerprinted by DHS and had to get a medical exam, including a blood test, verification of a list of vaccines and a TB test. I don’t remember if I also had to provide a urine sample.
After all this, I had an interview with a USCIS officer, who asked me a lot of questions and verified that my answers matched those in my forms and generally asked me about why I wanted to get a green card and then I waited for the FBI background check to be done and everything to finish being processed.
Gaelle Sabben, Seattle, Wash.
Calls for Continuity, Calls for Change
As our reporter found, an Egyptian immigrant who shot and killed two people in 2002at Los Angeles International Airport had obtained a permanent resident card as the husband of a lottery winner, the 2011 Congressional Service Report said. And in 2004, the State Department’s deputy inspector general warned about the risk of granting visas to winners from countries with ties to terrorism, the report noted.
But in 2007, the report said, the Government Accountability Office found no evidence that diversity visa winners posed a threat.
All the readers who wrote to us defended the program, but some also proposed modifications.
I’m originally from Morocco. I won the DV in 2005 and came to the U.S. in 2006. It’s actually pure luck for me because I was studying my last year in nursing school when a friend of my family applied online for almost every person he know. My name was the only one chosen in the lottery.
I would definitely recommend making it a merit based at the selection stage. So instead of just asking people to enter the basic information in the system, they should add fields that ask about education and work experience and also some basic English questions.
Also, given how much our world changed post 9/11, I would recommend some psychology and ideology tests and questions just make sure the person is ready to simulate and blend in and also open to other cultures and believes.
Hoda A., Albuquerque, N.M.
A note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.
Correction: November 6, 2017, Monday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated the gender of a reader commenting on the diversity visa lottery program. The reader, Livia Ungur, is a woman, not a man.

Load-Date: November 9, 2017


End of Document
Trump Moves to Tighten Visa Access for High-Skilled Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
October 6, 2020 Tuesday 12:28 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1077 words
Byline: Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Four weeks before the election, the Trump administration has announced stricter rules for the H-1B visa program, which U.S. companies have long valued.
Body


Four weeks before the election, the Trump administration has announced stricter rules for the H-1B visa program, which U.S. companies have long valued.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration announced significant changes on Tuesday to the H-1B visa program for high-skilled workers, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants.
Top administration officials framed the changes as a way to protect American jobs during the coronavirus pandemic, even though the Trump administration first committed to overhauling the program in 2017 as part of its efforts to reduce the number of foreign citizens employed in the United States.
“With millions of Americans looking for work, and as the economy continues its recovery, immediate action is needed to guard against the risk lower-cost foreign labor can pose to the well-being of U.S. workers,” Patrick Pizzella, the deputy secretary of labor, told reporters on Tuesday.
The rules will directly affect foreign workers and employers, especially tech companies that have long supported the H-1B program and pushed hard for its expansion.
Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, said he expected the changes to cut by one-third the number of petitions filed annually for the coveted visas.
The changes will be published this week as interim final rules, meaning that the agency believes it has “good cause” to claim exemption from the normal requirement to obtain feedback from the public before completing them.
Immigration lawyers and experts predicted that the changes would be swiftly challenged in court because they bypassed the normal regulatory process.
“The public hasn’t even seen these regulations yet and won’t have the usual opportunity to provide comments, as required by Congress,” said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship. “Given the inevitability of court challenges, it seems like slim odds that these policies are built to last.”
The government issues 85,000 H-1B visas each year, often using a lottery to award them because the number of workers sought by companies almost always surpasses the number of available visas. Many workers are eventually sponsored by their employers for green cards to remain permanently in the United States.
Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the election, were politically motivated.
“Why this, why now, and why is it an interim final rule?” said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center. “There’s no estimate of the amount of jobs this would actually free up for U.S. workers. It’s a bank shot at best.”
The Labor Department rule, which takes effect upon publication, would increase wages across the board for foreign workers, based on surveys of salaries in each profession. Companies would have to pay entry-level workers in the program in the 45th percentile of their profession’s salary rather than the 17th percentile. Wages for higher-skilled workers would rise to the 95th percentile from the 67th percentile.
“It will also likely result in higher personnel costs for some employers,” according to the Labor Department rule. “The purpose of protecting U.S. workers outweighs such interests and justifies such increased costs,” the agency added.
But Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor of immigration law at Cornell Law School, said the rule would have the opposite effect.
“By increasing the required wages, the new rules will harm all employers trying to hire foreign workers, but especially start-up companies and smaller firms who may not be able to meet the increased wage requirements,” he said.
The Department of Homeland Security’s rule, which takes effect in 60 days, would also tighten the eligibility for visa applicants. The rule would require the foreign workers to have a degree in the “specialty occupation” they apply for, rather than any college degree. Some would also need to show how their studies provided “a body of highly specialized knowledge” for a potential job in the United States.
The largest share of H-1B visa holders are employed by the tech sector, where they work as computer engineers and software developers. The visas are also issued to architects, accountants and physicians, among other professionals.
The rule will almost certainly have an adverse effect on rural hospitals and other health care providers that depend on a steady pipeline of physicians from abroad because they cannot attract enough American doctors, who generally prefer to practice in urban areas.
For example, instead of offering a minimum starting salary of $120,000 to $130,000, a clinic in northeastern Pennsylvania, which is considered an underserved area, would have to pay a foreign physician around $195,000 or $200,000.
“Entry-level doctors in rural areas will have to be offered experienced-level wages, which may be more than their supervisor is being paid,” said William A. Stock, an employment immigration lawyer in Philadelphia. “This will further restrict the supply of doctors willing to move to parts of rural America. It will put providers in a jam that they can’t afford to hire foreign-born doctors.”
The H-1B rule comes on the heels of a proclamation signed by President Trump in June that suspended an array of worker visas until at least Dec. 31. Groups representing thousands of businesses challenged that proclamation, which affected H-1Bs, H-2B seasonal work visas, L-1 visas for executives being transferred by companies and cultural-exchange J-1 visas, including au pairs.
The groups won a reprieve last week, when a federal judge ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority in banning the visas.
“There must be some measure of constraint on presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power,” the judge said.
His order was at odds with an earlier decision by a federal judge in Washington, which ensured that an appeals court would make the ultimate determination.
But it immediately set aside the ban for companies that employed large numbers of foreign workers.
PHOTO: Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the presidential election, were politically motivated. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Scott Olson/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 7, 2020


End of Document
Melania Trump’s Parents Ignite Debate Over ‘Chain Migration’
The New York Times 
August 16, 2018 Thursday 09:32 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: READER-CENTER
Length: 1137 words
Byline: Kelly Virella
Highlight: Readers debate who deserves to get a family visa to immigrate to the U.S., citing as examples their own families’ stories and the stories of families they know.
Body


Thenaturalization of Melania Trump’s parents last week in a private ceremony in Manhattan led many of our readers to question President Trump’s opposition to            family-based immigration.
In recent months, Mr. Trump has derided the program that his in-laws, Amalija and Viktor Knavs, used to become United States citizens. Calling it “chain migration,” he has argued that it must be restricted in favor of more merit-based immigration.
A few readers talked about relatives and friends who they feel have abused family visas as proof that the program should be curtailed. 
But others offered themselves and their families as examples of Americans who, they argue, are just as deserving as the Knavses, if not more, of family-based immigration. Here is a condensed and lightly edited selection of the comments.
Tell us in the comments how you see the issue.
Families divided
My husband and I are U.S.-born citizens. Our legally adopted kids from an African country were granted green cards but must wait over a year and a half to receive their certificate of citizenship, thanks to the Trump administration’s           slowdown on processing forms. They cannot take money out of their personal bank accounts, cannot apply for drivers’ licenses nor apply for college because their green cards expired while we wait.
I am an American citizen who is married to a lovely Japanese woman and citizen of Japan. We have two kids, both of whom are also American citizens. We are in our fourth year of dealing with the bureaucracy of the U.S. immigration department, having to obtain countless documents, translations from Japanese to English and now having to find the inoculation records of my 48-year-old wife. Who, besides children, have their measles mumps and rubella records? 
I guess the parents of “Einstein visas” have all that information and are able to slide through quite nicely in a private ceremony. Congratulations to them. I wish I knew the “right” people. 
America burdened
I am an Indian who immigrated to the United States 30 years ago. I became a citizen 18 years ago under an employer sponsorship. I worked my way up from a student visa to a temporary work visa to an H-1 to a green card and finally to a U.S. passport. I have not sponsored a single relative for citizenship. 
However, I am an exception. 
I have a friend from India who immigrated here at exactly the same time as I did. He was the beneficiary of chain migration. His uncle, 15 years before him, had come to the United States and established a base here. He then sponsored all his siblings. They in turn sponsored their children and spouses, their children and spouses then sponsored their spouses and siblings, respectively, and so on. 
Today, this friend has a very large extended family of individuals who would not have been in the United States had it not been for his uncle who started the chain migration in the 70s. The above is an example of a regular, educated, middle class family, with no particular reason to leave India other than the fact that it was “conveniently available” and also with no special value add to American society. 
Look at what one of my cousins did with his family. After waiting for several years, three of his brothers and their families, totaling 10 people, came to America on a green card. None of them speak good English. None of them has any skills. Immediately after coming, they applied for Medicaid. 
Though they are trying to find a job, it is difficult to find one. If they don’t find any job, they may be eligible to apply for all kinds of benefits. Americans will be spending thousands of dollars to feed them, to house them, to provide medical care, to educate their children, etc. 
While that is the case, there are many educated and skilled people who can’t come to America under the current system. 
What Trump proposes is good for America. Bring immediate family members and create a merit based system with a limitation of overall immigration. After passing that system, if Trump brings any of his distant relatives, you have a right to criticize him. 
Immigrants harassed
I am a U.S. citizen living abroad on contract. My wife had a green card for more than 30 years, taught thousands of children, paid taxes and cost the government exactly zero. She was put under so much browbeating and stress by the I.N.S. (taken to private room for questioning etc.) every time we returned to the United States that she surrendered her green card for a quiet life. 
We’re not coming back.
Contributions belittled
I am somewhat conservative in many of my views. My wife is an immigrant and when I hear Trump going on and on about “chain” migration it really bothers me. I could understand if he is talking about keeping terrorists from entering the country, but my wife’s nieces and nephews who have tech degrees would be great to have here in America. 
She would really like to have her mom come to live with us here also. Obviously her 70-year-old mom does not have any degree, and I cringe when he talks about chain migration because I feel like he is talking directly to our family. 
If my wife wants her mom here and we sign papers that we will support her, there should be no problem. 
Just a note, when my wife came here I had to sign papers that said she would not take any public aid, no food stamps or welfare, or I would have to pay it back, and that if she ran away or disappeared I would have to pay all fees associated with deportation, etc. 
My husband is an American citizen. He sponsored his parents for a green card, so they could come and live with his sister’s busy family, help with the grandchild, and not be alone in their country where things are bad and their friends and family are mostly dead. 
My husband’s father recently died in the United States. One of his big fears had been that he would die in the old country, and no one would be coming to his grave. Thankfully, his grave is in the United States, and his wife, children and the grandchild visit often, as Papa hoped. 
Trump wants to prevent people like my father-in-law from enjoying his last days with his closest family; this change would have crushed my father-in-law’s soul.
And now, my husband’s mother has her green card, but may never be able to get citizenship, and may never feel secure in her status, until her dying day. 
No one in this family broke any laws. Every adult in the family has at least one PhD. My husband was initially on the Einstein visa — because he is an internationally respected physics professor. Why should he not be able to provide for his parents what the Einstein Melania did for hers?
PHOTO: Melania Trump's parents, Amalija and Viktor Knavs, center, with their lawyer, Michael Wildes, right, after their naturalization ceremony in Manhattan on Thursday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Holly Pickett for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: August 17, 2018


End of Document
Trump’s Crackdown on Students Who Overstay Visas Rattles Higher Education
The New York Times 
May 24, 2018 Thursday 20:58 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1365 words
Byline: Erica L. Green
Highlight: Educators fear that the harsher penalties, which go into effect in August, could hinder university efforts to attract the brightest minds from overseas.
Body


The Trump administration plans to crack down on international students and visitors who overstay their visas, stoking fears in the higher education community that President Trump’s aggressive immigration policies will hinder university efforts to attract the brightest minds from overseas.
In a policy memorandum, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced this month that it plans to change how it calculates “unlawful presence” for foreigners in the student visa and exchange program. It will also impose harsher punishments — up to a 10-year ban from the country — for graduates who overstay their visas.
The policy, due to take effect in August, has been criticized by higher education institutions and student advocates who say the change shows the indiscriminate nature of the Trump administration’s “America First” policies. They say Mr. Trump’s aggressive immigration efforts are shutting out the nation’s leading scholars, who contribute billions of dollars to the economy in the United States, staff its leading research institutions, support its most high-skilled jobs, and contribute to the president’s own goal of strengthening the pipeline to science, technology, mathematics and engineering jobs.
“It is clear that in an attempt to ‘enhance public safety,’ the administration seeks to further close the door on academic talent,” said Jill Welch, the deputy executive director for public policy at Nafsa, the Association of International Educators. “This is yet another policy which makes the United States less attractive to talented international students and scholars.”
So far, the president has focused his policy efforts on the nation’s borders, and his harshest rhetoric has targeted gang members. But Mr. Trump issued an executive order in January 2017 signaling that visa overstays would also be a target.
“Many aliens who illegally enter the United States and those who overstay or otherwise violate the terms of their visas present a significant threat to national security and public safety,” the order said.
It is estimated that overstays account for as many as half of the undocumented immigrants in the country, and the most recent figures released by the Department of Homeland Security show that student and exchange visitors had the highest overstay rate — 2.8 percent — among nonimmigrant visitors to the United States.
Immigration officials said the new policy aligned with the executive order.
In a statement announcing the policy, the director of Citizenship and Immigration Services, L. Francis Cissna, said that visa holders “are admitted to the United States for a specific purpose, and when that purpose has ended, we expect them to depart, or to obtain another, lawful immigration status.”
The proposed rules would target F and M visas, which are overwhelmingly used by international students to enter academic and vocational institutions of higher education, as well as J-1 visas, which allow students, professors and visitors to participate in short-term cultural exchange programs.
Under the new policy, the government would begin to calculate what is called “unlawful presence” from the date that visa holders’ purpose in the country has expired, such as the end of their studies. Under the current policy, put in place 20 years ago, that calculation started once the government discovered the violation.
The new policy would also be less forgiving. Visa holders found to be in the country illegally for more than 180 days would be barred from re-entry for three or 10 years, depending on the length of their overstay. The current policy usually allows students to go back to their country and apply for a new visa, or update their visa status and return.
The harsh penalties are especially jarring because small mistakes could now carry big consequences, said Angelo A. Paparelli, an immigration lawyer at Seyfarth Shaw LLP, a firm based in Los Angeles.
“For immigration attorneys, because time is of the essence, if the three- or 10-year bar is triggered, there’s not much you can do,” he said.
It is common for students to fall out of compliance while awaiting a new visa or transitioning to a new one, Mr. Paparelli said. Students who use visas to stay and work after completing their degrees are particularly vulnerable. Determining whether their jobs meet certain requirements to stay is subjective. Their violations could be applied retroactively, and subject them to an automatic ban, he said.
“The effect of this change will be felt by businesses,” he added. “It will foreclose what have been standard approaches to transitioning from student to worker, whether that’s on an H1-B or some other work visa category, or the transition to permanent residence.”
Administrators who work with international students worry that they will be punished for life events that domestic students are usually supported through. Many students fall out of status because of extenuating circumstances, such as temporarily dropping below a full course load because of mental health issues, leaving school temporarily for a family emergency or picking up a part-time job to help with family finances.
“A lot of this impacts things that happen when students are in crisis, when status is the last thing on their minds,” said Katie Tudini, the director for international student services at the University at Buffalo.
Adam Julian, the director of international student and scholar services and outreach at Appalachian State University, said international students are among the most scrutinized populations in the immigration system because their visas require constant reporting of enrollment information, such as addresses and full-time status in school. But now, even the smallest miscommunication with school officials could lead to a violation.
“We’ve always stressed compliance with students; that’s not changing,” Mr. Julian said. “But we will just be especially vigilant on advising students that this is the new reality: The U.S. is ultimately going to be a country that does not want to benefit from everything that international scholars have to offer.”
College administrators have already noticed that the international talent pool is shrinking.
Last fall, the Institute of International Education, which produces a report on international student enrollment trends, noted that in fall 2016, American higher education saw the first drop in new international students. The decline occurred at the end of the Obama administration, but also during the bitter presidential campaign. In            a follow-up survey of 522 institutions one year later, the first international freshman class under Mr. Trump, the organization found a 7 percent decline in new international enrollments, with 45 percent of the institutions surveyed reporting a decrease.
According to a biannual report issued last month by the Department of Homeland Security, there were more than one million international students seeking degrees in the United States.
But there was a slight decline — 6,210 students, or 0.5 percent — in the number of students studying on F and M visas from March 2017 to March 2018. While the visa data included K-12 education, 85 percent of student visa holders attend colleges and universities. The report said that a majority of students seek bachelor’s and master’s degrees in business, engineering or computer science. It also noted a sharp decline in the number of students coming from Saudi Arabia and South Korea.
“These students and scholars are considered the most brilliant minds in their field, and they are not coming here with the intention to infringe the law and intentionally overstay in the country,” said Karen F. Da Silva, an international student advocate for the National Association of Graduate-Professional Students.
PHOTO: Behnam Partopour, a Worcester Polytechnic Institute student from Iran, at Logan Airport in Boston last year after clearing customs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Brian Snyder/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As Flow of Foreign Students Wanes, U.S. Universities Feel the Sting
    • Amid ‘Trump Effect’ Fear, 40% of Colleges See Dip in Foreign Applicants
    • Students at Fake University Say They Were Collateral Damage in Sting Operation

Load-Date: June 27, 2018


End of Document
Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump
The New York Times 
April 19, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1369 words
Byline: DEANNE FITZMAURICE and KATIE BENNER
Highlight: They are app makers, they are podcasters, and they are also H-1B visa holders — possibly putting them at risk from the president’s immigration policies.
Body


At dawn in California’s Bay Area, the river of commuters begins to flow. It is filled with the people who help make our smartphones, our favorite games, the apps we download.
But many have also come to make something else, perhaps — a new life in America.
These are just a few of the 85,000 people who come to work at American companies from as far away as India and China on H-1B visas, which are granted to highly skilled workers from overseas. Many, like Kaushik Gopal, land jobs at technology firms that have struggled to find enough American citizens with advanced math and science skills to fill their cubicles.
Often, they hope to call the United States home.
“What I have loved about the U.S. is that it didn’t matter where you came from,” Mr Gopal said. “Your past, your color or religion didn’t matter. If you did good work, there was a place for you here.”
President Trump’s plans to change the rules that govern work visas and immigration have thrown the lives of many visa holders into limbo.
“I’m always on guard because there is a chance that suddenly I’ll get the news that I’m no longer welcome,” said Mr. Gopal, 32, who first came to the United States in 2012.
Like many of Silicon Valley’s workers who are here as part of the H-1B visa program, which is aimed at highly skilled workers, Mr. Gopal was born in India, attended university in the United States and got a job at a tech company. He said the Bay Area attracts the smartest engineers from all over the world because it is known as “a magnet for technical skill.”
He is now at the delivery start-up Instacart, working on an app that customers in several cities use to order their groceries. His weekly podcast “Fragmented,” which he hosts with an app maker named Donn Felker, has raised his professional profile and netted him speaking spots at conferences as far away as Sweden.
While growing up in India, Mr. Gopal was a fan of American television shows and cartoons. After he graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, he was excited to take his parents to Disneyland.
The high-tech industry is now deeply dependent on workers like Mr. Gopal: One in eight tech workers has an H-1B visa, according to estimates from Goldman Sachs.
H-1B visa holders account for about 15 percent of the American work forces at Facebook and Qualcomm, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department. Silicon Valley start-ups, which often drive tech innovation, employ many engineers on student and work visas, as do tech giants like Google and Apple.
This has allowed an ethnically diverse population to flourish around the Bay Area. The Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple in San Jose is one of the largest Sikh temples in North America. The 49-mile stretch of towns and cities from San Jose to San Francisco is filled with Asian eateries, like the popular Rajwadi Thali restaurant in Sunnyvale.
Some visa holders, like Sujay Jaladi, have been in America for so long that they cannot imagine living elsewhere. Mr. Jaladi, 35, has lived here for 15 years, first on a student visa and then on a series of H-1B visas. He applied for a green card in 2012 and is waiting for the application to be approved. His wife, Priya, also holds an H-1B visa and works at a tech company.
“My family lives in India and I love that country,” said Mr. Jaladi, “but I have spent my adult life in the United States and it definitely feels like more of a home to me.”
Mr. Jaladi commutes an hour each day to work as the head of information security at Gusto, a company that provides human resources services to small businesses. He enjoys meals at home and weekend shopping trips to Costco. He and his wife love to cook.
But visas are always on his mind, along with the possibility that he may have to return to India.
“Our ability to stay in the U.S., with good standing, depends on the visa process,” he said. “Working hard is just one factor. If the financial markets are hit and your job lays people off, H-1B visa holders have a limited time to find another job and get into good standing before we have to leave the country. If the market is down and jobs numbers are low, there will be more H-1Bs in the market looking for jobs.”
Mr. Jaladi isn’t the only one who has found himself in immigration limbo at Gusto. Shub Jain, a 26-year-old software engineer there, graduated from the University of California, San Diego, in 2014, worked at Microsoft and last fall moved to San Francisco for a job at the H.R. start-up. He has been working on an extended student visa and has lost out on the H-1B visa lottery three times. This is the last year he will be eligible to apply. “If it doesn’t work out,” he said, “I’ll leave the country.”
Mr. Jain’s life is like that of many 20-something professionals. He loves cars and driving around California, as well as exploring new restaurants with friends. But the feeling of welcome he has always experienced in the United States has shifted as politicians have changed their views on immigration.
“My conversations with friends have changed,” he said. “I used to look at the news every morning, but now I don’t because I don’t want it to impact my work. I look at night. You don’t know what you’ll read.”
Like many tech employees, Mr. Jain took a gamble on a smaller start-up. But his decision came with extra risk. At Microsoft, he could deal with visa issues by relocating to one of the company’s many global offices. He does not have that option at Gusto.
Mr. Jain talks about his anxieties with teammates like Nicholas Gervasi, 32, a Canadian who is working at Gusto on an H-1B visa. Thanks to provisions under the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Gervasi has had an easier time living and working in the United States than his colleagues from India, and he expects his green card application to be approved soon.
Mr. Jain’s sister attended the University of Illinois, worked on a trading floor in Chicago and left the country after she was unable to get an H1-B visa. She has since started her own company and talks to Mr. Jain almost every day as he prepares himself for the possibility that he will have to leave.
Because of his uncertain situation, Mr. Jain’s best friend from college recently visited for a month to play video games, go on drives and spend as much time together as they could.
Some critics of the H-1B visa program say there are more than enough Americans with technology degrees to fill all the technical jobs in the United States. Others say that Silicon Valley companies do not cast a wide enough net for American job candidates. But tech executives have long said that there are not enough Americans with the advanced math and science skills necessary to succeed at their companies.
Mr. Gervasi said that companies “should be empowered to hire the best people.” Joshua Reeves, the chief executive and founder of Gusto, agreed, noting that 8 percent of his work force is on a visa or green card. Gusto’s hiring policy has never taken a candidate’s citizenship into account, and Mr. Reeves said the company was “committed to sticking to that mind-set.”
That commitment could be tested over the next few years, given that the White House is continuously looking for ways to curb immigration as it seeks to enact America-first policies.
“It’s almost like living under this — maybe not fear — but a worry about what’s next and what will happen,” Mr. Jain said. “This feeling of being unwelcome in the country. I hadn’t really felt that before.”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting.
PHOTOS: The sun setting over San Jose, Calif., and the Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple, one of the largest Sikh temples in North America.; Kaushik Gopal, an H-1B visa holder who works at the delivery start-up Instacart, above left, working in what the company calls a “chill room.” At left, a line forms outside the restaurant Rajwadi Thali in Sunnyvale. Shub Jain, below left, has failed in three attempts to get an H-1B visa. At far left, Sujay Jaladi in his wedding photo; he applied for a green card in 2012 but it hasn’t been approved yet. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DEANNE FITZMAURICE)
Related Articles
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers

Load-Date: April 21, 2017


End of Document
Major Changes Would Tighten Eligibility Rules For H-1B Visas
The New York Times
October 7, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 1056 words
Byline: By Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Miriam Jordan
Body


Four weeks before the election, the Trump administration has announced stricter rules for the H-1B visa program, which U.S. companies have long valued.
WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration announced significant changes on Tuesday to the H-1B visa program for high-skilled workers, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants. 
  Top administration officials framed the changes as a way to protect American jobs during the coronavirus pandemic, even though the Trump administration first committed to overhauling the program in 2017 as part of its efforts to reduce the number of foreign citizens employed in the United States.
  ''With millions of Americans looking for work, and as the economy continues its recovery, immediate action is needed to guard against the risk lower-cost foreign labor can pose to the well-being of U.S. workers,'' Patrick Pizzella, the deputy secretary of labor, told reporters on Tuesday.
  The rules will directly affect foreign workers and employers, especially tech companies that have long supported the H-1B program and pushed hard for its expansion.
  Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, said he expected the changes to cut by one-third the number of petitions filed annually for the coveted visas.
  The changes will be published this week as interim final rules, meaning that the agency believes it has ''good cause'' to claim exemption from the normal requirement to obtain feedback from the public before completing them.
  Immigration lawyers and experts predicted that the changes would be swiftly challenged in court because they bypassed the normal regulatory process.
  ''The public hasn't even seen these regulations yet and won't have the usual opportunity to provide comments, as required by Congress,'' said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship. ''Given the inevitability of court challenges, it seems like slim odds that these policies are built to last.''
  The government issues 85,000 H-1B visas each year, often using a lottery to award them because the number of workers sought by companies almost always surpasses the number of available visas. Many workers are eventually sponsored by their employers for green cards to remain permanently in the United States.
  Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the election, were politically motivated.
  ''Why this, why now, and why is it an interim final rule?'' said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center. ''There's no estimate of the amount of jobs this would actually free up for U.S. workers. It's a bank shot at best.''
  The Labor Department rule, which takes effect upon publication, would increase wages across the board for foreign workers, based on surveys of salaries in each profession. Companies would have to pay entry-level workers in the program in the 45th percentile of their profession's salary rather than the 17th percentile. Wages for higher-skilled workers would rise to the 95th percentile from the 67th percentile.
  ''It will also likely result in higher personnel costs for some employers,'' according to the Labor Department rule. ''The purpose of protecting U.S. workers outweighs such interests and justifies such increased costs,'' the agency added.
  But Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor of immigration law at Cornell Law School, said the rule would have the opposite effect.
  ''By increasing the required wages, the new rules will harm all employers trying to hire foreign workers, but especially start-up companies and smaller firms who may not be able to meet the increased wage requirements,'' he said.
  The Department of Homeland Security's rule, which takes effect in 60 days, would also tighten the eligibility for visa applicants. The rule would require the foreign workers to have a degree in the ''specialty occupation'' they apply for, rather than any college degree. Some would also need to show how their studies provided ''a body of highly specialized knowledge'' for a potential job in the United States.
  The largest share of H-1B visa holders are employed by the tech sector, where they work as computer engineers and software developers. The visas are also issued to architects, accountants and physicians, among other professionals.
  The rule will almost certainly have an adverse effect on rural hospitals and other health care providers that depend on a steady pipeline of physicians from abroad because they cannot attract enough American doctors, who generally prefer to practice in urban areas.
  For example, instead of offering a minimum starting salary of $120,000 to $130,000, a clinic in northeastern Pennsylvania, which is considered an underserved area, would have to pay a foreign physician around $195,000 or $200,000.
  ''Entry-level doctors in rural areas will have to be offered experienced-level wages, which may be more than their supervisor is being paid,'' said William A. Stock, an employment immigration lawyer in Philadelphia. ''This will further restrict the supply of doctors willing to move to parts of rural America. It will put providers in a jam that they can't afford to hire foreign-born doctors.''
  The H-1B rule comes on the heels of a proclamation signed by President Trump in June that suspended an array of worker visas until at least Dec. 31. Groups representing thousands of businesses challenged that proclamation, which affected H-1Bs, H-2B seasonal work visas, L-1 visas for executives being transferred by companies and cultural-exchange J-1 visas, including au pairs.
  The groups won a reprieve last week, when a federal judge ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority in banning the visas.
  ''There must be some measure of constraint on presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power,'' the judge said.
  His order was at odds with an earlier decision by a federal judge in Washington, which ensured that an appeals court would make the ultimate determination.
  But it immediately set aside the ban for companies that employed large numbers of foreign workers.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/06/us/politics/h1b-visas-foreign-workers-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the presidential election, were politically motivated. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Scott Olson/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: October 7, 2020


End of Document
Tech Workers Left in Limbo
The New York Times
April 20, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 1259 words
Byline: By DEANNE FITZMAURICE and KATIE BENNER; Vindu Goel contributed reporting.
Body


At dawn in California's Bay Area, the river of commuters begins to flow. It is filled with the people who help make our smartphones, our favorite games, the apps we download.
But many have also come to make something else, perhaps -- a new life in America. 
  These are just a few of the 85,000 people who come to work at American companies from as far away as India and China on H-1B visas, which are granted to highly skilled workers from overseas. Many, like Kaushik Gopal, land jobs at technology firms that have struggled to find enough American citizens with advanced math and science skills to fill their cubicles.
  Often, they hope to call the United States home.
  ''What I have loved about the U.S. is that it didn't matter where you came from,'' Mr Gopal said. ''Your past, your color or religion didn't matter. If you did good work, there was a place for you here.''
  President Trump's plans to change the rules that govern work visas and immigration have thrown the lives of many visa holders into limbo.
  ''I'm always on guard because there is a chance that suddenly I'll get the news that I'm no longer welcome,'' said Mr. Gopal, 32, who first came to the United States in 2012.
  Like many of Silicon Valley's workers who are here as part of the H-1B visa program, which is aimed at highly skilled workers, Mr. Gopal was born in India, attended university in the United States and got a job at a tech company. He said the Bay Area attracts the smartest engineers from all over the world because it is known as ''a magnet for technical skill.''
  He is now at the delivery start-up Instacart, working on an app that customers in several cities use to order their groceries. His weekly podcast ''Fragmented,'' which he hosts with an app maker named Donn Felker, has raised his professional profile and netted him speaking spots at conferences as far away as Sweden.
  While growing up in India, Mr. Gopal was a fan of American television shows and cartoons. After he graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, he was excited to take his parents to Disneyland.
  The high-tech industry is now deeply dependent on workers like Mr. Gopal: One in eight tech workers has an H-1B visa, according to estimates from Goldman Sachs.
  H-1B visa holders account for about 15 percent of the American work forces at Facebook and Qualcomm, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department. Silicon Valley start-ups, which often drive tech innovation, employ many engineers on student and work visas, as do tech giants like Google and Apple.
  This has allowed an ethnically diverse population to flourish around the Bay Area. The Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple in San Jose is one of the largest Sikh temples in North America. The 49-mile stretch of towns and cities from San Jose to San Francisco is filled with Asian eateries, like the popular Rajwadi Thali restaurant in Sunnyvale.
  Some visa holders, like Sujay Jaladi, have been in America for so long that they cannot imagine living elsewhere. Mr. Jaladi, 35, has lived here for 15 years, first on a student visa and then on a series of H-1B visas. He applied for a green card in 2012 and is waiting for the application to be approved. His wife, Priya, also holds an H-1B visa and works at a tech company.
  ''My family lives in India and I love that country,'' said Mr. Jaladi, ''but I have spent my adult life in the United States and it definitely feels like more of a home to me.''
  Mr. Jaladi commutes an hour each day to work as the head of information security at Gusto, a company that provides human resources services to small businesses. He enjoys meals at home and weekend shopping trips to Costco. He and his wife love to cook.
  But visas are always on his mind, along with the possibility that he may have to return to India.
  ''Our ability to stay in the U.S., with good standing, depends on the visa process,'' he said. ''Working hard is just one factor. If the financial markets are hit and your job lays people off, H-1B visa holders have a limited time to find another job and get into good standing before we have to leave the country. If the market is down and jobs numbers are low, there will be more H-1Bs in the market looking for jobs.''
  Mr. Jaladi isn't the only one who has found himself in immigration limbo at Gusto. Shub Jain, a 26-year-old software engineer there, graduated from the University of California, San Diego, in 2014, worked at Microsoft and last fall moved to San Francisco for a job at the H.R. start-up. He has been working on an extended student visa and has lost out on the H-1B visa lottery three times. This is the last year he will be eligible to apply. ''If it doesn't work out,'' he said, ''I'll leave the country.''
  Mr. Jain's life is like that of many 20-something professionals. He loves cars and driving around California, as well as exploring new restaurants with friends. But the feeling of welcome he has always experienced in the United States has shifted as politicians have changed their views on immigration.
  ''My conversations with friends have changed,'' he said. ''I used to look at the news every morning, but now I don't because I don't want it to impact my work. I look at night. You don't know what you'll read.''
  Like many tech employees, Mr. Jain took a gamble on a smaller start-up. But his decision came with extra risk. At Microsoft, he could deal with visa issues by relocating to one of the company's many global offices. He does not have that option at Gusto.
  Mr. Jain talks about his anxieties with teammates like Nicholas Gervasi, 32, a Canadian who is working at Gusto on an H-1B visa. Thanks to provisions under the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Gervasi has had an easier time living and working in the United States than his colleagues from India, and he expects his green card application to be approved soon.
  Mr. Jain's sister attended the University of Illinois, worked on a trading floor in Chicago and left the country after she was unable to get an H1-B visa. She has since started her own company and talks to Mr. Jain almost every day as he prepares himself for the possibility that he will have to leave.
  Because of his uncertain situation, Mr. Jain's best friend from college recently visited for a month to play video games, go on drives and spend as much time together as they could.
  Some critics of the H-1B visa program say there are more than enough Americans with technology degrees to fill all the technical jobs in the United States. Others say that Silicon Valley companies do not cast a wide enough net for American job candidates. But tech executives have long said that there are not enough Americans with the advanced math and science skills necessary to succeed at their companies.
  Mr. Gervasi said that companies ''should be empowered to hire the best people.'' Joshua Reeves, the chief executive and founder of Gusto, agreed, noting that 8 percent of his work force is on a visa or green card. Gusto's hiring policy has never taken a candidate's citizenship into account, and Mr. Reeves said the company was ''committed to sticking to that mind-set.''
  That commitment could be tested over the next few years, given that the White House is continuously looking for ways to curb immigration as it seeks to enact America-first policies.
  ''It's almost like living under this -- maybe not fear -- but a worry about what's next and what will happen,'' Mr. Jain said. ''This feeling of being unwelcome in the country. I hadn't really felt that before.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/19/technology/h1-b-tech-worker-life.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: The sun setting over San Jose, Calif., and the Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple, one of the largest Sikh temples in North America.
Kaushik Gopal, an H-1B visa holder who works at the delivery start-up Instacart, above left, working in what the company calls a ''chill room.'' At left, a line forms outside the restaurant Rajwadi Thali in Sunnyvale. Shub Jain, below left, has failed in three attempts to get an H-1B visa. At far left, Sujay Jaladi in his wedding photo
 he applied for a green card in 2012 but it hasn't been approved yet. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DEANNE FITZMAURICE)       

Load-Date: April 20, 2017


End of Document
They Live in the U.S., but They’re Not Allowed to Come Home
The New York Times 
May 17, 2021 Monday 11:48 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1188 words
Byline: Aishvarya Kavi
Highlight: Thousands of immigrants who live in the United States on temporary visas and traveled to India in recent weeks have been stranded there under the Biden administration’s travel ban.
Body


Thousands of immigrants who live in the United States on temporary visas and traveled to India in recent weeks have been stranded there under the Biden administration’s travel ban.
In early April, Payal Raj accompanied her family to India to renew the visas that permit them to live in the United States. She and her husband waited until they had been vaccinated, carefully preparing their paperwork according to the advice of their immigration lawyers. But the visa itself would soon strand her in India indefinitely, separating her from her husband and daughter in Hendersonville, Tenn.
“Our family is in a crisis,” said Ms. Raj, who is one of thousands of immigrants stuck in India, in part because the Biden administration’s restrictions on most travel from the country mean that temporary visa holders are explicitly barred from re-entering the United States. “Every morning is a struggle.”
The restrictions, issued as a devastating surge in coronavirus cases has overwhelmed India in recent weeks, prohibit Ms. Raj and others like her from returning to their homes, families and jobs in the United States. Even those exempt under the ban are in limbo as the outbreak forces the U.S. Embassy and consulates to close, leaving many with no clear path home.
Ms. Raj’s husband, Yogesh Kumar, an operations manager for a multinational corporation, lives in the United States on an H-1B visa, or a temporary permit for highly technical foreign workers. As dependents, Ms. Raj and their daughter hold H-4 visas, which allow temporary workers to bring immediate family and must be renewed about every three years at an embassy or consulate outside the United States.
Mr. Kumar and his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, renewed their visas, but Ms. Raj was asked to submit biometrics and complete an in-person interview, both of which would not be completed until after the travel restrictions went into effect two weeks ago.
As the primary breadwinner, Mr. Kumar said his employer would not allow him to work from India indefinitely given that some aspects of his job required in-person interaction. He returned to Tennessee with Saanvi, leaving Ms. Raj behind in Bangalore.
“If he quits his job, we won’t have any means to sustain ourselves,” Ms. Raj said of her husband, whose income also supports both their parents. “But in the middle of all of this, I’m sitting here, away from my family, for I don’t know — months? Years?”
The White House did not respond to questions about the restrictions on travel from India, but a State Department representative described them as “appropriate public health measures” that are “critical” to defeating the coronavirus.
“The pandemic is a global issue, and it will not be over for anyone until it’s over for everyone,” the representative said in a statement.
But critics say that the exemptions to the travel ban are unevenly applied and still risk spreading the virus. American citizens and permanent residents, for instance, can travel freely, while people who are fully vaccinated, test negative or quarantine before and after flying cannot. The administration has not indicated when or under what circumstances it would lift the restrictions.
“They just put the same blanket ban for India that they were using in the Trump administration,” said Greg Siskind, an immigration lawyer who is suing the Biden administration over the State Department’s inability to issue visas in countries experiencing lockdowns. “This was the same style ban that President Biden said last March was ineffective and was a bad idea.”
The United States has restricted entry from a number of countries, but the most recent ban has had a disproportionate effect on Indians in the United States given that Indian citizens claim more than two-thirds of H-1B visas issued each year. Including those on other kinds of nonimmigrant visas, immigration lawyers estimate that thousands of Indians living in the United States have been affected.
Some traveled to India when coronavirus case counts were low to renew their visas or see family. Others went to care for sick or dying relatives. Now some are unable to secure even emergency appointments to renew their visas at the embassy in New Delhi or any of the four U.S. consulates in India.
In late April, Gaurav Chauhan traveled to Agra to care for his father, who was hospitalized with the coronavirus. He is now separated from his wife and two children, who live in Atlanta.
As a parent of American citizens who are minors, Mr. Chauhan is exempt from the ban, but he has been unable to make an emergency appointment on the State Department’s website to renew his visa. His employer, a software company, has temporarily allowed Mr. Chauhan, who works in human resources, to do his job overseas. But others in similar situations say they have been asked to leave their jobs.
“If you are certain that in two months or three months things are going to be normal, we are going to get a visa issued, you have at least a timeline of when you are going to see your family,” Mr. Chauhan said. “But the uncertainty — that’s the thing that is killing us.”
Since the beginning of the pandemic, American embassy and consulate closings have bottlenecked visa processing. In early April, 76 percent of consulates were still fully or partly closed, according to an analysis of State Department data by the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank.
Such shutdowns should not stop visa processing, Mr. Siskind said, pointing to other immigration agencies that had successfully adapted to remote work and exceptions to in-person document submission.
“One of the issues with the State Department for the last 14 months is their lack of imagination in terms of how to change their procedures in a pandemic,” Mr. Siskind said. “They have, for example, not switched to video interviewing, which is something that they have the statutory authority to do.”
The State Department acknowledged that “services are limited” at U.S. outposts in India but said that it would “make every attempt to continue to honor approved emergency visa appointments.” The department could not provide a specific date for when other visa services would resume.
Abhiram, a professor in Broward County, Fla., whose wife and 3-year-old daughter remain outside Hyderabad after visiting family in January, said he did not fault the government for enforcing travel restrictions to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. But the situation has made him consider whether to stay in the United States.
“Every day my daughter asks me, ‘Daddy, where are you?’” said Abhiram, who asked to be identified only by his middle name. “I do feel sometimes like going back to my home country, rather than dealing with this.”
But for Ms. Raj and her family, home is Hendersonville.
“Our whole day-to-day life was interacting with our neighbors, going and visiting friends, getting together for backyard parties. It’s been wonderful,” she said. “I don’t want to uproot our lives.”
PHOTO: Yogesh Kumar with his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, at home. His wife, Payal Raj, is stranded in India under the U.S. travel ban. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM DESHAZER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 15, 2021


End of Document
Trump's Crackdown on Students Who Overstay Visas Rattles Colleges
The New York Times
May 25, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1307 words
Byline: By ERICA L. GREEN
Body


The Trump administration plans to crack down on international students and visitors who overstay their visas, stoking fears in the higher education community that President Trump's aggressive immigration policies will hinder university efforts to attract the brightest minds from overseas.
In a policy memorandum, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced this month that it plans to change how it calculates ''unlawful presence'' for foreigners in the student visa and exchange program. It will also impose harsher punishments -- up to a 10-year ban from the country -- for graduates who overstay their visas. 
  The policy, due to take effect in August, has been criticized by higher education institutions and student advocates who say the change shows the indiscriminate nature of the Trump administration's ''America First'' policies. They say Mr. Trump's aggressive immigration efforts are shutting out the nation's leading scholars, who contribute billions of dollars to the economy in the United States, staff its leading research institutions, support its most high-skilled jobs, and contribute to the president's own goal of strengthening the pipeline to science, technology, mathematics and engineering jobs.
  ''It is clear that in an attempt to 'enhance public safety,' the administration seeks to further close the door on academic talent,'' said Jill Welch, the deputy executive director for public policy at Nafsa, the Association of International Educators. ''This is yet another policy which makes the United States less attractive to talented international students and scholars.''
  So far, the president has focused his policy efforts on the nation's borders, and his harshest rhetoric has targeted gang members. But Mr. Trump issued an executive order in January 2017 signaling that visa overstays would also be a target.
  ''Many aliens who illegally enter the United States and those who overstay or otherwise violate the terms of their visas present a significant threat to national security and public safety,'' the order said.
  It is estimated that overstays account for as many as half of the undocumented immigrants in the country, and the most recent figures released by the Department of Homeland Security show that student and exchange visitors had the highest overstay rate -- 2.8 percent -- among nonimmigrant visitors to the United States.
  Immigration officials said the new policy aligned with the executive order.
  In a statement announcing the policy, the director of Citizenship and Immigration Services, L. Francis Cissna, said that visa holders ''are admitted to the United States for a specific purpose, and when that purpose has ended, we expect them to depart, or to obtain another, lawful immigration status.''
  The proposed rules would target F and M visas, which are overwhelmingly used by international students to enter academic and vocational institutions of higher education, as well as J-1 visas, which allow students, professors and visitors to participate in short-term cultural exchange programs.
  Under the new policy, the government would begin to calculate what is called ''unlawful presence'' from the date that visa holders' purpose in the country has expired, such as the end of their studies. Under the current policy, put in place 20 years ago, that calculation started once the government discovered the violation.
  The new policy would also be less forgiving. Visa holders found to be in the country illegally for more than 180 days would be barred from re-entry for three or 10 years, depending on the length of their overstay. The current policy usually allows students to go back to their country and apply for a new visa, or update their visa status and return.
  The harsh penalties are especially jarring because small mistakes could now carry big consequences, said Angelo A. Paparelli, an immigration lawyer at Seyfarth Shaw LLP, a firm based in Los Angeles.
  ''For immigration attorneys, because time is of the essence, if the three- or 10-year bar is triggered, there's not much you can do,'' he said.
  It is common for students to fall out of compliance while awaiting a new visa or transitioning to a new one, Mr. Paparelli said. Students who use visas to stay and work after completing their degrees are particularly vulnerable. Determining whether their jobs meet certain requirements to stay is subjective. Their violations could be applied retroactively, and subject them to an automatic ban, he said.
  ''The effect of this change will be felt by businesses,'' he added. ''It will foreclose what have been standard approaches to transitioning from student to worker, whether that's on an H1-B or some other work visa category, or the transition to permanent residence.''
  Administrators who work with international students worry that they will be punished for life events that domestic students are usually supported through. Many students fall out of status because of extenuating circumstances, such as temporarily dropping below a full course load because of mental health issues, leaving school temporarily for a family emergency or picking up a part-time job to help with family finances.
  ''A lot of this impacts things that happen when students are in crisis, when status is the last thing on their minds,'' said Katie Tudini, the director for international student services at the University at Buffalo.
  Adam Julian, the director of international student and scholar services and outreach at Appalachian State University, said international students are among the most scrutinized populations in the immigration system because their visas require constant reporting of enrollment information, such as addresses and full-time status in school. But now, even the smallest miscommunication with school officials could lead to a violation.
  ''We've always stressed compliance with students; that's not changing,'' Mr. Julian said. ''But we will just be especially vigilant on advising students that this is the new reality: The U.S. is ultimately going to be a country that does not want to benefit from everything that international scholars have to offer.''
  College administrators have already noticed that the international talent pool is shrinking.
  Last fall, the Institute of International Education, which produces a report on international student enrollment trends, noted that in fall 2016, American higher education saw the first drop in new international students. The decline occurred at the end of the Obama administration, but also during the bitter presidential campaign. In a follow-up survey of 522 institutions one year later, the first international freshman class under Mr. Trump, the organization found a 7 percent decline in new international enrollments, with 45 percent of the institutions surveyed reporting a decrease.
  According to a biannual report issued last month by the Department of Homeland Security, there were more than one million international students seeking degrees in the United States.
  But there was a slight decline -- 6,210 students, or 0.5 percent -- in the number of students studying on F and M visas from March 2017 to March 2018. While the visa data included K-12 education, 85 percent of student visa holders attend colleges and universities. The report said that a majority of students seek bachelor's and master's degrees in business, engineering or computer science. It also noted a sharp decline in the number of students coming from Saudi Arabia and South Korea.
  ''These students and scholars are considered the most brilliant minds in their field, and they are not coming here with the intention to infringe the law and intentionally overstay in the country,'' said Karen F. Da Silva, an international student advocate for the National Association of Graduate-Professional Students.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/24/us/politics/trump-crackdown-student-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Behnam Partopour, a college student from Iran, arriving in Boston in February 2017, after President Trump issued a travel ban. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN SNYDER/REUTERS)       

Load-Date: May 30, 2018


End of Document
U.S. Residents, but Not Yet Allowed Home
The New York Times
May 18, 2021 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 1171 words
Byline: By Aishvarya Kavi
Body


Thousands of immigrants who live in the United States on temporary visas and traveled to India in recent weeks have been stranded there under the Biden administration's travel ban.
In early April, Payal Raj accompanied her family to India to renew the visas that permit them to live in the United States. She and her husband waited until they had been vaccinated, carefully preparing their paperwork according to the advice of their immigration lawyers. But the visa itself would soon strand her in India indefinitely, separating her from her husband and daughter in Hendersonville, Tenn. 
  ''Our family is in a crisis,'' said Ms. Raj, who is one of thousands of immigrants stuck in India, in part because the Biden administration's restrictions on most travel from the country mean that temporary visa holders are explicitly barred from re-entering the United States. ''Every morning is a struggle.''
  The restrictions, issued as a devastating surge in coronavirus cases has overwhelmed India in recent weeks, prohibit Ms. Raj and others like her from returning to their homes, families and jobs in the United States. Even those exempt under the ban are in limbo as the outbreak forces the U.S. Embassy and consulates to close, leaving many with no clear path home.
  Ms. Raj's husband, Yogesh Kumar, an operations manager for a multinational corporation, lives in the United States on an H-1B visa, or a temporary permit for highly technical foreign workers. As dependents, Ms. Raj and their daughter hold H-4 visas, which allow temporary workers to bring immediate family and must be renewed about every three years at an embassy or consulate outside the United States.
  Mr. Kumar and his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, renewed their visas, but Ms. Raj was asked to submit biometrics and complete an in-person interview, both of which would not be completed until after the travel restrictions went into effect two weeks ago.
  As the primary breadwinner, Mr. Kumar said his employer would not allow him to work from India indefinitely given that some aspects of his job required in-person interaction. He returned to Tennessee with Saanvi, leaving Ms. Raj behind in Bangalore.
  ''If he quits his job, we won't have any means to sustain ourselves,'' Ms. Raj said of her husband, whose income also supports both their parents. ''But in the middle of all of this, I'm sitting here, away from my family, for I don't know -- months? Years?''
  The White House did not respond to questions about the restrictions on travel from India, but a State Department representative described them as ''appropriate public health measures'' that are ''critical'' to defeating the coronavirus.
  ''The pandemic is a global issue, and it will not be over for anyone until it's over for everyone,'' the representative said in a statement.
  But critics say that the exemptions to the travel ban are unevenly applied and still risk spreading the virus. American citizens and permanent residents, for instance, can travel freely, while people who are fully vaccinated, test negative or quarantine before and after flying cannot. The administration has not indicated when or under what circumstances it would lift the restrictions.
  ''They just put the same blanket ban for India that they were using in the Trump administration,'' said Greg Siskind, an immigration lawyer who is suing the Biden administration over the State Department's inability to issue visas in countries experiencing lockdowns. ''This was the same style ban that President Biden said last March was ineffective and was a bad idea.''
  The United States has restricted entry from a number of countries, but the most recent ban has had a disproportionate effect on Indians in the United States given that Indian citizens claim more than two-thirds of H-1B visas issued each year. Including those on other kinds of nonimmigrant visas, immigration lawyers estimate that thousands of Indians living in the United States have been affected.
  Some traveled to India when coronavirus case counts were low to renew their visas or see family. Others went to care for sick or dying relatives. Now some are unable to secure even emergency appointments to renew their visas at the embassy in New Delhi or any of the four U.S. consulates in India.
  In late April, Gaurav Chauhan traveled to Agra to care for his father, who was hospitalized with the coronavirus. He is now separated from his wife and two children, who live in Atlanta.
  As a parent of American citizens who are minors, Mr. Chauhan is exempt from the ban, but he has been unable to make an emergency appointment on the State Department's website to renew his visa. His employer, a software company, has temporarily allowed Mr. Chauhan, who works in human resources, to do his job overseas. But others in similar situations say they have been asked to leave their jobs.
  ''If you are certain that in two months or three months things are going to be normal, we are going to get a visa issued, you have at least a timeline of when you are going to see your family,'' Mr. Chauhan said. ''But the uncertainty -- that's the thing that is killing us.''
  Since the beginning of the pandemic, American embassy and consulate closings have bottlenecked visa processing. In early April, 76 percent of consulates were still fully or partly closed, according to an analysis of State Department data by the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank.
  Such shutdowns should not stop visa processing, Mr. Siskind said, pointing to other immigration agencies that had successfully adapted to remote work and exceptions to in-person document submission.
  ''One of the issues with the State Department for the last 14 months is their lack of imagination in terms of how to change their procedures in a pandemic,'' Mr. Siskind said. ''They have, for example, not switched to video interviewing, which is something that they have the statutory authority to do.''
  The State Department acknowledged that ''services are limited'' at U.S. outposts in India but said that it would ''make every attempt to continue to honor approved emergency visa appointments.'' The department could not provide a specific date for when other visa services would resume.
  Abhiram, a professor in Broward County, Fla., whose wife and 3-year-old daughter remain outside Hyderabad after visiting family in January, said he did not fault the government for enforcing travel restrictions to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. But the situation has made him consider whether to stay in the United States.
  ''Every day my daughter asks me, 'Daddy, where are you?''' said Abhiram, who asked to be identified only by his middle name. ''I do feel sometimes like going back to my home country, rather than dealing with this.''
  But for Ms. Raj and her family, home is Hendersonville.
  ''Our whole day-to-day life was interacting with our neighbors, going and visiting friends, getting together for backyard parties. It's been wonderful,'' she said. ''I don't want to uproot our lives.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/17/us/politics/india-travel-restrictions.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Yogesh Kumar with his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, at home. His wife, Payal Raj, is stranded in India under the U.S. travel ban. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM DESHAZER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: May 18, 2021


End of Document
Trump Floats Possible Citizenship to Holders of H-1B Visas: What Are They?
The New York Times 
April 6, 2018 Friday 13:13 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1398 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: President Trump said on Twitter that changes are coming to the H1-B visa program for foreign workers that could involve a path to citizenship.
Body


Updated Jan. 11, 2019
For years, skilled workers from abroad have been coming to the United States on temporary visas, known as H-1B visas, that allow companies to recruit employees overseas when the necessary talent might not be available at home.
Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized for displacing United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. Critics also want to end special work permits issued to some spouses of workers on H-1B visas. President Trump has long been critical of the program.
On Friday, the president said on Twitter that changes to the program might be coming — including the possibility that workers brought in under the program could be allowed to become American citizens.
“H1-B holders in the United States can rest assured that changes are soon coming which will bring both simplicity and certainty to your stay, including a potential path to citizenship,” the president wrote. “We want to encourage talented and highly skilled people to pursue career options in the U.S.”
What is the H-1B visa?
It is a temporary visa that employers use to hire foreigners in “specialty occupations” for which there are not enough skilled American workers to fill available jobs. The workers must have at least a bachelor’s degree. It enables those employed to legally work in the United States for three years, with the possibility of extensions.
How does a worker get a visa?
Companies identify a worker they wish to hire and submit a petition on the candidate’s behalf. The typical petition is a collection of forms and documents describing the job and the unique qualifications of the person chosen to fill it.
Are all H-1B recipients in the technology sector?
Many are software engineers, computer programmers and other workers in the technology sector. However, H-1B recipients work in a variety of jobs. They can be architects, scientists, models and tattoo artists. Some are math and science teachers in rural school districts that have trouble recruiting American instructors.
How many visas are issued each year?
Congress established that 65,000 H-1B visas are available each year for workers with bachelor’s degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master’s degrees or higher. Universities and research organizations are exempt from the cap.
Why is there a lottery to choose petitions?
In the past several years, the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services has received more petitions than there are visas. If the maximum number of applications is reached during the first five business days of April, the agency holds a lottery to randomly select which petitions it will process.
Can the visas lead to permanent residence?
Very often they do. Companies can choose to sponsor an H-1B worker for permanent residence. The green card applications are often approved, though they can take years to be issued.
Where are most foreign workers from?
India is the country of origin for more than 80 percent of H-1B recipients, with China a distant second. Next in line during the 2016 fiscal year were the Philippines, South Korea and Canada.
Do H-1B workers compete with Americans?
Supporters of the visa program say they fill a critical need for talent that is not available in the United States, especially when the economy is strong and the labor market is tight. Employers must attest that an H-1B worker will not adversely impact the wages and working conditions of American workers.
Critics say that employers often hire H-1B workers for lower salaries than they would pay Americans to do the same job. They point to Americans who have been displaced when companies have outsourced areas like technology maintenance to a company that brings in H-1B workers.
Who’s right?
As usual with immigration policy, it’s complicated. More than 40,500 companies sponsored workers for H-1B visas in the 2017 fiscal year. Many employers specifically target a worker with hard-to-find expertise whom they wish to hire to do specialized work — obviously because they could not find someone in the United States to do the job. In many cases, H-1B workers have gone on to create start-ups and develop cutting-edge technology that keeps America competitive.
But there are questions about who’s benefiting, collectively. About 20 companies accounted for 32 percent of approved H-1B petitions, according to an analysis by the Migration Policy Institute. Many of the employers are global outsourcing companies from India that supply entry-level workers to retailers, insurance companies and banks. Not all. Among them are also American firms who appear to be using the program to create a pool of cheap labor.
“Big household-name American companies are just as culpable as the outsourcing companies of abusing the program,” said Norman Matloff, a professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies the H-1B program.
So there has been some misuse?
Almost everybody agrees that there has, though it is probably not as widespread as critics claim. Abuses rarely result in penalties for the companies, experts say. In one highly publicized case in 2015, some Disney employees said they were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments. Workers filed suit, but the judge dismissed the case; new litigation is pending in state court. Workers at other companies, including Toys “R” Us and New York Life Insurance Company, also said they            lost their jobs to imported workers.
Last May, the former acting director of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the agency had started “multiple investigations” into “possible misuse” of the H-1B visa program and would turn the findings over for enforcement as warranted.
Ultimately, though, it is up to Congress to change laws that govern the program, since in most cases, practices that workers may claim as abusive are not necessarily illegal as the law is written.
What changes did the Trump administration start?
At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors, saying, “We won’t let this happen anymore.”
Once in office, he ordered a review of the H-1B and other visa programs. In April 2017, he signed a “Buy American, Hire American” executive order, which has served to justify several recent changes.
For one thing, United States Citizen and Immigration Services, the federal agency that reviews the petitions, has tightened its oversight. Between January and August of last year, it issued 45 percent more challenges or requests for more evidence. That has delayed the issuance of visas, and some immigration lawyers report an increase in denials.
The agency has also stepped up the number of surprise visits by fraud teams to sites where large numbers of H-1B workers are employed. And in a policy memo earlier this year, it expanded its review of H1-B workers who are employed at third-party work sites. Now, it is requiring more details about what work will be performed, why a foreigner is needed to do it, and what wages are being paid.
What more does the administration plan to do?
The administration has said from the beginning that it would end an Obama-era program that has allowed spouses of H-1B visa holders to work, as long as they had been approved and were waiting for a green card. Those work permits have been issued under a program known as H-4EAD.
Federal authorities had also suggested they might change the selection process for H-1B visas to ensure that they are granted to the “most skilled or highest-paid” job candidates.
Finally, Trump has said he would like to scrap the lottery.
But precisely what changes are being contemplated now is still unknown.
What about the role of Congress?
More sweeping changes can occur only if Congress passes new laws or overhauls the immigration system. The Trump administration’s call to end the lottery and raise wages for H-1B visa candidates as a means of recruiting qualified American workers has support among some Democrats and Republicans.
PHOTO: H-1B visa petitions en route to a government processing center in Laguna Niguel, Calif., last year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Eros Hoagland for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump

Load-Date: January 14, 2019


End of Document
Don’t Mess With Texas; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 7, 2022 Tuesday 10:47 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1945 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Vivian Giang, Stephen Gandel, Lauren Hirsch, Ephrat Livni and Jenny Gross
Highlight: The Lone Star State enters the Musk-Twitter fray, highlighting Texas’ willingness, and Republicans in general, to break with traditional free market thinking.
Body


The Lone Star State enters the Musk-Twitter fray, highlighting Texas’ willingness, and Republicans in general, to break with traditional free market thinking.
Target announced this morning that it had misjudged consumer demand and over-ordered goods, which will hurt profits. U.S. stock markets headed lower on the news, which has renewed fears that the economy will slow as consumers shut their wallets despite the strong job market. More here. 
Texas enters the Twitter deal 
Texas’ Republican attorney general, Ken Paxton, is investigating whether Twitter has misled users by underreporting the number of bots on its platform. He announced the investigation yesterday, on the same day Elon Musk said in a regulatory filing that he had the right to pull out his $44 billion acquisition of Twitter due to concerns about the same issue. Musk, who moved Tesla’s headquarter to Texas last year, has increasingly been aligning himself with the Republican Party.
Spam accounts have become a contentious issue in Musk’s acquisition of Twitter. Around the same time that shares of Twitter and Tesla plummeted, Musk began publicly questioning Twitter’s disclosures that 5 percent of users are bots, indicating he may be fashioning a way to get out of or renegotiate the Twitter deal. Yesterday, Paxton similarly questioned that figure, arguing that Twitter might be in violation of Texas’ Deceptive Trade Practices Act.
Musk and Paxton are kicking it up a notch. Musk said in a letter, drafted by his lawyers at Skadden Arps, that if Twitter did not provide him with more information about how it accounted for its number of bots, it was in breach of its obligation to share information vital to the deal. Twitter, for its part, has concerns about sharing such confidential information with a man who has said he was considering launching a rival social media service, among other things.
It’s not clear that Musk’s demands are anything more than a fishing expedition, nor that the information is actually vital to closing the deal. The same goes for Paxton’s requests: “Consumer laws exist to protect consumers from real harm,” James Tierney, a lecturer at Harvard Law School and a former Maine state attorney general, told DealBook. “They do not exist to allow a government official to meddle in ongoing corporate transactions on behalf of a constituent.”
It’s the latest headache for Twitter in Texas. In September, Texas passed a law banning Twitter from removing users from its platform based on their viewpoints. Removing an account that appeared to be a bot spreading political misinformation, but was actually run by a real individual, would open Twitter up to litigation under that same law. Last week, the Supreme Court blocked the law from taking effect.
And it represents a new course for the Republican Party, which has traditionally espoused the value of free markets and deregulation. As with other hot-button issues, like vaccine mandates, gun controland energy, the party is increasingly embracing laws that target companies as part of the free marketplace, if those laws target policies embraced by liberals. “Cynical opportunistic state officials in Texas and Florida have abused their public duties,” Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a top management professor at Yale University, told DealBook. He warns that politicians who “weaponize private commerce” endanger foundations that “businesses require to thrive.”
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
Wells Fargo is pausing a hiring policy that led to fake job interviews. The bank instituted the policy to increase diversity, but it instead led some managers to conduct sham interviews of nonwhite and female candidates for positions that had already been filled, The Times reported last month.  C.E.O. Charles W. Scharf said the bank will study what needed to change about its “diverse slate” requirement before restarting the process.
Peloton has another high-level departure. The at-home fitness company said its chief financial officer, Jill Woodworth, is leaving the company and will be replaced by Liz Coddington, who comes from Amazon Web Services. Peloton’s new C.E.O., Barry McCarthy, has cut the cost of its high-end connected exercise bikes and treadmills and increased monthly subscription fees, but that has yet to stabilize the company, which overexpanded during the pandemic.
Kohl’s is in advanced talks to be sold. The department store chain could be sold for about $8 billion to the retail holding company Franchise Group Inc., which owns the Vitamin Shoppe and other brands, The Wall Street Journal reported. Franchise Group reportedly offered about $60 a share for Kohl’s.
The S.E.C. is expected to outline ideas for improving markets. Chairman Gary Gensler plans to detail potential changes in a speech tomorrow that the S.E.C. believes will make markets more efficient for small investors and public companies, according to The Wall Street Journal. Meanwhile, pension funds have been pushing the agency to proceed with a proposed rule that would require private-equity funds to provide more disclosures to investors.
C.E.O.-worker wage gap widens during pandemic
Although a hot job market pushed up pay for low-wage workers, the average pay gap between those workers and their C.E.O.s widened even more last year.
The median pay for workers at companies that tend to pay low wages last year was up by 17 percent, to $24,000, a jump that more than doubled the rate of inflation, according to a study out this morning from the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning think tank.
Still, those rising wages did not outpace C.E.O. pay gains, which rose by 31 percent at those same companies, to an average of $10.6 million. “We do have to acknowledge there was some good news last year,” Sarah Anderson, the lead author of the “Executive Excess” study, told DealBook. “But this could have been a time when companies used rising profits to level the pay playing field. Instead, we haven’t seen a very big shift in pay equity.”
C.E.O.s did even better at companies where salaries did not keep pace with inflation. Median workers’ wages at about a third of the firms in the I.P.S. study did not keep pace with inflation. At those companies, the average C.E.O. pay was up by 65 percent, or more than double the increase at all of the firms in the study. Among the companies highlighted in the report were Best Buy, where median pay fell 2 percent last year to $29,999, while the C.E.O., Corie Barry, received a 30 percent pay increase to $15.6 million.
S.E.C. urged to require more transparency on labor spending 
A group of former regulators will ask the S.E.C. to issue new rules, illuminating the cost and payoffs of work force investments. The petition, which DealBook is first to report, contends that investors need more information about what companies pay workers and urges the S.E.C. to propose several new rules, including requiring companies to disclose how much they are investing in their workforces.
The group includes Joseph Grundfest of Stanford and Robert Jackson of N.Y.U., two former S.E.C. commissioners who have often had opposing views. “We differ in our views about the regulation of firms’ relationships with their employees generally,” they wrote. “But we all share the view that investors need additional information.”
The current accounting and tax rules make investing in machines more attractive than spending on humans, the group says. A million dollars’ worth of robots are an asset on balance sheets, whereas the same amount spent on job skills is an cost that needs to be expensed immediately, according to one of the petitioners, Colleen Honigsberg of Stanford Law School. Currently, only about 15 percent of public companies disclose labor costs.
The proposed rules would require companies to disclose labor costs, rather than aggregating them with other expenses. They would also require companies to provide detailed work force compensation data, including information on the breakdown of contract, part-time and full-time employees. 
“No one can credibly argue that this type of disclosure wouldn’t be valuable or material to investors in a highly competitive 21st century, global economy,” Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, who supports the petition, said in a statement to DealBook.
“Equal voting rights is not enough if you have very unequal funding of political campaigns.” 
— Thomas Picketty, the economist and chronicler of inequality, makes his case for universal inheritance, worker ownership and “participatory socialism” on “The Ezra Klein Show.” His new book is titled, “A Brief History of Equality.”
The talent pool that the U.S. needs to maintain its ‘world leader status’
A group of business leaders is pushing Congress to change an immigration policy that they say is harming the U.S. economy. In a letter sent today to Alejandro Mayorkas, secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, the group, which is made up of about 15 associations and companies including Google, Amazon, IBM, Salesforce and the Chamber of Commerce, said the policy leaves highly skilled immigrants and American companies in a lose-lose situation.
About 200,000 children of highly skilled foreign-born workers, often H-1B visa holders, are affected by the policy. Those young people, known as documented Dreamers, are unlike Dreamers who grow up in the U.S. without legal status. Dreamers have some legal relief from policymakers, but young people raised in the U.S. under a parent’s visa must leave by age 21 if their family’s application for permanent residence is pending.
Fixing the age-out policy is needed if the U.S. wants to “maintain its world leader status,” the letter says. American companies need to fill millions of job openings, but there just aren’t enough workers in the U.S., the letter says, and the job vacancies that need to be filled are “especially critical” to the country’s progress in “innovation and ingenuity.” Karam Bhatia, the global head of policy at Google, told DealBook that documented Dreamers represent a critical new talent pool, like their parents.
The policy also creates obstacles to recruiting. Because of current backlogs, those seeking green cards could end up waiting years, or even decades. Potential recruits, including skilled workers most in demand, don’t want jobs that could lead to their families being separated later on, he said. “Policy needs to be competitive in the immigration space to attract the kind of talent that is going to allow the U.S. to remain at the cutting edge of technological innovation around the world,” he said.
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
    • African payments company MFS Africa acquires a U.S. fintech company, Global Technology Partners. (FT)
    • With the value of tech companies plunging, Tiger Global is down 52 percent this year. (WSJ)
Policy
    • China is offering free Covid vaccine insurance packages to encourage skeptics to get vaccinated. (FT)
    • “In Britain, a New Test of an Old Dream: The 4-Day Workweek” (NYT)
    • Ukrainians look to ‘decolonize’ their streets, removing names that evoke the history of the Russian Empire or the Soviet Union. (NYT)
Best of the rest
    • Tweeting complaints at airlinesmay be less effective than it was last summer. (WSJ)
    • A new book discovery app, Tertulia, is distilling online chatter about books to point readers to those that are driving discussions. (NYT)
    • “Don’t Believe Everything You Read About the Man in This Photo” (NYT)
    • After two years of remote work, being “fashionably late” is falling out of fashion. (NYT)
We’d like your feedback! Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Twitter’s latest headache is in Texas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Eric Gay/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: June 7, 2022


End of Document
Facebook to Pay $14 Million Over Claims of Hiring Bias
The New York Times
October 20, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 944 words
Byline: By David McCabe
Body


The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to ''recruit, consider or hire'' qualified United States workers for more than 2,000 positions.
WASHINGTON -- Facebook agreed on Tuesday to pay up to $14.25 million to settle claims brought by the federal government in the waning days of the Trump administration that the company had discriminated against United States workers. 
  The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to ''recruit, consider or hire'' qualified United States workers for thousands of positions. Instead, prosecutors said, the company gave those jobs to foreign workers who held temporary work visas.
  The agreement with the Justice Department included payments of $4.75 million to the government and as much as $9.5 million to ''eligible victims of Facebook's alleged discrimination,'' according to a news release. The combined settlement is the largest ever collected by the agency's civil rights division for violations of the anti-discrimination provision in the Immigration and Nationality Act. The company also separately settled concerns raised by the Labor Department this year over whether it had violated labor regulations.
  The claims were part of an effort by the Trump administration to push the country's biggest tech companies to hire more United States workers. The administration tightened the requirements to receive a so-called H-1B visa, which are popular with technology companies hiring foreigners, including increasing the salaries companies needed to pay workers as part of the program.
  The government investigated Facebook for two years, looking into whether the company intentionally favored workers with H-1B visas and other temporary immigrants over U.S. workers. Prosecutors ultimately claimed that the company had failed to make more than 2,600 jobs -- with an average salary of $156,000 -- as readily available to Americans and other United States workers as to foreigners.
  ''Facebook is not above the law and must comply with our nation's federal civil rights laws, which prohibit discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices,'' said Kristen Clarke, an assistant attorney general in the Justice Department's civil rights division.
  A Facebook spokesman, Andy Stone, said that the company believed it had met the government standards but that the settlements would allow the company to move forward.
  ''These resolutions will enable us to continue our focus on hiring the best builders from both the U.S. and around the world and supporting our internal community of highly skilled visa holders who are seeking permanent residence,'' he said in a statement.
  Under the agreement with the Justice Department, Facebook will have to better advertise for some jobs and make it easier for United States workers to apply. The separate settlement with the Labor Department requires the company to do more to recruit United States workers and to submit to audits.
  The monetary value of the settlement is negligible for Facebook. It paid a fine of roughly $5 billion in 2019 to resolve accusations by the Federal Trade Commission that it had abused consumer data. In the second quarter of 2021, it generated $29 billion in revenue. The jobs in question amounted to only a fraction of Facebook's roughly 63,000 employees.
  But the agreements the company reached Tuesday with the federal government show how the social media giant is facing battles with Washington regulators on multiple fronts.
  The F.T.C. has accused the company of breaking antitrust laws when it acquired WhatsApp and Instagram, two services the government believes could have become bigger threats to Facebook if they had not been purchased. In recent weeks, lawmakers have called for more rules to protect children who use Facebook products after a former employee of the company claimed it knew that its product harmed teenagers.
  Lawmakers in Washington have long focused on how tech companies use visa programs -- particularly the H-1B system -- to hire engineers from abroad. The companies and their allies have pushed Congress to expand access to the visas, arguing they help companies bring the most talented engineers to the United States. But critics say the companies prefer those engineers to United States workers because they command lower salaries.
  Former President Donald J. Trump's administration put the program under a microscope for years. In 2017, Mr. Trump announced he would revamp the program.
  Three years later the administration temporarily blocked new visas under the H-1B program. It also raised the qualifications needed for foreign workers to access the program, saying they needed a more specialized degree than was previously needed. The administration also said companies would have to pay the workers a higher minimum salary.
  A federal judge ruled against the ban on the visa program in October 2020, forestalling its impact for business groups that had sued over the change, including a major technology trade association. The Biden administration allowed a Trump-era ban on multiple visa programs to expire in March.
  Facebook's founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has adopted immigration reform as a cause. He helped to found a group called FWD.us in 2013 that has pushed for changes to the immigration system. And he personally entered the debate over immigration as Mr. Trump began his crackdown on foreigners entering the United States.
  ''We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here,'' Mr. Zuckerberg said in January 2017.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/19/technology/facebook-foreign-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Facebook's chief, Mark Zuckerberg. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B6)               

Load-Date: October 20, 2021


End of Document
Facebook will pay up to $14 million to settle claims it favored foreign workers.
The New York Times 
October 19, 2021 Tuesday 08:12 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 951 words
Byline: David McCabe
Highlight: The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to “recruit, consider or hire” qualified United States workers for more than 2,000 positions.
Body


The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to “recruit, consider or hire” qualified United States workers for more than 2,000 positions.
WASHINGTON — Facebook agreed on Tuesday to pay up to $14.25 million to settle claims brought by the federal government in the waning days of the Trump administration that the company had discriminated against United States workers.
The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to “recruit, consider or hire” qualified United States workers for thousands of positions. Instead, prosecutors said, the company gave those jobs to foreign workers who held temporary work visas.
The agreement with the Justice Department included payments of $4.75 million to the government and as much as $9.5 million to “eligible victims of Facebook’s alleged discrimination,” according to a news release. The combined settlement is the largest ever collected by the agency’s civil rights division for violations of the anti-discrimination provision in the Immigration and Nationality Act. The company also separately settled concerns raised by the Labor Department this year over whether it had violated labor regulations.
The claims were part of an effort by the Trump administration to push the country’s biggest tech companies to hire more United States workers. The administration tightened the requirements to receive a so-called H-1B visa, which are popular with technology companies hiring foreigners, including increasing the salaries companies needed to pay workers as part of the program.
The government investigated Facebook for two years, looking into whether the company intentionally favored workers with H-1B visas and other temporary immigrants over U.S. workers. Prosecutors ultimately claimed that the company had failed to make more than 2,600 jobs — with an average salary of $156,000 — as readily available to Americans and other United States workers as to foreigners.
“Facebook is not above the law and must comply with our nation’s federal civil rights laws, which prohibit discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices,” said Kristen Clarke, an assistant attorney general in the Justice Department’s civil rights division.
A Facebook spokesman, Andy Stone, said that the company believed it had met the government standards but that the settlements would allow the company to move forward.
“These resolutions will enable us to continue our focus on hiring the best builders from both the U.S. and around the world and supporting our internal community of highly skilled visa holders who are seeking permanent residence,” he said in a statement.
Under the agreement with the Justice Department, Facebook will have to better advertise for some jobs and make it easier for United States workers to apply. The separate settlement with the Labor Department requires the company to do more to recruit United States workers and to submit to audits.
The monetary value of the settlement is negligible for Facebook. It paid a fine of roughly $5 billion in 2019 to resolve accusations by the Federal Trade Commission that it had abused consumer data. In the second quarter of 2021, it generated $29 billion in revenue. The jobs in question amounted to only a fraction of Facebook’s roughly 63,000 employees.
But the agreements the company reached Tuesday with the federal government show how the social media giant is facing battles with Washington regulators on multiple fronts.
The F.T.C. has accused the company of breaking antitrust laws when it acquired WhatsApp and Instagram, two services the government believes could have become bigger threats to Facebook if they had not been purchased. In recent weeks, lawmakers have called for more rules to protect children who use Facebook products after a former employee of the company claimed it knew that its product harmed teenagers.
Lawmakers in Washington have long focused on how tech companies use visa programs — particularly the H-1B system — to hire engineers from abroad. The companies and their allies have pushed Congress to expand access to the visas, arguing they help companies bring the most talented engineers to the United States. But critics say the companies prefer those engineers to United States workers because they command lower salaries.
Former President Donald J. Trump’s administration put the program under a microscope for years. In 2017, Mr. Trump announced he would revamp the program.
Three years later the administration temporarily blocked new visas under the H-1B program. It also raised the qualifications needed for foreign workers to access the program, saying they needed a more specialized degree than was previously needed. The administration also said companies would have to pay the workers a higher minimum salary.
A federal judge ruled against the ban on the visa program in October 2020, forestalling its impact for business groups that had sued over the change, including a major technology trade association. The Biden administration allowed a Trump-era ban on multiple visa programs to expire in March.
Facebook’s founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has adopted immigration reform as a cause. He helped to found a group called FWD.us in 2013 that has pushed for changes to the immigration system. And he personally entered the debate over immigration as Mr. Trump began his crackdown on foreigners entering the United States.
“We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in January 2017.
PHOTO: Facebook’s chief, Mark Zuckerberg. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B6)

Load-Date: October 29, 2021


End of Document
Businesses Brace for Possible Limits on Foreign Worker Visas
The New York Times 
June 19, 2020 Friday 23:35 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1562 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Citing the economic slump, the president is looking at a limit on H-1B, L-1 and other visas as well as a program allowing foreign students to work in the United States after they graduate.
Body


Citing the economic slump, the president is looking at a limit on H-1B, L-1 and other visas as well as a program allowing foreign students to work in the United States after they graduate.
Maya Nasr was admitted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology at 16 to study aerospace engineering. Currently a doctoral student there, she has been working on NASA’s next Mars rover, slated for launch this summer.
“By the time I finish my Ph.D., I will have spent 10 years in the U.S. researching what I am passionate about — getting people to Mars and human space exploration,” said Ms. Nasr, 23, who is Lebanese. “I would really like to stay here and work in this field.”
But recently she has been wracked with worry that the economic downturn that has left millions of Americans unemployed could threaten the visa program that would allow her to work as a foreigner in the United States once she graduates. “If I had to, I would consider Canada, the U.K. or Europe, but the U.S. is the place,” she said.
President Trump is expected to issue an executive order within days to temporarily suspend various work visas that businesses rely on to hire foreigners, and also lay the groundwork for regulatory changes that would limit employment opportunities for foreign graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr.
The details and scope of the plan remain unclear, and it is still a work in progress. But the coming order has elicited an extraordinary response from a diverse coalition that includes universities and sectors spanning manufacturing, technology and consulting, which have been inundating the White House with letters and phone calls.
“What is scaring so many different groups here is that the order is going to impact everyone,” said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations at the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
Mr. Trump on April 22 signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards for applicants outside the country, describing it as protection for unemployed Americans amid the coronavirus pandemic. But he stopped short of suspending visas and programs that allow U.S. employers to hire foreign workers.
Additional limitations on foreign skilled and seasonal workers are now in the works, said several people who have been communicating with the administration in an attempt to narrow the scope of the proposed new limitations. “What is being proposed is significant; we just don’t know how far it will go,” Ms. Dalal-Dheini said.
A key target is expected to be the H-1B visa, often issued to computer programmers and other skilled workers who critics say often displace Americans from such jobs. The order is also expected to temporarily halt other visas, including L-1s, for executives transferred within companies; H-2Bs, for seasonal workers who often work in landscaping and hospitality; and J-1s, issued to au pairs, students on work-study summer programs and others.
The administration is also likely to freeze or downsize a popular program, Optional Practical Training, that enables graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr to work in the country for up to three years if they are in science, technology or mathematics fields. Once in the program, the graduates are often sponsored for H-1Bs by their employers, who eventually may help them get green cards.
In the 2019 fiscal year, almost 139,000 new H-1B petitions were approved; 77,000 L-1 visas were issued, as well as 66,000 H-2Bs, visas for unskilled workers that Mr. Trump has regularly used to staff his resorts. There were about 200,000 new J-1 workers hired in 2018, according to the latest data available. About 225,000 graduates of U.S. universities were authorized to remain in the country to work.
The visa suspensions would likely extend into the next fiscal year, starting Oct. 1, according to people familiar with the planning.
The proposed limits on foreign worker visas, if adopted, would be the latest restriction on immigration imposed by the Trump administration since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
Immigration opponents argue that recipients of “nonimmigrant” visas compete with Americans for jobs, and that the present unemployment level justifies a clampdown.
“The president should insist that certain employers who have found it to be cheaper and more convenient to hire visa workers instead cast down their bucket here first, and get used to hiring U.S. workers again,” said Jessica Vaughan, policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which lobbies to curb immigration. She said she was regularly consulted by White House aides on the matter.
The planned new restrictions could hamper the ability of companies to relocate personnel, affecting both American multinationals that transfer employees from abroad to the United States and foreign firms that send employees to do stints in U.S. cities.
The National Association of Manufacturers, which represents 14,000 small and large companies, sent a letter to the White House on June 1 warning that the planned immigration restrictions would stymie recovery efforts.
“We urge you to avoid immigration actions, either temporary or long term, that would cause uncertainty and impose great costs on our nation at this critical time,” said the letter, signed by the association’s president, Jay Timmons.
Two groups affiliated with the industrialist Charles Koch last week sent a letter to Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, and Jared Kushner, senior adviser to Mr. Trump, urging the administration to “refrain from imposing additional barriers” on visas.
The letter from Americans for Prosperity and the Libre Initiative said research had shown that immigrants were key to an economic rebound.
Thomas J. Donohue, chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also sent a letter to Mr. Trump last week calling on him to reconsider a visa ban.
Several Republican senators have voiced their opposition to elements of the proposed order. But influential members of Mr. Trump’s entourage believe that a pause in visas, coupled with additional regulations, would induce employers to hire Americans and pay them higher wages.
There could be risks in seriously reducing the number of foreign workers. Many businesses have learned during the pandemic that employees can work remotely from almost anywhere. If immigration is further restricted, companies might feel compelled to move jobs abroad, defenders of the visa programs caution, a trend that could undermine the U.S. economy in the long term.
“I have spoken to the administration and they are open-minded about this, but I emphasized that if we go too far on restricting immigration, from C.E.O.s I talked to, there is a risk companies will move jobs outside the country,” said Rich Lesser, chief executive of the Boston Consulting Group, an American global management consultancy.
The additional regulatory changes now under review would affect many other people already in the United States.
Among the changes under consideration are eliminating the H-4 visa, which allows spouses of H-1B visa holders to work; ending the Optional Practical Training program, or shortening the time foreign graduates can work in the United States; and tightening H-1B requirements along with a $20,000 fee per applicant sponsored for the visa.
While some Republican lawmakers have called for rescinding the O.P.T. program, 21 Republican members of Congress this month called for it to remain intact, saying in a letter to the Trump administration that it was a magnet for foreign students — a key source of revenue for many universities, whose numbers have been falling.
The Association of American Universities issued an action alert to presidents and chancellors, urging them to engage the administration on the executive order.
“The message you are sending to international students here, and those considering coming here, is that we don’t value them,” said Benjamin Lane, vice chair of the external affairs board at M.I.T.’s graduate student council. International students represent 45 percent of M.I.T. graduate students.
Fan Chen, a data scientist from China, was hired by a U.S. multinational in Washington after earning a master’s degree at the University of Michigan.
For three consecutive years, the company, which initially had hired her under the O.P.T. program, sponsored her for an H-1B visa. However, she was not selected in the lottery that U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services holds when the number of applications exceeds the allotted annual number of visas.
To keep employing Ms. Fan, the company transferred her last year to its branch in the United Kingdom, where she has continued to work with her U.S.-based team.
Ms. Chen and her manager were ecstatic when she was chosen for a visa in this year’s round. Then news began to circulate about the impending executive order, and it is no longer certain that she will be able to return to the United States in the fall.
The company’s lawyer and human resources personnel have been trying to reassure her. “They are trying to make it sound like this order isn’t likely to happen,” Ms. Chen said. “But they are also saying we might have to think of Plan B.”
PHOTO: Maya Nasr, an M.I.T. student, is working on the next Mars rover. “I would really like to stay here and work in this field,” she said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HANNAH REYES MORALES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
China, Russia, Cardi B: Your Friday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
April 6, 2018 Friday 19:57 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 941 words
Byline: Karen Zraick and Sandra Stevenson
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. Rising tensions between China and the U.S. pummeled stocks, as investors began to take seriously the risk of a trade war between the world’s two largest economies. The latest U.S.            jobs report didn’t help matters — it showed that job growth slowed in March.
Our correspondent in Shanghai says there’s a fundamental question at the heart of the dispute: Which country is more willing to endure short-term pain for the long-term gain of playing a leading role in high-tech industries?
____
2. The White House imposed new sanctions on seven of Russia’s richest oligarchs — and 17 top government officials. It’s the latest effort to punish the inner circle of President Vladimir Putin, above, for interference in the 2016 election and other alleged misdeeds.
And Facebook announced that it would require political advertisers to verify their identities. The rule is meant to prevent foreign interference in domestic politics, like the paid posts by Russian “trolls” ahead of the 2016 election.
____
3. John Kelly, above, President Trump’s chief of staff, urged him last week to fire Scott Pruitt, the E.P.A. leader mired in ethics questions. But Mr. Trump has resisted doing so.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Pruitt’s success in achieving items on the president’s agenda — including rolling back a large number of environmental regulations — may weigh heavily as a counterbalance to allegations that he misused taxpayer dollars.
“He likes the work product,” she said of Mr. Trump.
____
4. “We’re doing it for the kids.”
That was a Salvadoran woman we interviewed in the Texas border city of McAllen, explaining why she had crossed the Rio Grande on an inflatable mattress with her two sons. She said she was fleeing the threat of gang violence. Above, other migrants detained by Border Patrol agents near McAllen.
Some locals questioned President Trump’s plan to deploy the National Guard to the border. They said there was no security crisis, only the daily challenge of meeting the basic needs of migrants who arrive.
____
5. The Trump administration is also cracking down on H-1B visas, which allow skilled workers to enter the U.S. It plans to rescind a program that allowed spouses of those visa holders to work.
That would force thousands of Indian women — many of them highly educated and with sought-after skills — to leave their jobs. (The majority of H1-B visas go to Indian nationals.            Here’s how the visas work.)
“We were happily working and feeling settled down with the life we wanted,” said Deepika Jalakam, above with her parents and daughter. “Suddenly, this announcement came and there is instability.”
____
6. Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s impeached and ousted president, was sentenced to 24 years in prison on charges of bribery, coercion and abuse of power.
The corruption scandal exposed the deep ties between the country’s government and huge businesses like Samsung.
Ms. Park did not appear in court. Her supporters, mostly elderly South Koreans, have insisted on her innocence, and hundreds of them protested outside the courthouse, above.
____
7. Palestinian demonstrators and Israeli soldiers faced off along the Gaza border for the second Friday in a row. The demonstrations were smaller than last week’s, with a lower death toll: The Gaza Health Ministry said at least 10 Palestinians had been killed, and hundreds wounded.
The protests are aimed at Israel’s blockade of Gaza, which began after Hamas seized control in 2007. Our reporters say the demonstrators have already achieved a crucial aim: changing the international conversation to one in which Gaza is portrayed as a prison, with Israel as the jailer.
____
8. Can architecture help protect human rights? A firm called Forensic Architecture, based in London, is using tools of the trade to investigate violence and armed conflict around the world.
A survey of their work is now on view at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London, and our architecture critic says it’s changing the definition of the profession. Above, a rendering of the 2014 Israel-Gaza war.
____
9. Cecil Taylor, the jazz pianist who defied the genre’s orthodoxy and became one of its most original improvisers, has died at 89.
He was a supreme example of an uncompromising artist, arguing — mainly through his work, but in principled and prickly interviews as well — against reductive definitions of what a musician of his training and background could or should do.
“What I am doing,” he once explained, “is creating a language. A different American language.”
____
10. Finally, as the hit show “Fixer Upper” ends, HGTV is looking for some new power couples. Or couples who use power tools, at least. Above, Joanna and Chip Gaines, who became stars on the series.
On the late-night shows, Jimmy Fallon said he didn’t have high hopes for President Trump’s trip to Peru for the Summit of the Americas next week: “When he saw it on his schedule, Trump was like, ‘Wait, there’s more than one America? What is this?’”
On Monday night, Mr. Fallon will have a co-host for the first time: The rapper Cardi B, who just released her first album, “Invasion of Privacy.”
Have a great weekend.
____
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Lucas Jackson/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: January 24, 2020


End of Document
Businesses Brace for Limits on Foreign Worker Visas
The New York Times
June 20, 2020 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 1545 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


Citing the economic slump, the president is looking at a limit on H-1B, L-1 and other visas as well as a program allowing foreign students to work in the United States after they graduate.
Maya Nasr was admitted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology at 16 to study aerospace engineering. Currently a doctoral student there, she has been working on NASA's next Mars rover, slated for launch this summer. 
  ''By the time I finish my Ph.D., I will have spent 10 years in the U.S. researching what I am passionate about -- getting people to Mars and human space exploration,'' said Ms. Nasr, 23, who is Lebanese. ''I would really like to stay here and work in this field.''
  But recently she has been wracked with worry that the economic downturn that has left millions of Americans unemployed could threaten the visa program that would allow her to work as a foreigner in the United States once she graduates. ''If I had to, I would consider Canada, the U.K. or Europe, but the U.S. is the place,'' she said.
  President Trump is expected to issue an executive order within days to temporarily suspend various work visas that businesses rely on to hire foreigners, and also lay the groundwork for regulatory changes that would limit employment opportunities for foreign graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr.
  The details and scope of the plan remain unclear, and it is still a work in progress. But the coming order has elicited an extraordinary response from a diverse coalition that includes universities and sectors spanning manufacturing, technology and consulting, which have been inundating the White House with letters and phone calls.
  ''What is scaring so many different groups here is that the order is going to impact everyone,'' said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations at the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
  Mr. Trump on April 22 signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards for applicants outside the country, describing it as protection for unemployed Americans amid the coronavirus pandemic. But he stopped short of suspending visas and programs that allow U.S. employers to hire foreign workers.
  Additional limitations on foreign skilled and seasonal workers are now in the works, said several people who have been communicating with the administration in an attempt to narrow the scope of the proposed new limitations. ''What is being proposed is significant; we just don't know how far it will go,'' Ms. Dalal-Dheini said.
  A key target is expected to be the H-1B visa, often issued to computer programmers and other skilled workers who critics say often displace Americans from such jobs. The order is also expected to temporarily halt other visas, including L-1s, for executives transferred within companies; H-2Bs, for seasonal workers who often work in landscaping and hospitality; and J-1s, issued to au pairs, students on work-study summer programs and others.
  The administration is also likely to freeze or downsize a popular program, Optional Practical Training, that enables graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr to work in the country for up to three years if they are in science, technology or mathematics fields. Once in the program, the graduates are often sponsored for H-1Bs by their employers, who eventually may help them get green cards.
  In the 2019 fiscal year, almost 139,000 new H-1B petitions were approved; 77,000 L-1 visas were issued, as well as 66,000 H-2Bs, visas for unskilled workers that Mr. Trump has regularly used to staff his resorts. There were about 200,000 new J-1 workers hired in 2018, according to the latest data available. About 225,000 graduates of U.S. universities were authorized to remain in the country to work.
  The visa suspensions would likely extend into the next fiscal year, starting Oct. 1, according to people familiar with the planning.
  The proposed limits on foreign worker visas, if adopted, would be the latest restriction on immigration imposed by the Trump administration since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
  Immigration opponents argue that recipients of ''nonimmigrant'' visas compete with Americans for jobs, and that the present unemployment level justifies a clampdown.
  ''The president should insist that certain employers who have found it to be cheaper and more convenient to hire visa workers instead cast down their bucket here first, and get used to hiring U.S. workers again,'' said Jessica Vaughan, policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which lobbies to curb immigration. She said she was regularly consulted by White House aides on the matter.
  The planned new restrictions could hamper the ability of companies to relocate personnel, affecting both American multinationals that transfer employees from abroad to the United States and foreign firms that send employees to do stints in U.S. cities.
  The National Association of Manufacturers, which represents 14,000 small and large companies, sent a letter to the White House on June 1 warning that the planned immigration restrictions would stymie recovery efforts.
  ''We urge you to avoid immigration actions, either temporary or long term, that would cause uncertainty and impose great costs on our nation at this critical time,'' said the letter, signed by the association's president, Jay Timmons.
  Two groups affiliated with the industrialist Charles Koch last week sent a letter to Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, and Jared Kushner, senior adviser to Mr. Trump, urging the administration to ''refrain from imposing additional barriers'' on visas.
  The letter from Americans for Prosperity and the Libre Initiative said research had shown that immigrants were key to an economic rebound.
  Thomas J. Donohue, chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also sent a letter to Mr. Trump last week calling on him to reconsider a visa ban.
  Several Republican senators have voiced their opposition to elements of the proposed order. But influential members of Mr. Trump's entourage believe that a pause in visas, coupled with additional regulations, would induce employers to hire Americans and pay them higher wages.
  There could be risks in seriously reducing the number of foreign workers. Many businesses have learned during the pandemic that employees can work remotely from almost anywhere. If immigration is further restricted, companies might feel compelled to move jobs abroad, defenders of the visa programs caution, a trend that could undermine the U.S. economy in the long term.
  ''I have spoken to the administration and they are open-minded about this, but I emphasized that if we go too far on restricting immigration, from C.E.O.s I talked to, there is a risk companies will move jobs outside the country,'' said Rich Lesser, chief executive of the Boston Consulting Group, an American global management consultancy.
  The additional regulatory changes now under review would affect many other people already in the United States.
  Among the changes under consideration are eliminating the H-4 visa, which allows spouses of H-1B visa holders to work; ending the Optional Practical Training program, or shortening the time foreign graduates can work in the United States; and tightening H-1B requirements along with a $20,000 fee per applicant sponsored for the visa.
  While some Republican lawmakers have called for rescinding the O.P.T. program, 21 Republican members of Congress this month called for it to remain intact, saying in a letter to the Trump administration that it was a magnet for foreign students -- a key source of revenue for many universities, whose numbers have been falling.
  The Association of American Universities issued an action alert to presidents and chancellors, urging them to engage the administration on the executive order.
  ''The message you are sending to international students here, and those considering coming here, is that we don't value them,'' said Benjamin Lane, vice chair of the external affairs board at M.I.T.'s graduate student council. International students represent 45 percent of M.I.T. graduate students.
  Fan Chen, a data scientist from China, was hired by a U.S. multinational in Washington after earning a master's degree at the University of Michigan.
  For three consecutive years, the company, which initially had hired her under the O.P.T. program, sponsored her for an H-1B visa. However, she was not selected in the lottery that U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services holds when the number of applications exceeds the allotted annual number of visas.
  To keep employing Ms. Fan, the company transferred her last year to its branch in the United Kingdom, where she has continued to work with her U.S.-based team.
  Ms. Chen and her manager were ecstatic when she was chosen for a visa in this year's round. Then news began to circulate about the impending executive order, and it is no longer certain that she will be able to return to the United States in the fall.
  The company's lawyer and human resources personnel have been trying to reassure her. ''They are trying to make it sound like this order isn't likely to happen,'' Ms. Chen said. ''But they are also saying we might have to think of Plan B.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/19/us/foreign-worker-visas-trump-coronavirus.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Maya Nasr, an M.I.T. student, is working on the next Mars rover. ''I would really like to stay here and work in this field,'' she said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HANNAH REYES MORALES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: June 21, 2020


End of Document
Amid ‘Trump Effect’ Fear, 40% of Colleges See Dip in Foreign Applicants
The New York Times 
March 16, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1234 words
Byline: STEPHANIE SAUL
Highlight: College officials wondered if there would be a price to pay for the president’s travel ban and the anti-Muslim rhetoric. Now the first numbers are in.
Body


The president of Portland State University, Wim Wiewel, met last week with 10 prospective students in Hyderabad, India. But what started as a get-acquainted visit quickly turned into more of a counseling session, as the students expressed fears about coming to the United States this fall.
One student, who is Muslim, said his father was worried that America had an anti-Muslim attitude, Mr. Wiewel recounted. “Several others said they were concerned about the ‘Trump effect,’” he said in an email.
“I’d say the rhetoric and actual executive orders are definitely having a chilling effect,” Mr. Wiewel wrote, referring to the Trump administration’s travel ban.
Like many universities across the country, the Oregon university is getting fewer international applications.
Nearly 40 percent of colleges are reporting overall declines in applications from international students, according to a survey of 250 college and universities, released this week by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers. The biggest decline is in applications from the Middle East.
Many officials cited worries among prospective students about Trump administration immigration policies. “International student recruitment professionals report a great deal of concern from students all over the globe,” the study said.
On Wednesday, the federal judge in Hawaii who blockedthe latest version of the administration’s travel ban cited the financial harm the executive order posed to the state’s university system, which recruits students and hires faculty members from the six target countries. (Washington State officials raised similar concerns in successfully            challengingthe first travel ban.)
Graduate schools appear to be feeling the worst pinch, with nearly half reporting drops. “Our deans describe it as a chilling effect,” said Suzanne Ortega, president of the Council of Graduate Schools.
The numbers — while not yet final — are provoking anxiety in some programs that rely on international students, who bring more than $32 billion a year into the United States economy. International enrollment at American colleges has been on the rise over the past decade, and for the first time exceeded one million students last year.
Still, despite the steady increase, the movement of students from one country to another is sensitive to fluctuations tied to political and economic forces. So some officials cautioned that a “Trump effect’ is just one possible explanation for this year’s application figures. Beyond that, many schools, including New York University, the University of Southern California and Northeastern University, reported that their international numbers are up. Purdue University reported a 1.2 percent decline in graduate school applications.
Mr. Wiewel made his trip to Hyderabad not long after residents of the city held funeral services for a young Indian man who was killed in a bar in Olathe, Kan., where he worked as an engineer. The shooting is being investigated as a hate crime.
Mr. Wiewel reassured the students — all admitted to Portland State’s graduate engineering program — that his university’s environment was safe and welcoming. He was a bit surprised by their concerns, he said, because students he visited earlier in New Delhi and Bangalore had been more anxious about financing their graduate studies, apparently a reaction to India’s recent currency shortage. Other economic factors may also be involved in the application declines, Ms. Ortega said, including crude oil prices in Saudi Arabia.
Also at play: uncertainty about the future of a visa program called H-           1           B that international graduates frequently rely on to remain in the United States to work.
For several graduate schools, the Trump administration’s travel ban, which initially affected seven predominantly Muslim countries, could not have been more poorly timed. It was announced in late January as deadlines loomed for applications to some graduate programs, and it came on the heels of Mr. Trump’s virulently anti-immigrant rhetoric during the campaign.
Slumping graduate school applications can now be seen at universities ranging from giant Big Ten public universities like Ohio State and Indiana University to regional programs such as Portland State, with just over 27,000 students, including more than 1,900 international students.
At Indiana University, international applications for undergraduate programs increased 6 percent, but graduate applications for some programs are posting big drops, said David Zaret, vice president for international affairs.
Mr. Zaret said international applications to the masters program in business were down 20 percent, and down 30 percent in both the master of law program and at the School of Informatics and Computing. The university will not have problems filling the programs, but the drop might affect the overall quality of the applicant pool, he said.
Ohio State has also seen an increase in international undergraduate applications but a significant overall drop — 8.4 percent — in international applicants to its graduate programs, a university spokesman, Chris Davey, said. The biggest decline was among students from China — a fact Mr. Davey said did not support the “Trump effect” theory. In 2016, he said, there were 2,412 graduate applications from China; this year the number was down to 1,952.
“We’re inclined to say that the overarching factors that might be influencing this are probably global economic factors and it would be premature to conclude that it’s the travel ban,” Mr. Davey said. “But it certainly could be.”
Because application deadlines at several larger colleges had passed before Mr. Trump’s travel ban was announced, some universities are more worried about the “yield” — the number of students offered admission who end up enrolling, said Frances Leslie, vice provost for the graduate division at the University of California, Irvine.
Applications at Irvine are not down, but students have expressed concerned about coming to the United States, Ms. Leslie said. “We’re hearing from students, even beyond the seven countries, expressing concern,” Ms. Leslie said, referring to Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, which were singled out in the first travel ban. “This year, even when students are admitted, they may not be willing to accept the offers.”
The university will not have those numbers until April 15, a national deadline for students to make a decision.
At Portland State, where undergraduate international applications are up 4 percent but international graduate applications are down 15 percent, the vice provost for international affairs, Margaret Everett, said she had heard recently from a Chinese student who canceled his application, citing the political climate.
“Obviously we’re concerned about the climate and the rhetoric and the administration policies and travel ban,” Ms. Everett said.
PHOTOS: John Gorgan chatted this week with a fellow student, Fatima Alkharaz, a Libyan, on the campus of Portland State University in Oregon.; Graduate engineering students from India at Portland State. The college has worked to reassure foreign students. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LEAH NASH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • ‘Is It Safe?’ Foreign Students Consider College in Donald Trump’s U.S.
    • After Visa Ban, Hints of Hidden Tension on Mississippi Campus
    • 2 Federal Judges Rule Against Trump’s Latest Travel Ban

Load-Date: March 18, 2017


End of Document
Companies Criticize Visa Suspensions, but Impact May Be Muted for Now
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 10:57 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; economy
Length: 800 words
Byline: Gillian Friedman
Highlight: President Trump’s executive order came at a time when hiring has slowed, and many U.S. consulates are not conducting interviews for temporary green cards.
Body


President Trump’s executive order came at a time when hiring has slowed, and many U.S. consulates are not conducting interviews for temporary green cards.
While the American business community reacted swiftly — and negatively — to President Trump’s executive order suspending new visas for foreign workers, immigration experts said that because of the coronavirus pandemic it would take some time before workers felt the impact.
The order, announced on Monday, suspends at least through the end of the year H-1B visas for skilled workers, H-2B visas for low-skill jobs, H-4 visas for dependents of certain visa holders, J visas for those participating in work and student exchanges and L visas for transfers within a company.
However, United States consulates are not currently conducting interviews for most green cards or temporary workers because of Covid-19, said Julia Gelatt, senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute.
“The immediate impact of the suspension is mostly symbolic until those consular officers reopen,” she said. “Then it will have a real impact on who is able to immigrate into the United States.”
In signing the order on Monday, Mr. Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during an economic downturn.
But businesses leaders rejected that rationale, with companies like Google, Twitter, Facebook and Amazon all releasing critical statements saying that the order would hurt them and the American economy as a whole.
“We’ve heard from manufacturers, technology companies, accounting firms, pharmaceutical companies, cosmetics companies, among many others, about how these visa restrictions will harm their businesses, and the negative impacts will be felt by not only these companies, but also the American workers employed by them,” said Jon Baselice, the executive director of immigration policy for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
The H-1B visa program is available only to foreign workers who have a bachelor’s degree or higher, and is often used to fill positions in the tech sector, though the visas are also used to hire teachers, architects, engineers, doctors, lawyers and other skilled workers.
The Trump administration’s suspension of H-1B visas is intended to push companies to look harder for Americans to fill those roles.
“They may have to raise wages, they may have to recruit in ways and in places that they don’t currently,” said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a think tank in Washington that supports immigration limits.
But Jennifer Minear, the president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association, said that companies often used H-1B visas because they could not find qualified American workers for specific roles.
“We already have a shortage of STEM workers in the United States, they’re not just going to suddenly become qualified to do these jobs, just because they lost their job doing something else,” Ms. Minear said.
American companies have become more comfortable with remote work over the past few months, and they may choose to respond to the visa suspension by hiring the same worker but having them work remotely in another country, said Joseph Vavra, associate professor of economics at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
“From the perspective of the domestic worker who is displaced, that looks exactly the same, except now you’re not bringing in tax revenue and you’re not bringing in local demand or any of the other positive benefits you get from having that worker physically in the United States,” Mr. Vavra said.
The suspension of L-1 visas, which allow for transfers within companies and also allow companies to send an employee to the United States to establish a company office, could also have significant implications for the U.S. economy.
“This may discourage companies from opening U.S. offices if they aren’t able to get the visas to bring their employees from abroad to the United States,” Ms. Gelatt said.
Low-wage jobs in fields like landscaping, forestry, seasonal construction and seasonal hospitality have been filled by workers on H-2B visas. The economic crisis caused by the virus could change that, Ms. Gelatt said, and there may be more Americans facing the prospect of long-term unemployment who are willing to take those jobs.
Au pairs will also be subject to the ban, as well as interns, trainees, teachers, camp counselors and anyone participating in summer work travel, who would have normally been able to apply for J visas. Though with summer activities paused throughout the country, there may be less demand for workers to fill those roles.
PHOTO: President Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during a downturn when suspending new visas for foreign workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pete Marovich for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Study Questions Guest Visa Issue
The New York Times
July 29, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4; BITS
Length: 1061 words
Byline: By QUENTIN HARDY and SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Although certain kinds of engineers are in short supply in the United States, plenty of potential candidates exist for thousands of positions for which companies want to import guest workers, according to an analysis of three million résumés of job seekers in the United States.
The numbers, prepared by a company called Bright, which collects résumés and uses big data tools to connect job seekers with openings, enter a contentious debate over whether tech companies should be allowed to expand their rolls of guest workers. In lobbying Congress for more of these temporary visas, called H-1B visas, the technology industry argues there are not enough qualified Americans. Its critics, including labor groups, say bringing in guest workers is a way to depress wages in the industry.
Many economists take issue with the industry's argument, too. One side points out that wages have not gone up across the board for engineers, suggesting that there is no stark labor shortage. Another counters that unemployment rates in the sector are minuscule and that in any event, H-1B workers represent a tiny fraction of the American work force.
''I didn't expect this result,'' said Steve Goodman, Bright's chief executive.
Bright is based in San Francisco, and it makes money in part by placing qualified candidates with recruiters and, according to Mr. Goodman, employs workers using H-1B visas. ''We're Silicon Valley people, we just assumed the shortage was true,'' Mr. Goodman said. ''It turns out there is a little Silicon Valley groupthink going on about this, though it's not comfortable to say that.''
For a few job categories, like computer systems analysts, there are relatively few ''good fits'' among American applicants, Bright found. Computer systems analyst jobs, considered relatively low-skilled in the tech world, had four openings for every American candidate. For others, like high-skilled computer programmers, there were more than enough potential candidates in the United States, the company found.
Bright's study is unlikely to end the debate, partly because it rests on the company's proprietary algorithm to determine who is a ''good fit'' for a particular job opening. Its algorithm uses a range of criteria, including work experience and education, but also work descriptions that indicated a high likelihood of other skills. Its analysis also doesn't specify how many job openings there are at a particular point in time, or whether they are sufficient to accommodate both American engineers and foreign guest workers.
Lawrence Katz, an economist at Harvard, said that while the tech industry's claims of a labor shortage may be overblown, the argument over expanding temporary work visas should not be made on the basis of whether there are shortages at one point in time. He said the data from Bright were useful in showing that there was most likely not ''a huge mismatch'' in the demand and supply of computer professionals, except perhaps in certain job categories like computer systems analysts.
''But they don't help us determine whether the U.S. economy would benefit from an expansion of the H1-B visa program or what the impact would be on U.S. workers in these occupations,'' he said. ''The case for and against expanding the H1-B visa program should be done on an overall assessment of the impact on the U.S. economy (workers, consumers, investors, students/future workers) and not only on whether there are short-run 'shortages' in any specific occupation.''
For the study, Bright looked at the job categories for which firms applied for H-1B visas, and then, looked at résumés of job seekers in the United States whose résumés matched those same categories.
Giovanni Peri, an economist at University of California, Davis, said that the Bright study was insufficient to determine whether there was a need for foreign engineers. ''It is the difference between job vacancies (demand) and unemployed with right qualifications (supply) that provides a measure of the excess (or not) of demand,'' he said. ''Knowing only the number of unemployed with right qualifications does not do it.''
''There are many more job openings'' where companies do not file for H-1Bs, but search for candidates on the domestic job market, he added.
The Senate immigration bill, passed last month, nearly doubles the number of H-1B visas that companies can seek every year. Industry lobbied heavily for it, bulldozing efforts to add language that would force companies to try to hire an equally qualified American first. The House is mired in arguments over what kind of immigration legislation it can pass. Technology industry groups are lobbying members of the House for a substantial increase in H-1Bs, among other things.
Outsourcing companies, mostly from India, have lately sought the largest chunks of H-1B visas. Companies like Tata Consultancy Services and Wipro bring thousands of temporary workers, mostly from India, and place them for short-term projects in a variety of American industries, from banks to technology firms like Microsoft and Oracle. H-1B visas are also used by graduates of American universities who are hired by companies in the United States.
Bright's analysis suggests a hierarchy in the industry that mirrors what has long been said about jobs like low-skilled agricultural or restaurant work: Americans could do these jobs, but are unlikely to accept the pay or conditions. As a result, the jobs are taken by immigrants.
The age of workers, which the study did not look at, may also play a role. Experienced American workers tend to be older in an industry that prizes youth. A study conducted by a Seattle-based company called Payscale found that among 32 technology companies surveyed, only six had a work force with a median age over 35. At Monster, the job search portal, the median age was 30; at Google, 29; and at Facebook, 28. The median age of American workers over all is 42.3 years old, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
As if to underline the study's findings, Mr. Goodman spoke from a conference room that looked out on decorated ping-pong tables, a liquor bar and tiki-themed snacks. Later that day, Bright was having a party, partly to attract new talent, he said, including foreign programmers here on H-1B visas.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/23/big-data-analysis-adds-to-guest-worker-debate/

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Lawrence F. Katz, an economist at Harvard, said the argument over temporary work visas should include a broader focus. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVAN MCGLINN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)            

Load-Date: July 29, 2013


End of Document
Broader Effects Of Visa Limits May Be Muted, For the Moment
The New York Times
June 24, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 774 words
Byline: By Gillian Friedman
Body


President Trump's executive order came at a time when hiring has slowed, and many U.S. consulates are not conducting interviews for temporary green cards.
While the American business community reacted swiftly -- and negatively -- to President Trump's executive order suspending new visas for foreign workers, immigration experts said that because of the coronavirus pandemic it would take some time before workers felt the impact. 
  The order, announced on Monday, suspends at least through the end of the year H-1B visas for skilled workers, H-2B visas for low-skill jobs, H-4 visas for dependents of certain visa holders, J visas for those participating in work and student exchanges and L visas for transfers within a company.
  However, United States consulates are not currently conducting interviews for most green cards or temporary workers because of Covid-19, said Julia Gelatt, senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute.
  ''The immediate impact of the suspension is mostly symbolic until those consular officers reopen,'' she said. ''Then it will have a real impact on who is able to immigrate into the United States.''
  In signing the order on Monday, Mr. Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during an economic downturn.
  But businesses leaders rejected that rationale, with companies like Google, Twitter, Facebook and Amazon all releasing critical statements saying that the order would hurt them and the American economy as a whole.
  ''We've heard from manufacturers, technology companies, accounting firms, pharmaceutical companies, cosmetics companies, among many others, about how these visa restrictions will harm their businesses, and the negative impacts will be felt by not only these companies, but also the American workers employed by them,'' said Jon Baselice, the executive director of immigration policy for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
  The H-1B visa program is available only to foreign workers who have a bachelor's degree or higher, and is often used to fill positions in the tech sector, though the visas are also used to hire teachers, architects, engineers, doctors, lawyers and other skilled workers.
  The Trump administration's suspension of H-1B visas is intended to push companies to look harder for Americans to fill those roles.
  ''They may have to raise wages, they may have to recruit in ways and in places that they don't currently,'' said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a think tank in Washington that supports immigration limits.
  But Jennifer Minear, the president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association, said that companies often used H-1B visas because they could not find qualified American workers for specific roles.
  ''We already have a shortage of STEM workers in the United States, they're not just going to suddenly become qualified to do these jobs, just because they lost their job doing something else,'' Ms. Minear said.
  American companies have become more comfortable with remote work over the past few months, and they may choose to respond to the visa suspension by hiring the same worker but having them work remotely in another country, said Joseph Vavra, associate professor of economics at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
  ''From the perspective of the domestic worker who is displaced, that looks exactly the same, except now you're not bringing in tax revenue and you're not bringing in local demand or any of the other positive benefits you get from having that worker physically in the United States,'' Mr. Vavra said.
  The suspension of L-1 visas, which allow for transfers within companies and also allow companies to send an employee to the United States to establish a company office, could also have significant implications for the U.S. economy.
  ''This may discourage companies from opening U.S. offices if they aren't able to get the visas to bring their employees from abroad to the United States,'' Ms. Gelatt said.
  Low-wage jobs in fields like landscaping, forestry, seasonal construction and seasonal hospitality have been filled by workers on H-2B visas. The economic crisis caused by the virus could change that, Ms. Gelatt said, and there may be more Americans facing the prospect of long-term unemployment who are willing to take those jobs.
  Au pairs will also be subject to the ban, as well as interns, trainees, teachers, camp counselors and anyone participating in summer work travel, who would have normally been able to apply for J visas. Though with summer activities paused throughout the country, there may be less demand for workers to fill those roles.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/23/business/economy/visa-suspensions-companies-react.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: President Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during a downturn when suspending new visas for foreign workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pete Marovich for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: June 24, 2020


End of Document
Australian Rules Would Make So-Called 457 Visa Harder for Migrants
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; australia
Length: 566 words
Byline: JACQUELINE WILLIAMS
Highlight: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said he was “putting Australians first” by replacing a special category of visas that allows certain temporary foreign workers into the country.
Body


SYDNEY, Australia — Saying he was “putting Australians first,” Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull announced plans on Tuesday to replace a special visa category that allows some temporary foreign workers to enter Australia.
The rules would make it harder for skilled migrants to work in the country. Mr. Turnbull said that the special category, the so-called 457 visa, would be abolished in favor of two new temporary visas requiring more work experience and, in some cases, greater English skills. Current holders of the visa, who number about 95,000, would not be affected.
“We will no longer allow 457 visas to be passports to jobs that could and should go to Australians,” Mr. Turnbull said. “We’re putting jobs first, and we’re putting Australians first.”
The prime minister said the changes would attract better-skilled workers and encourage the hiring of Australians instead of cheaper foreign labor.
The government’s action mirrors another effort in the United States, where President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that could limit the number of H1-B visas, under which the government admits 85,000 immigrants each year. During his campaign, Mr. Trump pledged to end the H-1B visa program, which he said was allowing companies to fire Americans and replace them with lower-cost foreign employees.
Joanna Howe, an associate professor of law at the University of Adelaide, said that Australia was hewing to a similar argument.
“That rhetoric is very consistent with the rhetoric from Donald Trump around protecting American jobs and also from Theresa May’s government in the United Kingdom post-‘Brexit,’ ensuring that U.K. workers get first access to jobs,” she said.
The 457 visa in Australia was expected to bolster the country’s economy by enlisting foreign workers to fill skill shortages. “The scheme has blown out significantly from its original numbers,” Dr. Howe said. “It’s being used in occupations where Australian graduates are struggling to find work — occupations like accounting and teaching and nursing. There have been concerns around exploitation of the 457 visa holders but also around whether Australian workers are getting first access to jobs.”
Far-right parties like One Nation and left-leaning labor unions have expressed concerns about the number of temporary migrant workers in Australia. But Dean McEvoy, chief executive of the technology industry group TechSydney, said he was worried about the abolition of the program.
“Any plans to cut back on the tech industry’s ability to bring in expertise from overseas before more Australians have been adequately trained in I.T. will only harm the industry and the future of jobs in this country,” Mr. McEvoy said.
Workers in about 650 occupations can qualify under the 457 program in Australia. That will be reduced to no more than 435 under the new system.
The new visas will be available in two-year and four-year versions, with the longer one being targeted to higher-skilled positions and requiring greater English proficiency.
“Australia is the most successful multicultural nation in the world — we are an immigrant nation,” Mr. Turnbull said. “But the fact remains, Australian workers must have priority for Australian jobs.”
Related Articles
    • Planned Trump Order Will Discourage Hiring of Low-Wage Foreign Workers
    • As New Zealand Courts Tech Talent, Isolation Becomes a Draw
    • For Millionaire Immigrants, a Global Welcome Mat

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
They Lost Their Jobs. Now They May Have to Leave the U.S.
The New York Times 
May 15, 2020 Friday 16:26 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1384 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The Trump administration is unlikely to allow laid-off holders of H-1B and other work visas to extend their stay in the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Body


The Trump administration is unlikely to allow laid-off holders of H-1B and other work visas to extend their stay in the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Like millions of American workers, an Indian software engineer, a British market researcher and an Iranian architect lost their jobs amid the coronavirus pandemic. Unlike Americans, they are not entitled to unemployment benefits, despite paying taxes, because they are on foreign work visas. And, if they fail to find similar jobs soon, they must leave the country.
Rejish Ravindran analyzed data for a national footwear retailer, helping make sales projections and investment decisions. After hiring him on an H-1B skilled-worker visa nearly two years ago, the company recently sponsored his application for legal permanent residency, a process that takes several years to complete.
“It was going good. I thought I would be in Michigan forever. We were going to buy a house and settle down here,” said Mr. Ravindran, 35, who lives in Grand Rapids, Mich. His wife, Amrutha, a nurse, was finishing a course and hoped to put her training to use soon.
But battered by the coronavirus outbreak, the retailer furloughed Mr. Ravindran last month, which is not allowed under the terms of his visa. So two days later, the company terminated him.
“Everything came crashing down,” said Mr. Ravindran, who arrived in the United States in 2012.
Now, he is scrambling to find another job before the 60-day grace period for transferring his visa to another employer expires early next month. He is not optimistic.
The lives of tens of thousands of foreign workers on skilled-worker visas, such as H-1Bs, have been upended by the economic fallout from the Covid-19 crisis. Many have been waiting in a backlog for several years to obtain permanent legal residency through their employer, and now face the prospect of deportation.
The Trump administration is also expected within the next few weeks to halt the issuance of new work visas such as the H-1B, for high skilled foreigners, and the H-2B, for seasonal employment. The new measures under review, according to two current and two former government immigration officials, would also eliminate a program that enables foreign graduates of American universities to remain in the country and work.
The tightening work rules come as unemployment in the U.S. soared last month to 14.7 percent, the highest level on record, and as calls escalated in Congress for Americans to be given priority for jobs.
“Given the extreme lack of available jobs for American job-seekers as portions of our economy begin to reopen, it defies common sense to admit additional foreign guest workers to compete for such limited employment,” a group of Republican senators said in a letter last week calling for a suspension of new visas to guest workers who have not yet entered the country.
For those already rooted in the U.S., the consequences of canceling the existing visas are “life-altering,” said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations for the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
“They have been thrown into limbo. It’s not like they can go and just find any job, like at a pizza place,” Ms. Dalal-Dheini said. A new job must meet specific criteria for the visa, such as by paying a certain salary and requiring at least a bachelor’s degree.
Ms. Dalal-Dheini’s association of 15,000 lawyers has asked United States Citizenship and Immigration Services to extend the grace period, giving H-1B holders at least 90 days after the public health emergency has ended to find employment.
An agency spokesman did not address whether an extension was under consideration. He said the agency would continue to monitor the coronavirus and “assess various options related to temporary worker programs.”
Since taking office, President Trump has thrust immigration and job displacement onto center stage, introducing a series of policies to curtail both legal and illegal immigration. More recently, his administration has cited the pandemic to justify even stricter restrictions.
On April 22, Mr. Trump suspended the entry of new immigrants for 60 days. Less noticed in his proclamation was the order to the secretaries of labor and homeland security for a speedy review of nonimmigrant work visa programs.
There are about 500,000 people on H-1B visas in the United States, according to estimates by Daniel Costa, a researcher at the Economic Policy Institute. More than 70 percent of them are Indians, and many of them technology workers. About 220,000 people were enrolled in the 2018-19 academic year in the Optional Practical Training program, which allows foreign students to work after completing their studies.
The strong economy had fueled brisk demand for foreign workers in recent years, with H-1B applications by private companies far outstripping the annual supply of 85,000, a situation that prompted the government to resort to a lottery to award them.
But proponents of limiting immigration say that if there was ever a time to prioritize American workers, it is now.
“If an H-1B visa holder is terminated from their job and is unable to find another employer willing to sponsor them, they should go back home,” said Kevin Lynn, executive director of Progressives for Immigration Reform, which advocates for American technology workers.
American citizens with foreign partners on visas are also affected.
Andrew Jenkins and Krista York of Minnesota began more than a year ago to plan their wedding. The couple had settled on getting married Aug. 22 at the majestic Cathedral of St. Paul, where Ms. York’s grandparents were married decades ago and she was confirmed in the church as a teenager. Then the coronavirus struck.
Ms. York was furloughed. Mr. Jenkins, who is British, lost his job as a market research analyst. Because he is on an H-1B visa, Mr. Jenkins is not eligible for unemployment. “It’s far from ideal to not have any income when you’re planning your wedding,” said Mr. Jenkins, 27.
What’s worse, the couple said, is that Mr. Jenkins is in a race against time to find him another job before his visa expires in July.
Unless he succeeds, they may have to hurriedly get married at a courthouse so that Mr. Jenkins can salvage his immigrant status — by filing an application for a green card through a spouse. If that happens, the couple will not be allowed to hold a religious ceremony at the cathedral.
“Everything is ready to go for the cathedral. But if we have to get married on paper, we’ll have to find another church,” said Ms. York, 27.
Bahar Shirkhanloo of Iran completed a master’s degree in architecture two years ago and used the Optional Practical Training program to get a job at a firm in Chicago, where she is part of a team that designs high-rise residential buildings.
Early this year, the firm decided to sponsor her for a green card. But she was abruptly terminated in early April when projects came to a standstill, leaving her with 60 days, under the terms of the program, to find a new job.
“I’m applying every day, everywhere in the U.S. you can think of,” said Ms. Shirkhanloo, 28. Most often, she hears the same thing: “They are interested, but, for now, there’s a hiring freeze.”
In Michigan, Mr. Ravindran is contemplating selling his 2013 Honda Accord to make the rent and pay outstanding bills, including $6,000 for a hospital visit by his wife last year.
The son of a tea stall owner and the first to attend college in his family, the software engineer said that if he ends up having to return to India, “I want to clear all my debts. I need to make a smooth exit from the U.S.”
But there is a wrinkle: Commercial flights to India have been suspended since that country went into lockdown in March. While the government recently started repatriating some Indians stranded abroad, it has stipulated that pregnant women, older people and those with medical conditions will have priority.
That could put someone like Mr. Ravindran at risk of overstaying his visa, which could jeopardize his ability to live in the United States in the future.
“If I don’t find a new job, I can’t stay here,” he said.
PHOTO: Andrew Jenkins, who is British, and Krista York had planned to marry at the Cathedral of St. Paul in Minnesota. Now both are out of work. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Narendra Modi, Eid al-Fitr, China: Your Morning Briefing; Asia and Australia Edition
The New York Times 
June 25, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1132 words
Byline: CHARLES McDERMID
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


Good morning. 
Here’s what you need to know:
 Scores of people remain missing after an avalanche of mud and rocks buried a village in southwest China.
Some 2,000 rescuers, working cautiously to avoid setting off more slides, have recovered few bodies, and at least 93 people were still missing. The region has long been rife with landslides and other geological hazards, and officials may be questioned about whether more could have been done to protect or move residents.
President Xi Jinping warned other areas to be on guard for signs of danger during the rainy season.
_____
 Pakistan is also grappling with a disaster, the explosion of an overturned oil tanker that killed at least 140 people and seriously injured more than 50 others.
The victims had been collecting the fuel spilling from the tanker for about 45 minutes when something — a spark or tossed cigarette — set it off. “We kept on telling people to leave the crash site,” a police official said, “but people wouldn’t listen and more kept coming.”
And in London, regulatory failures appear to have allowed the use of flammable cladding that channeled the lethal blaze at Grenfell Tower last week, which killed at least 79 people.
_____
 Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India visits the White House for his first meeting with President Trump. One likely topic: Mr. Trump’s plan to change the H1-B visa program, which has left thousands of            skilled foreign workers in limbo, most of them Indian.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, partly hampered by priorities that differ from those of Mr. Trump, still has no one lined up to cover Asia policy and has been stymied on North Korea and the Middle East.
Washington will spend the week gripped in debate over a Republican health care bill.
Above, Mr. Modi with Prime Minister Antonio Costa of Portugal on Saturday in Lisbon.
_____
 Millions of Chinese citizens are joining faith organizations, aiming to fill what they see as a moral vacuum.
But the groups operate carefully, to avoid antagonizing the authorities.
The calculations were clear in our interview with Master Hsing Yun,the founder of a group from Taiwan, Fo Guang Shan, or Buddha’s Light Mountain. “Buddhists don’t get involved in politics,” he said.
_____
 June Pride festivities were held across the world over the weekend. In our latest daily 360 video, join the L.G.B.T.Q. celebrations in cities like Dublin, Shanghai and Kiev, Ukraine.
And two years ago today, the U.S. Supreme Court made same-sex marriage a nationwide right. We asked gay couples what the ruling meant to them.
Business
 An impending trade deal between the European Union and Japan encompasses a quarter of the world’s economy, affirms commitments to the Paris climate accord, and offers a potent symbol of free trade as the U.S. pursues a protectionist policy.
 Takata, the scarred airbag maker, filed for bankruptcy.
 Introducing the I.C.O.: Start-ups are trying a new way to raise funds, making “initial coin offerings” of their own digital currencies that sidestep the hassles of regulators and investor protections.
  Premier Li Keqiang will speak at the opening of the Summer Davos Forum in the northeast Chinese city of Dalian on Tuesday.
 Here’s a snapshot of global markets.
In the News
 The U.S.S. Fitzgerald mystery: Investigators are trying to unravel the lethal collision with a cargo ship off the coast of Japan that many veteran seamen describe as incomprehensible. [The New York Times]
 Mongolians vote today in a neck-and-neck race for a new president. [Nikkei Asian Review]
 The Grand Mufti of Australia and other prominent Muslims in the country spoke out on Eid al-Fitr against what they say are relentless calls to condemn terror attacks. [SBS]
 Still at large: Shaun Davidson of Australia and Tee Kok King of Malaysia are still being hunted by police, but the two men they escaped with from a Bali prison were captured in East Timor. [BBC]
 AirAsia X, the Malaysian long-haul budget carrier, has not yet explained what caused a plane to limp back to Perth “shaking like a washing machine.” [BBC]
 In Berlin, crowds and officials greeted two giant pandas — Meng Meng (Sweet Dream) and Jiao Qing (Darling) — on loan from China for about $1 million a year. [Associated Press]
 World’s Ugliest Dog: Martha, a 125-pound Neapolitan mastiff, was awarded the dubious honor at a fair in California. [The New York Times]
Smarter Living
 We’re launching a weekly Smarter Living newsletter to deliver our best guidance on a better, smarter, more fulfilling life straight to your inbox. Sign up here, and catch up on our            latest advice here.
 Recipe of the day: Green goddess dressing makes a zippy marinade for roast chicken.
Noteworthy
 New Zealand is one win away from beating the U.S. and claiming the 35th America’s Cup, along with the right to            draw up the rules for the next competition. One edge for New Zealand:            drones.
 The surface of the sun is hot, obviously. Try imagining 10,000-degree           bursts of plasma that spurt 6,000 miles high at speeds of 60 miles per second.
 And walk through the Reversible Destiny Lofts in Tokyo in this 360 video. Tenants hope to extend their life spans with the rigorous sensory stimulation provided by their artist-inspired apartments.
Back Story
A certain boy wizard was introduced to the world 20 years ago today, when “Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone” was published in Britain.
The book, about Harry and other students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, was an immediate hit that just kept growing in popularity. The magic inspired real-world            Quidditch teams, book clubs,            theme parks and a multibillion-dollar film franchise.
J.K. Rowling wrote “Philosopher’s Stone” in the cafes of Edinburgh, and the hometown paper, The Scotsman, praised her as “a first-rate writer for children.”
(The J. stands for Joanne — Jo to her friends — and the K. for Kathleen, her grandmother’s name. Her publisher was worried that a book by an obviously female author wouldn’t appeal to boys. And            her surname is pronounced like “bowling.”)
A year later, the book arrived in the U.S. with a tweak to its title: “Philosopher’s” became “Sorcerer’s” to more clearly convey that it was about magic.
It was a New York Times best seller for weeks before a review on Feb. 14, 1999 called it “a wonderful first novel” by an author who had achieved “something quite special.”
As Albus Dumbledore, one of her characters, once said, words are “our most inexhaustible source of magic.”
Chris Stanford contributed reporting.
_____
This briefing was prepared for the Asian morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian,            European and            American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters            here.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
Laid Off in U.S., Immigrants Race to Find New Jobs
The New York Times
May 13, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 1367 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


The Trump administration is unlikely to allow laid-off holders of H-1B and other work visas to extend their stay in the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Like millions of American workers, an Indian software engineer, a British market researcher and an Iranian architect lost their jobs amid the coronavirus pandemic. Unlike Americans, they are not entitled to unemployment benefits, despite paying taxes, because they are on foreign work visas. And, if they fail to find similar jobs soon, they must leave the country. 
  Rejish Ravindran analyzed data for a national footwear retailer, helping make sales projections and investment decisions. After hiring him on an H-1B skilled-worker visa nearly two years ago, the company recently sponsored his application for legal permanent residency, a process that takes several years to complete.
  ''It was going good. I thought I would be in Michigan forever. We were going to buy a house and settle down here,'' said Mr. Ravindran, 35, who lives in Grand Rapids, Mich. His wife, Amrutha, a nurse, was finishing a course and hoped to put her training to use soon.
  But battered by the coronavirus outbreak, the retailer furloughed Mr. Ravindran last month, which is not allowed under the terms of his visa. So two days later, the company terminated him.
  ''Everything came crashing down,'' said Mr. Ravindran, who arrived in the United States in 2012.
  Now, he is scrambling to find another job before the 60-day grace period for transferring his visa to another employer expires early next month. He is not optimistic.
  The lives of tens of thousands of foreign workers on skilled-worker visas, such as H-1Bs, have been upended by the economic fallout from the Covid-19 crisis. Many have been waiting in a backlog for several years to obtain permanent legal residency through their employer, and now face the prospect of deportation.
  The Trump administration is also expected within the next few weeks to halt the issuance of new work visas such as the H-1B, for high skilled foreigners, and the H-2B, for seasonal employment. The new measures under review, according to two current and two former government immigration officials, would also eliminate a program that enables foreign graduates of American universities to remain in the country and work.
  The tightening work rules come as unemployment in the U.S. soared last month to 14.7 percent, the highest level on record, and as calls escalated in Congress for Americans to be given priority for jobs.
  ''Given the extreme lack of available jobs for American job-seekers as portions of our economy begin to reopen, it defies common sense to admit additional foreign guest workers to compete for such limited employment,'' a group of Republican senators said in a letter last week calling for a suspension of new visas to guest workers who have not yet entered the country.
  For those already rooted in the U.S., the consequences of canceling the existing visas are ''life-altering,'' said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations for the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
  ''They have been thrown into limbo. It's not like they can go and just find any job, like at a pizza place,'' Ms. Dalal-Dheini said. A new job must meet specific criteria for the visa, such as by paying a certain salary and requiring at least a bachelor's degree.
  Ms. Dalal-Dheini's association of 15,000 lawyers has asked United States Citizenship and Immigration Services to extend the grace period, giving H-1B holders at least 90 days after the public health emergency has ended to find employment.
  An agency spokesman did not address whether an extension was under consideration. He said the agency would continue to monitor the coronavirus and ''assess various options related to temporary worker programs.''
  Since taking office, President Trump has thrust immigration and job displacement onto center stage, introducing a series of policies to curtail both legal and illegal immigration. More recently, his administration has cited the pandemic to justify even stricter restrictions.
  On April 22, Mr. Trump suspended the entry of new immigrants for 60 days. Less noticed in his proclamation was the order to the secretaries of labor and homeland security for a speedy review of nonimmigrant work visa programs.
  There are about 500,000 people on H-1B visas in the United States, according to estimates by Daniel Costa, a researcher at the Economic Policy Institute. More than 70 percent of them are Indians, and many of them technology workers. About 220,000 people were enrolled in the 2018-19 academic year in the Optional Practical Training program, which allows foreign students to work after completing their studies.
  The strong economy had fueled brisk demand for foreign workers in recent years, with H-1B applications by private companies far outstripping the annual supply of 85,000, a situation that prompted the government to resort to a lottery to award them.
  But proponents of limiting immigration say that if there was ever a time to prioritize American workers, it is now.
  ''If an H-1B visa holder is terminated from their job and is unable to find another employer willing to sponsor them, they should go back home,'' said Kevin Lynn, executive director of Progressives for Immigration Reform, which advocates for American technology workers.
  American citizens with foreign partners on visas are also affected.
  Andrew Jenkins and Krista York of Minnesota began more than a year ago to plan their wedding. The couple had settled on getting married Aug. 22 at the majestic Cathedral of St. Paul, where Ms. York's grandparents were married decades ago and she was confirmed in the church as a teenager. Then the coronavirus struck.
  Ms. York was furloughed. Mr. Jenkins, who is British, lost his job as a market research analyst. Because he is on an H-1B visa, Mr. Jenkins is not eligible for unemployment. ''It's far from ideal to not have any income when you're planning your wedding,'' said Mr. Jenkins, 27.
  What's worse, the couple said, is that Mr. Jenkins is in a race against time to find him another job before his visa expires in July.
  Unless he succeeds, they may have to hurriedly get married at a courthouse so that Mr. Jenkins can salvage his immigrant status -- by filing an application for a green card through a spouse. If that happens, the couple will not be allowed to hold a religious ceremony at the cathedral.
  ''Everything is ready to go for the cathedral. But if we have to get married on paper, we'll have to find another church,'' said Ms. York, 27.
  Bahar Shirkhanloo of Iran completed a master's degree in architecture two years ago and used the Optional Practical Training program to get a job at a firm in Chicago, where she is part of a team that designs high-rise residential buildings.
  Early this year, the firm decided to sponsor her for a green card. But she was abruptly terminated in early April when projects came to a standstill, leaving her with 60 days, under the terms of the program, to find a new job.
  ''I'm applying every day, everywhere in the U.S. you can think of,'' said Ms. Shirkhanloo, 28. Most often, she hears the same thing: ''They are interested, but, for now, there's a hiring freeze.''
  In Michigan, Mr. Ravindran is contemplating selling his 2013 Honda Accord to make the rent and pay outstanding bills, including $6,000 for a hospital visit by his wife last year.
  The son of a tea stall owner and the first to attend college in his family, the software engineer said that if he ends up having to return to India, ''I want to clear all my debts. I need to make a smooth exit from the U.S.''
  But there is a wrinkle: Commercial flights to India have been suspended since that country went into lockdown in March. While the government recently started repatriating some Indians stranded abroad, it has stipulated that pregnant women, older people and those with medical conditions will have priority.
  That could put someone like Mr. Ravindran at risk of overstaying his visa, which could jeopardize his ability to live in the United States in the future.
  ''If I don't find a new job, I can't stay here,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/12/us/foreign-workers-visas-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Andrew Jenkins, who is British, and Krista York had planned to marry at the Cathedral of St. Paul in Minnesota. Now both are out of work. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: May 13, 2020


End of Document
The Disappearing American
The New York Times
November 5, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ED; Column 0; Education Life Supplement; Pg. 11
Length: 1221 words
Byline: By NICK WINGFIELD
Nick Wingfield is a technology correspondent at The Times based in Seattle.
Body


There are two very different pictures of the students roaming the hallways and labs at New York University's Tandon School of Engineering.
At the undergraduate level, 80 percent are United States residents. At the graduate level, the number is reversed: About 80 percent hail from India, China, Korea, Turkey and other foreign countries. 
  For graduate students far from home, the swirl of cultures is both reassuring and invigorating. ''You're comfortable everyone is going through the same struggles and journeys as you are,'' said Vibhati Joshi of Mumbai, India, who's in her final semester for a master's degree in financial engineering. ''It's pretty exciting.''
  The Tandon School -- a consolidation of N.Y.U.'s science, technology, engineering and math programs on its Brooklyn campus -- is an extreme example of how scarce Americans are in graduate programs in STEM. Overall, these programs have the highest percentage of international students of any broad academic field. In the fall of 2015, about 55 percent of all graduate students in mathematics, computer sciences and engineering were from abroad, according to a survey by the Council of Graduate Schools and the Graduate Record Examinations Board.
  In arts and humanities, the figure was about 16 percent; in business, a little more than 18 percent.
  The dearth of Americans is even more pronounced in hot STEM fields like computer science, which serve as talent pipelines for the likes of Google, Amazon, Facebook and Microsoft: About 64 percent of doctoral candidates and almost 68 percent in master's programs last year were international students, according to an annual survey of American and Canadian universities by the Computing Research Association. In comparison, only about 9 percent of undergraduates in computer science were international students (perhaps, deans posit, because families are nervous about sending offspring who are barely adults across the ocean to study).
  Many factors contribute to the gap, but a major one is the booming job market in technology. For the most part, Americans don't see the need for an advanced degree when there are so many professional opportunities waiting for them. For some, the price is just too high when they have so much student debt already.
  ''You can believe that U.S. bachelor's students, if they're good, can go get a job at Microsoft or Google with a bachelor's degree,'' said Edward D. Lazowska, a professor of computer science at the University of Washington.
  Hadi Partovi, a tech investor, received his master's in computer science from Harvard in the 1990s. His roommate did not. They both got job offers from the same company. ''Master's grads are valued more, but not enough more for American students to get a master's degree,'' said Mr. Partovi, a founder of Code.org, a nonprofit that promotes computer science in grade school and high school.
  Universities and employers are eager to tap the pool of international talent that helps them stay competitive globally, and graduate programs have a financial incentive in attracting them: Demand from abroad is so high, administrators don't see a need to offer as much tuition assistance.
  There's concern, though, that the current climate around immigration could jeopardize that flow of talent. Incidents of xenophobia, hostile political rhetoric and President Trump's attempts at banning travelers from some Muslim-majority countries may be weighing on the minds of potential applicants.
  The Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth, for example, saw a 30 percent decrease in international applications to its professional master's program for this semester, according to the dean, Joseph J. Helble. Dr. Helble surveyed more than two dozen engineering deans earlier this year, and three quarters of them said they, too, had seen significant drops in international graduate applications. But enrollment, he said, was not off.
  Still, trends are not clear.
  ''If there are one or two more years of comparable 20 to 30 percent decreases in international applications, we're very concerned about our ability to conduct research and spin off and start companies,'' he said. ''We're concerned from a competitive perspective.''
  Dan Spaulding, who oversees human resources at Zillow Group, the online real estate company, said that in specialized areas like machine learning and artificial intelligence, his company favors graduate degrees, but for the vast majority of its technical jobs, a bachelor's degree in computer science is adequate. He said he has heard concerns from students and managers about an international chill, but for now the supply of students with computer science skills hasn't been affected.
  ''A great many of them are coming in with programming skills first and looking to radiate out into other business disciplines, product management, product design,'' he said. ''I just think going deep academically is not a priority for as many computer science students today.''
  In 1994, only about 40 percent of students who were enrolled in computer science Ph.D. programs were from outside the country, according to the Computing Research Association survey.
  As the economy improved, the percentage of Americans in graduate programs dropped. ''Going to grad school became less of a priority for so many students,'' said Stuart Zweben, co-author of the survey and professor emeritus of computer science and engineering at Ohio State University. ''You had to really be interested in research or something special.''
  The balance of computer science graduate programs began to tilt toward so-called nonresident aliens in the late 1990s, when well-capitalized dot-coms began scouring for programmers, sometimes encouraging summer interns to drop out of school, Dr. Zweben said.
  Students from other countries have long seen graduate school as their best path to employment and residency in the United States, and for the industry connections they are not likely to find in their home countries.
  ''It's easier to get access from here,'' said Ms. Joshi, who is president of the N.Y.U. finance club. She wanted to attend N.Y.U. so she could merge her background in information technology with her interest in the financial industry. She has regular exposure to industry speakers and recruiters.
  Her decision paid off. Ms. Joshi, 25, has accepted an offer to work in risk management at American Express once she completes her master's. She will apply for Optional Practical Training, a program that allows her to work in the United States for a year, with an option of extending her stay for up to another 24 months.It will be up to her employer whether it wants to sponsor her for an H1-B visa after that, allowing her to stay longer. President Trump has ordered a review of the H1-B program, and floated the idea of adjusting the current lottery system to favor higher-paid, higher-skilled workers.
  The Tandon School recently started ''A Bridge to N.Y.U. Tandon,'' aimed at preparing students with non-STEM backgrounds like liberal arts for master's programs. Katepalli R. Sreenivasan, the dean, believes this could attract Americans who have not yet found decent jobs.
  And he would like to see more of them enrolled in the graduate programs. ''I feel that's an imbalance,'' he said, ''that absolutely needs to be corrected.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/03/education/edlife/american-graduate-student-stem.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: TECH SAVVY: A computer science class at N.Y.U.'s engineering school, where some 80 percent of graduate students are from other countries. (ED11)
 EXPOSURE: For Vibhati Joshi, graduate study in the United States paid off. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY YANA PASKOVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ED13)       

Load-Date: November 5, 2017


End of Document
Use Remote Work to Revitalize Cities That Need It Most
The New York Times
December 6, 2020 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section F; Column 0; SpecialSections; Pg. 2
Length: 508 words
Body


By Prithwiraj Choudhury | Professor at Harvard Business School 
  The Covid-19 pandemic has prompted a lot of change in America, including changes to where we work. My research suggests that if organizations adopt the right practices, workers can indeed ''work from anywhere.'' This presents an opportunity for the incoming administration to promote policies that will lead to more equitable talent distribution nationwide. But it also presents a potential threat -- if remote workers for U.S.-based companies decide they would rather live and work outside of the United States.
  For years, brain drain has plagued noncoastal cities in America, with talent and companies relocating to a handful of cities on the coasts. Fostering ''work from anywhere'' is an opportunity to reverse that trend. In 2018, a program called Tulsa Remote offered $10,000 and a range of services to remote workers who were willing to move to Tulsa, Okla., for one year. The program received more than 10,000 applications for 100 slots. Two years later, only a handful of program participants have left the city, and Tulsa Remote is fielding applications for its third cohort.
  Other regions have taken note, and similar programs have launched in Northwest Arkansas (participants receive a mountain bike) and Tucson, Ariz. Moving forward, the federal government should support these initiatives, in two ways: First, the Economic Development Administration should launch a program to share best practices and provide funding to enable smaller towns to start these initiatives. Second, the federal government should invest in establishing nationwide access to high-speed internet.
  If the United States doesn't invest in offering our workers the freedom to work from anywhere, other countries will -- to our detriment. The adoption of ''work from anywhere'' means just that: Workers can work from anywhere, worldwide.
  Immigration issues in the United States, from soaring rejection rates for H-1B visas to long wait times for permanent residence status, are already pushing global talent to alternative destinations. MobSquad, a Canadian-based staffing company, took advantage of Canada's Express Entry program for skilled workers and recruited foreign workers based in the United States, who were struggling with the immigration system to relocate to Canada -- while continuing to work for their U.S. employers.
  The new administration should stop this outflux of talent. Start by exempting immigrants with U.S. graduate degrees in STEM fields -- or Ph.D. holders in any field -- from visa quotas and provide them a faster path to permanent residence.
  By reforming the U.S. immigration system and replicating the Tulsa story in other smaller towns, the next administration can ensure that, when workers work from anywhere, rather than taking their talent -- and tax dollars -- across the border, these workers will choose to work from, and help revitalize, the cities in America's heartland that need it most.Prithwiraj Choudhury is a professor at Harvard Business School.

https://www.nytimes.com/live/2020/fix-america-economy-climate-health/prithwiraj-choudhury-remote-work-revitalize-cities

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY GETTY IMAGES)               

Load-Date: December 6, 2020


End of Document
The Government Is Dead. Long Live the Government!; The Conversation
The New York Times 
January 22, 2018 Monday 19:02 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1470 words
Byline: GAIL COLLINS and BRET STEPHENS
Highlight: Shutdowns and stopgaps are no way to deal with the Dreamers or any other aspect of our immigration policy.
Body


Bret Stephens: Gail, over the past few days, it’s been the battle of the shutdown hashtags. If you’re a Republican, it was the #SchumerShutdown. If you’re a Democrat, it was the #TrumpShutdown. I suspect that, for most Americans, the appropriate hashtag is #WhatIsWrongWithThesePeople? Now the Senate has voted to reopen the government, at least for a few weeks, and presumably the House will follow any minute. Give me your thoughts on shutdown politics.
Gail Collins: Well, the whole world agrees that this didn’t have to happen at all. Let’s stop here for a moment and recall the Obama era shutdown, when Donald Trump was on TV telling the world that the president has to be a deal maker who gets everybody into a room and keeps them there until they find a solution.
I am not going to be catty and say that at present, such a strategy would cut terribly into his cheeseburger-and-Fox executive time.
But with Mitch McConnell promising a “free and open debate,” let’s talk about the still-to-come fights. Tell me, Bret, what’s your theory of the ideal immigration plan?
Bret: Ideal immigration plan? O.K., here goes what remains of my conservative street cred.
First, we give Dreamers green cards provided there isn’t a criminal record. If they’ve served (or would agree to serve) in the military, I’d give them automatic citizenship. And if the political price for that is funding for a border wall, I would swallow it. I’d rather squander money on unnecessary concrete than continue toying with the lives of nearly a million people who are already our fellow Americans in nearly every respect save paperwork.
Gail: Sigh. Have to admit I’m currently with you on the wall. Took me a long time to get there. Even though it’s a stupid and offensive idea, it’s not worth shutting down the government forever. And I do have faith that since even many Republicans think it’s an incredible waste of money, the whole thing is never going to be built.
Bret: Next, I’d revoke Trump’s deportation orders for Salvadorans, Haitians and others who are here on so-called temporary protective status. Forcibly uprooting hundreds of thousands of people who have built lives and families in the United States and returning them to countries that are in no position to receive them is not the American way.
Gail: … still agreeing …
Bret: I’d dramatically increase the number of merit-based H1-B visas. Mitt Romney was right when he said it was crazy that we educate tens of thousands of engineers and scientists in the U.S. and then ship them back home instead of making use of their skills. At the same time, I would get rid of the diversity-visa lottery system. This is the one thing Trump is right about. Spin-the-wheel is not good policy, especially when a future terrorist winds up being the beneficiary.
I could go on for hours but the bottom line is that the United States is and should remain a land of immigrants, skilled or (like my ancestors) unskilled, provided they are eager to make a go of the American dream and play by American rules.
Gail: Whew, so glad you mentioned that terrorist. Otherwise I would have agreed with everything you said and then where would we be conversation-wise?
It is true that the guy who killed eight innocent people with a truck in Manhattan was a product of the visa program, a program that was started to give more Irish and Italians a chance to legally immigrate.
But what drives me nuts is that the president constantly points to this one terrible crime as an argument that the visa program is bad, while every single day we have stories about innocent people blasted to smithereens by guns, and we never hear a peep. If we wanted to keep America safe, we would really, really crack down on gun purchases.
However, I am not demanding we do that to keep the government open.
Bret: Please don’t get me wrong. My objection is to the visa lottery, not what’s invidiously called “chain” migration. As you and many others have reminded us, this is how many of our ancestors arrived in this country and worked their tails off so that they could afford to pay steerage for their wives and children. Republicans used to be the “pro-family” party, but that was in days of yore, when George W. Bush was president.
I wrote a column last week pointing out that the same stereotypes and slanders applied today by people like Jeff Sessions against present-day immigrants were made over a century ago against my impoverished Jewish ancestors, who didn’t speak English, didn’t have Ph.D.s, and in a few cases held dangerous political views. Yet just imagine how much worse off America would be today if it had kept out the parents of a Jonas Salk, a Leonard Bernstein or a Mike Bloomberg. The same goes for every single other immigrant group, past or present.
Except Norwegians, of course!
Gail: Isn’t it interesting that Trump almost never talks about his immigrant ancestors? That’s usually reflexive for a politician. The other day when Paul Ryan was trying to get past the “shithole” incident, he instantly began talking about his ancestors from Ireland coming here and laboring on the railroads. Trump’s ancestors came from a terrible town in Germany — full of fertilizer fumes and impoverished grape-pickers — but he never mentions it.
But about that little shutdown. Any other thoughts?
Bret: My gut tells me the Democrats were smart to back away from the shutdown, however well founded their doubts might be about getting to a good immigration deal. Bill Clinton crushed the Gingrich Republicans over the shutdown in the mid-1990s. Barack Obama crushed the Republicans again in 2013. And I suspect that’s what Trump is going to do to the Democrats, thereby helping himself politically when we might otherwise be focused on his alleged porn star liaisons and the possibility that the president is lying about it.
Why? Because the country doesn’t like having its government stop functioning on account of a partisan position, even one as worthy as a deal for the Dreamers. It will especially hurt vulnerable Democrats, like Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri, who is facing re-election in a state in which Trump crushed Hillary Clinton. And it reminds me of a purported exchange that Adlai Stevenson had with a voter who told him that “every thinking man will vote for you.”
“That’s not enough,” he supposedly replied. “I need a majority.”
Gail: I did notice that Democratic senators from red states who are up for re-election tended to vote to keep the government running, Dreamers or no Dreamers.
My bottom line is that the shutdown was so brief, it’s not going to last in anyone’s memory by the next election date. Presuming there’s no bigger problem down the road.
Bret: My big complaint with liberals these days is that they are overplaying their hand, politically, and underestimating Trump’s political cunning and resilience.
Gail: I know the guy got elected, but I still have more faith in the voters than to believe they’re going to want to keep him around if his persona as president is so deeply tied to racist ramblings and ineptitude. In retrospect I can understand why they did it once, but sorry, I don’t believe they’d want to go back to that well.
And the president is not doing his party any favors by running those loathsome ads saying the Democrats will be responsible for murders by immigrants. Maybe the hard-core base is into that stuff but average people do not like that kind of viciousness.
Bret: One of the things the 2016 election taught me, and I suspect other pundits, is that everything I thought I knew for sure about American politics was, if not wrong, at least no longer operative. So what should we make of the supposed rule that the parties of unpopular incumbent presidents — Clinton in ’94; Bush in ’06 and Obama in ’10 — tend to get pasted in the midterms?
Maybe that pattern will repeat itself once again, but I’m not so sure. If the economy continues to do well, a majority of voters get a bigger tax break than they anticipate, and the Russia investigation comes up empty-handed, then Democrats run the risk of being the party that cried wolf.
Gail: A lot of ifs, and it still doesn’t address what does seem to be a not-just-Democrats revulsion against the president himself.
Bret: That famous question Joseph Welch asked of Joe McCarthy — “At long last, have you left no sense of decency?” — is not going to work against Trump. Not only is he impervious to shame, but so is his political base. I hope Democrats have a better game plan than riding a wave of moral outrage against this president and hoping that he continues to oblige them with fresh material.
Gail: As do we all. Meanwhile, maybe we should make a quick date to get together at a national park.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and            Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the            Opinion Today newsletter. 

Load-Date: January 24, 2018


End of Document
The Disappearing American Grad Student
The New York Times 
November 3, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: EDUCATION; edlife
Length: 1286 words
Byline: NICK WINGFIELD
Highlight: Graduate programs in STEM have the highest percentage of international students of any broad academic field. Why don’t the locals bother?
Body


There are two very different pictures of the students roaming the hallways and labs at New York University’s Tandon School of Engineering.
At the undergraduate level, 80 percent are United States residents. At the graduate level, the number is reversed: About 80 percent hail from India, China, Korea, Turkey and other foreign countries.
For graduate students far from home, the swirl of cultures is both reassuring and invigorating. “You’re comfortable everyone is going through the same struggles and journeys as you are,” said Vibhati Joshi of Mumbai, India, who’s in her final semester for a master’s degree in financial engineering. “It’s pretty exciting.”
The Tandon School — a consolidation of N.Y.U.’s science, technology, engineering and math programs on its Brooklyn campus — is an extreme example of how scarce Americans are in graduate programs in STEM. Overall, these programs have the highest percentage of international students of any broad academic field. In the fall of 2015, about 55 percent of all graduate students in mathematics, computer sciences and engineering were from abroad, according to a survey by the Council of Graduate Schools and the Graduate Record Examinations Board.
In arts and humanities, the figure was about 16 percent; in business, a little more than 18 percent.
The dearth of Americans is even more pronounced in hot STEM fields like computer science, which serve as talent pipelines for the likes of Google, Amazon, Facebook and Microsoft: About 64 percent of doctoral candidates and almost 68 percent in master’s programs last year were international students, according to an annual survey of American and Canadian universities by the Computing Research Association. In comparison, only about 9 percent of undergraduates in computer science were international students (perhaps, deans posit, because families are nervous about sending offspring who are barely adults across the ocean to study).
Many factors contribute to the gap, but a major one is the booming job market in technology. For the most part, Americans don’t see the need for an advanced degree when there are so many professional opportunities waiting for them. For some, the price is just too high when they have so much student debt already.
“You can believe that U.S. bachelor’s students, if they’re good, can go get a job at Microsoft or Google with a bachelor’s degree,” said Edward D. Lazowska, a professor of computer science at the University of Washington.
Hadi Partovi, a tech investor, received his master’s in computer science from Harvard in the 1990s. His roommate did not. They both got job offers from the same company. “Master’s grads are valued more, but not enough more for American students to get a master’s degree,” said Mr. Partovi, a founder of Code.org, a nonprofit that promotes computer science in grade school and high school.
Universities and employers are eager to tap the pool of international talent that helps them stay competitive globally, and graduate programs have a financial incentive in attracting them: Demand from abroad is so high, administrators don’t see a need to offer as much tuition assistance.
There’s concern, though, that the current climate around immigration could jeopardize that flow of talent. Incidents of xenophobia, hostile political rhetoric and President Trump’s attempts at banning travelers from some Muslim-majority countries may be weighing on the minds of potential applicants.
The Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth, for example, saw a 30 percent decrease in international applications to its professional master’s program for this semester, according to the dean, Joseph J. Helble. Dr. Helble surveyed more than two dozen engineering deans earlier this year, and three quarters of them said they, too, had seen significant drops in international graduate applications. But enrollment, he said, was not off.
Still, trends are not clear.
“If there are one or two more years of comparable 20 to 30 percent decreases in international applications, we’re very concerned about our ability to conduct research and spin off and start companies,” he said. “We’re concerned from a competitive perspective.”
Dan Spaulding, who oversees human resources at Zillow Group, the online real estate company, said that in specialized areas like machine learning and artificial intelligence, his company favors graduate degrees, but for the vast majority of its technical jobs, a bachelor’s degree in computer science is adequate. He said he has heard concerns from students and managers about an international chill, but for now the supply of students with computer science skills hasn’t been affected.
“A great many of them are coming in with programming skills first and looking to radiate out into other business disciplines, product management, product design,” he said. “I just think going deep academically is not a priority for as many computer science students today.”
In 1994, only about 40 percent of students who were enrolled in computer science Ph.D. programs were from outside the country, according to the Computing Research Association survey.
As the economy improved, the percentage of Americans in graduate programs dropped. “Going to grad school became less of a priority for so many students,” said Stuart Zweben, co-author of the survey and professor emeritus of computer science and engineering at Ohio State University. “You had to really be interested in research or something special.”
The balance of computer science graduate programs began to tilt toward so-called nonresident aliens in the late 1990s, when well-capitalized dot-coms began scouring for programmers, sometimes encouraging summer interns to drop out of school, Dr. Zweben said.
Students from other countries have long seen graduate school as their best path to employment and residency in the United States, and for the industry connections they are not likely to find in their home countries.
“It’s easier to get access from here,” said Ms. Joshi, who is president of the N.Y.U. finance club. She wanted to attend N.Y.U. so she could merge her background in information technology with her interest in the financial industry. She has regular exposure to industry speakers and recruiters.
Her decision paid off. Ms. Joshi, 25, has accepted an offer to work in risk management at American Express once she completes her master’s. She will apply for Optional Practical Training, a program that allows her to work in the United States for a year, with an option of extending her stay for up to another 24 months.It will be up to her employer whether it wants to sponsor her for an H1-B visa after that, allowing her to stay longer. President Trump has ordered a            review of the H1-B program, and floated the idea of adjusting the current lottery system to favor higher-paid, higher-skilled workers.
The Tandon School recently started “A Bridge to N.Y.U. Tandon,” aimed at preparing students with non-STEM backgrounds like liberal arts for master’s programs. Katepalli R. Sreenivasan, the dean, believes this could attract Americans who have not yet found decent jobs.
And he would like to see more of them enrolled in the graduate programs. “I feel that’s an imbalance,” he said, “that absolutely needs to be corrected.”
Nick Wingfield is a technology correspondent at The Times based in Seattle.
PHOTOS: TECH SAVVY: A computer science class at N.Y.U.’s engineering school, where some 80 percent of graduate students are from other countries. (ED11); EXPOSURE: For Vibhati Joshi, graduate study in the United States paid off. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY YANA PASKOVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ED13)
Related Articles
    • Six Myths About Choosing a College Major
    • Where the STEM Jobs Are (and Where They Aren’t)

Load-Date: November 9, 2017


End of Document
Trump to Halt Worker Visas Through 2020
The New York Times
June 23, 2020 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1587 words
Byline: By Michael D. Shear and Miriam Jordan
Body


The move is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas.
WASHINGTON -- President Trump on Monday temporarily suspended new work visas and barred hundreds of thousands of foreigners from seeking employment in the United States, part of a broad effort to limit the entry of immigrants into the country. 
  In a sweeping order, which will be in place at least until the end of the year, Mr. Trump blocked visas for a wide variety of jobs, including those for computer programmers and other skilled workers who enter the country under the H-1B visa, as well as those for seasonal workers in the hospitality industry, students on work-study summer programs and au pairs who arrive under other auspices.
  The order also restricts the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for months or yearslong stints. And it blocks the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
  Officials said the ban on worker visas, combined with extending restrictions on the issuance of new green cards, would keep as many as 525,000 foreign workers out of the country for the rest of the year.
  Stephen Miller, the White House aide and the architect of Mr. Trump's immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate the worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. And in recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
  But the directive, which has been expected for several weeks, is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas for jobs that Americans are not willing to do or are not capable of performing.
  ''This is a full-frontal attack on American innovation and our nation's ability to benefit from attracting talent from around the world,'' said Todd Schulte, the president of FWD.us, a pro-immigration group supported by technology companies.
  ''Putting up a 'not welcome' sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won't help our country, it will hold us back,'' said Thomas J. Donohue, the chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. ''Restrictive changes to our nation's immigration system will push investment and economic activity abroad, slow growth and reduce job creation.''
  Administration officials said the president's order would not affect people outside the United States who already have valid visas or seasonal farm workers, whose annual numbers have ranged from a low of about 50,000 to a high of about 250,000 in the past 15 years. There will also be a narrow exception for certain medical workers dealing specifically with coronavirus research, officials said.
  The order will ban au pairs who come to the United States to care for children, though officials initially told reporters they would be exempt. Later, two senior administration officials said parents could seek waivers to the ban on a case-by-case basis, with no assurance that they would be approved.
  In the order, Mr. Trump described suspension of the visas as a way to ensure that Americans are first in line for scarce jobs -- an assertion that immigration advocates say does not reflect the reality of a dynamic and changing work force.
  ''Under the extraordinary circumstances of the economic contraction resulting from the Covid-19 outbreak, certain nonimmigrant visa programs authorizing such employment pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers,'' Mr. Trump wrote in the order.
  The effort to restrict entry from foreigners into the United States was at the heart of one of the president's key promises during the 2016 campaign and is certain to play a central role as Mr. Trump seeks to energize his core supporters during his re-election campaign this year.
  While the president's pledge to build a ''big, beautiful wall'' to prevent illegal border crossings has attracted more attention, his efforts to slow down the flow of legal immigration have been even more effective and potentially long-lasting.
  In April, the president signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards to most foreigners looking to live in the United States. But at the time, Mr. Miller and the president bowed to pressure from the business community to avoid imposing limits on the worker visas.
  Monday's order extends the green-card prohibition in addition to suspending the issuance of many of the worker visas.
  Immigration restrictionists who have had the ear of the Trump administration applauded the announcement. Combined with recent measures, ''the work visa suspensions will put the thumb on the labor market scale in favor of U.S. workers,'' said Jessica Vaughan, the policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates curbing immigration.
  ''It's really heartening to see the president stand up to the special interests that pull out the stops to lobby for these visa programs,'' said Ms. Vaughan, who said she had been regularly consulted by White House aides on the issue.
  In addition to the temporary suspensions, administration officials said Mr. Trump was directing the government to make permanent changes to a broad array of immigration regulations in order to discourage what they said was unfair competition for American jobs from foreigners looking to come to the United States.
  Among those changes will be new methods of ensuring that high-skill visas in the future are awarded to the highest-paid workers and of preventing companies from contracting large numbers of midlevel foreign workers to perform accounting, programming and other technology-assisted jobs that Americans might be able to do.
  Other changes would be aimed at discouraging immigrants from applying for asylum as a way of obtaining a work permit in the United States. It was unclear when those regulatory changes would go into effect.
  The administration could try to issue emergency rules to expedite such changes rather than go through the normal process, which can take months or even years because the public must be allowed to comment before a final rule is enacted.
  But fast-tracking the rule-making process on foreign workers could invite legal challenges from opponents who say the administration did not follow the rules. Last week, the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump violated the Administrative Procedure Act when he tried to terminate an Obama-era program aimed at protecting young immigrants from deportation.
  ''The government could try and fast-track that process by not allowing the public to weigh in on the changes before they go into effect, but it is difficult to see that process surviving court review,'' said Lynden Melmed, an immigration lawyer and the former chief counsel of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  Amid the pandemic, the Trump administration has seized on the threat to public health as a pretext to issue a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system, including asylum and green cards. While many changes have been announced as temporary, they could remain in place indefinitely.
  But critics say the administration has used the health crisis and the economic meltdown it has caused as pretext to put in place restrictions that further its immigration agenda.
  While Mr. Trump and his aides said the suspension of visas was in response to the pandemic, the administration has been pursuing the same broad reductions to legal immigration policies for years, including during times when unemployment was at its lowest in decades. In 2017, the president endorsed the RAISE Act, a Republican Senate bill that would have cut legal immigration, including business visas, by about 50 percent.
  In the weeks leading up to the announcement on Monday, a diverse coalition of businesses and research universities had lobbied fiercely, flooding the White House with letters and phone calls, in an attempt to limit the scope of the executive order.
  ''It's the largest crackdown on work visas that I have seen in my 35 years of practice,'' said Steve Yale-Loehr, a Cornell law professor. ''Thousands of businesses and universities will be hurt by these restrictions. Similarly, individuals will be stuck overseas unable to help the U.S. economy recover.''
  But the opponents failed to block the measures, which they had argued were counterproductive to economic recovery.
  ''The Trump administration has argued that it wants to create a merit-based immigration system that prioritizes educated immigrants with skills,'' said Alex Nowrasteh, the director of immigration studies at the conservative Cato Institute. ''With this suspension of the H-1B visa program, they have shown, once again, that they really mean they want fewer immigrants.''
  ''These immigration bans are more red meat and not jobs for the base,'' said Rebecca Shi from the American Business Immigration Coalition in Chicago. ''They don't even serve Trump's own business interests.''
  Mr. Trump has used H-2B visas to hire seasonal staff for his resorts to work as cooks and waiters.
  Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles.Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/22/us/politics/trump-h1b-work-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Amid the coronavirus pandemic, the Trump administration has issued a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: June 24, 2020


End of Document
A Google Whiz Searches for His Place on Earth - Correction Appended
The New York Times
April 12, 2009 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3265 words
Byline: By MATT RICHTEL
Dateline: MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. 
Body


Where's Sanjay? 
  The question comes from one of dozens of engineers around a crowded conference table at Google. They have gathered to discuss how to build easy-to-use maps that could turn hundreds of millions of mobile phones into digital Sherpas -- guiding travelers to businesses, restaurants and landmarks. 
  ''His plane gets in at 9:30,'' the group's manager responds.
  Google is based here in Silicon Valley. But Sanjay G. Mavinkurve, one of the key engineers on this project, is not.
  Mr. Mavinkurve, a 28-year-old Indian immigrant who helped lay the foundation for Facebook while a student at Harvard, instead works out of a Google sales office in Toronto, a lone engineer among marketers. 
  He has a visa to work in the United States, but his wife, Samvita Padukone, also born in India, does not. So he moved to Canada.
  ''Every American I've talked to says: 'Dude, it's ridiculous that we're not doing everything we can to keep you in the country. We need people like you!' '' he said.
  ''The people of America get it,'' he added. ''And in a matter of time, I think current lawmakers are going to realize how dumb they're being.''
  Immigrants like Mr. Mavinkurve are the lifeblood of Google and Silicon Valley, where half the engineers were born overseas, up from 10 percent in 1970. Google and other big companies say the Chinese, Indian, Russian and other immigrant technologists have transformed the industry, creating wealth and jobs.
  Just over half the companies founded in Silicon Valley from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s had founders born abroad, according to Vivek Wadhwa, an immigration scholar working at Duke and Harvard. 
  The foreign-born elite dating back even further includes Andrew S. Grove, the Hungarian-born co-founder of Intel; Jerry Yang, the Chinese-born co-founder of Yahoo; Vinod Khosla of India and Andreas von Bechtolsheim of Germany, the co-founders of Sun Microsystems; and Google's Russian-born co-founder, Sergey Brin. 
  But technology executives say that byzantine and increasingly restrictive visa and immigration rules have imperiled their ability to hire more of the world's best engineers. 
  While it could be said that Mr. Mavinkurve's case is one of a self-entitled immigrant refusing to live in the United States because his wife would not be able to work, he exemplifies how immigration policies can chase away a potential entrepreneur who aspires to create wealth and jobs here. 
  His case highlights the technology industry's argument that the United States will struggle to compete if it cannot more easily hire foreign-born engineers.
  ''We are watching the decline and fall of the United States as an economic power -- not hypothetically, but as we speak,'' said Craig R. Barrett, the chairman of Intel. 
  Mr. Barrett blames a slouching education system that cannot be easily fixed, but he says a stopgap measure would be to let companies hire more foreign engineers.
  ''With a snap of the fingers, you can say, 'I'm going to make it such that those smart kids -- and as many of them as want to -- can stay in the United States.' They're here today, they're graduating today -- and they're going home today.''
  He is opposed by staunch foes of liberalized immigration and by advocates for American-born engineers. 
  ''There are probably two billion people in the world who would like to live in California and work, but not everyone in the world can live here,'' said Kim Berry, an engineer who operates a nonprofit advocacy group for American-born technologists. ''There are plenty of Americans to do these jobs.''
  The debate has only sharpened as the country's economic downturn has deepened. Advocates for American-born workers are criticizing companies that lay off employees even as they retain engineers living here on visas. But the technology industry counters that innovations from highly skilled workers are central to American long-term growth.
  It is a debate well known to Google, and it is a deeply personal one to Mr. Mavinkurve. 
  An Eye on America
  Sanjay Mavinkurve (pronounced MAY-vin-kur-VAY) was born in Bombay to working-class parents who soon moved to Saudi Arabia.
  He thought everything important in life was American -- from Baskin-Robbins and Nike Airs to the Hardees's and Domino's in the food court at the shopping mall. When in the car, he and his older brother played a game, naming all the things they could see that came from the United States.
  ''I know this sounds romantic, but it's true: I always wanted to come to America,'' said Mr. Mavinkurve, lanky, with bushy hair and an easy smile. ''I admired everything in the way America portrayed itself -- the opportunity, U.S. Constitution, its history, enterprising middle class.''
  When he was 14, he and his brother were accepted at Western Reserve Academy, a private school in Cleveland, and received scholarships. During his senior year, Mr. Mavinkurve finished near the top of his class, ran cross-country and track, and scored 1560 out of 1600 on the SAT.
  Next stop: Harvard. His freshman year, he won the prize for best essay written in French, a comparison of books by Annie Ernaux. His friends described him as social but with a quiet, determined work ethic. He took the toughest classes, and to make money he took a job cleaning toilets in the dorm.
  He remained patriotic; on his dorm wall, he hung an American flag his brother had purchased at Fort McHenry in Baltimore, where ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' was written.
  But he knew he could lose his immigration status after he graduated and his student visa expired. So he decided to major in computer science, which he understood to be in demand, and entered a four-year program for a master's degree. 
  In 2003, his final  year, he and three friends decided to build a Web site where college students could connect. Mr. Mavinkurve wrote the computer code. Eventually, the team disbanded, although some of its work evolved into Facebook. He had helped create the foundation for a product that has become a national sensation.
  He started at Google in August 2003, as a product manager on the teams that developed Google News and the Google toolbar, then worked on the look and feel of the video search, and on the early versions of Google Maps for cellphones. He developed a reputation for helping design the way the products look, and making them simple to use.
  Still, he had ample reason to worry about his visa status, given the limits on how many visas are issued for skilled immigrant labor.
  It is a category whose significance has been growing since the 1920s, when politicians and business executives started recognizing the value of skilled immigrants. After World War II, companies began actively recruiting scientists, among them Nobel Prize winners, from around the world. 
  The emphasis on skilled labor was codified in the Hart-Celler Immigrant Act of 1965, which said that for 20 percent of immigration spots, candidates with certain skills would get preference to stay indefinitely, though that 20 percent also included the family members of those skilled immigrants. 
  (At the time, 74 percent of visas were given to people to be reunited with family members here, and 6 percent for political refugees from the Eastern Hemisphere.) 
  Reflecting the growing importance of technology -- and responding to industry lobbying -- in 1990 Congress set aside 65,000 temporary work visas, known as H-1B visas, for skilled workers. The visas, which are sponsored by companies on behalf of employees, permit three years of work, with an automatic three-year extension.
  The limit was raised twice as the technology sector boomed, to 115,000 in 1999 and to 195,000 in 2001. But those temporary increases were not renewed for 2004, and the number of H-1B visas reverted to 65,000. (There are an additional 20,000 H1-B's for people with graduate degrees from American universities.) 
  Since 2004, there has been a growing gap between the number of H-1B visas sought and those granted, through a lottery. In 2008, companies made 163,000 applications for the 65,000 slots. Google applied for 300 of them; 90 were denied. 
  In 2004, Mr. Mavinkurve was one of the lucky ones. ''You can be very proud,'' said the congratulatory e-mail message he received from an immigration lawyer at Google. 
  Good fortune followed at Google. In honor of the country that made it possible, on June 14, 2004, Flag Day, Mr. Mavinkurve made a laser print of an American flag and taped it to a white board in a Google hallway. The flag remains.
  When Google went public that August, Mr. Mavinkurve was on his way to becoming a multimillionaire. 
  ''I remember quantifying: for each dollar the stock goes up, I make more than my mother and father make together in a whole month at work,'' he said. 
  Indeed, recent immigrants like those at Google have been successful. 
  ''The thing distinctive about this generation, and I think unprecedented, is that they are coming with the highest level of skills in the leading industries,'' said AnnaLee Saxenian of the school of information at the University of California, Berkeley. 
  She added that this was acute in Silicon Valley because of its entrepreneurial culture. 
  ''You don't see immigrant success at any other place in the U.S. at anywhere near the same scale,'' she said.
  The Guy With the Answer
  The role Mr. Mavinkurve played in Google's success was on stark display in early 2007, when the company's map-making team faced a problem that even the best and brightest could not solve. The team met in Winnipeg, one of many conference rooms at Google headquarters named for foreign cities, like Algiers, Tunis and Haifa.
  International tributes take other forms; over cubicles in one building hang flags from dozens of countries. The cafeteria, where much of the fare is ethnic, includes Indian and Chinese food stations.
  These touches are appropriate. Of Google's 20,000 workers, 2,000 were born abroad and work on temporary visas, while numerous others (the company would not disclose how many) have become American citizens or been granted permanent residency, the so-called green card status.
  The work force is international, and so is the company's market. With the mobile phone, Google believes it can expand in places where reaching the Internet over computers is difficult, and create advertising-supported versions of maps and other services so consumers can effectively use the services free, exchanging not money, but attention. 
  But back in late 2006, maps produced by the service were taking too long to download and appear on phones. As customers waited for the maps to form, they racked up huge bills from cellphone providers, which at the time were charging for every minute or every byte of data transferred. 
  Enter Mr. Mavinkurve, who floated an alternative: cut the number of colors in each map section to 20 or 40 from around 256. The user would not see the difference, but the load times would be reduced 20 percent.
  Mr. Mavinkurve used a rare combination of creativity, analysis, engineering and an understanding of graphics to find a solution that had eluded the rest of the team, said Mark Crady, a manager in the maps group.
  ''He's one of the best U.I. guys I've ever seen,'' Mr. Crady said, referring to user interfaces. ''Google Maps for mobile reflects Sanjay.''
  Many innovators in Silicon Valley come from overseas; 42 percent of engineers with master's degrees and 60 percent of those with engineering Ph.D.'s in the United States are foreign-born. 
  Foreigners also spur innovation by broadening understanding of consumers abroad. For instance, on the advice of Chinese-born workers, Google dotted its mobile maps for China with fast-food restaurants, which locals use as navigational landmarks. 
  When Google cannot get visas for people it wants to hire, it seeks to accommodate them in overseas offices, like the bureaus in Britain and Brazil from which map-team members attend meetings via video conference. 
  That work-around presents a number of drawbacks, one of which is especially apparent when one worker is in California and a colleague is in India.
  ''It's 11 hours to Hyderabad,'' Peter Norvig, director of research for Google, says of the time difference. ''We do video conferences where we're up late and they're up early. Maybe a video conference is as good as a formal meeting, but there are no informal meetings. As a result, we lose the pace of work, and we lose trust.''
  The larger risk is employees growing unhappy working at a distance, or foreign companies recruiting them. 
  For his part, Mr. Mavinkurve, in Toronto, typically talks with colleagues via video conference, e-mail or instant message. But he does fly twice a month to headquarters and once a month to Britain, his life a whirlwind of time zones and virtual interaction.
  For Google and Mr. Mavinkurve, working here would be better. The trouble is, he fell in love.
  Stuck North of the Border
  He sits at a rooftop pub in Toronto, drinking Canadian amber beer. His wife, Ms. Padukone, 27, sips sangria. Evident between them is a respect, and slight emotional distance -- understandable given their brief history together.
  In 2006, while working for Google in Mountain View, Mr. Mavinkurve saw his future wife's photo on the cover of a newsletter published by his Indian ethnic community, the Konkani. She was attending college in Singapore. He found her pretty, so he e-mailed her.
  ''For three months, we sent messages back and forth -- but regularly,'' she said.
  ''I hate talking on the phone,'' he explained.
  They arranged to meet while Mr. Mavinkurve was in Singapore during a flight layover on his way to India. They met for two hours, and connected. 
  They were engaged in January 2007 in India, their second meeting. They married there in 2008.
  Like first-generation immigrants throughout American history, Mr. Mavinkurve has deep ethnic ties but is quickly assimilating. His wife is no different. But visa rules preclude her from working in the United States unless her husband gets a green card.
  That process can take two years. So they live in Toronto, where she recently landed a job in finance. 
  Mr. Mavinkurve and his wife get little sympathy from Mr. Berry of the Programmers Guild, a nonprofit group with a volunteer staff that lobbies Congress on behalf of American-born high-tech workers. 
  To Mr. Berry, 50 -- who lives in Sacramento, where he was born -- it is unfathomable that Google, which receives one million resumes a year, cannot find enough qualified Americans. Further, he says immigrants depress wages. 
  By law, H-1B workers must be paid prevailing wages, but there are conflicting studies on whether some employers actually pay less when they control the fate of the sponsored workers. Even some of the supporters of allowing in more skilled immigrants say the H-1B system is flawed because it gives employers so much power over employees.
  As the recession deepens, many people, including members of Congress, have criticized companies like Microsoft and Intel for laying off Americans while retaining visa holders. Google says it will cut 350 workers this year.
  Mr. Berry says his skills and education -- a bachelor's degree in computer science from California State University, Sacramento -- are denigrated by an industry that asserts that the best talent comes from overseas, via Ivy League schools. He worries about the employability of his children, who are studying engineering at top colleges, the University of Southern California and California Polytechnic State University.
  Mr. Berry, for his part, works at a major technology company he declines to name because his employment agreement precludes him from talking about his employer when in his advocacy role.
  He does not believe that skilled immigrants are essential to innovation. In fact, he argues the opposite. ''In my experience,'' he said, ''foreign software programmers are less likely to step out of the box and present alternatives to management.''
  His arguments have caught the attention of some on Capitol Hill. ''Not all our own people are able to get good jobs right now,'' said Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama and one of the members of Congress who oppose temporary work visas.
  Mr. Sessions favors broad immigration reform that puts even greater emphasis on admitting people with skills. He even wants to ask visa applicants to take a scholastic aptitude test. 
  But he opposes temporary workers, whom he argues have incentive to work for less and return to their countries to share what they have learned. This puts him at odds with tech companies. 
  ''They need to step up and look at what's in the national interest,'' he said. 
  Google estimates that it spends about $20 million a year on its immigration efforts -- including lobbying, administration and fees to a law firm. Microsoft, while it would not disclose expenses, probably spends more. Its in-house immigration team numbers 20 lawyers and staff members.
  On the political front, the tech industry lobbies Congress through an organization called Compete America, which includes titans like Intel, Microsoft, Google and Oracle. 
  ''The next generation of Google engineers are being turned down,'' says Pablo Chavez, Google's senior policy counsel. ''If a foreign-born engineer doesn't come to Google, there is a very good chance that individual will return to India to compete against us.''
  At the rooftop pub, Mr. Mavinkurve and his wife both express some anger. He thinks America should embrace him, given his contributions and taxpaying potential. After Google went public, he paid more than $200,000 in federal taxes on his income from salary and, mostly, sales of his shares, just in one year.
  He misses interaction with colleagues. It hinders efficiency, slows work. He is physically drained from travel. He is frustrated that he cannot put down roots in America, and maybe start his own company, because he cannot leave Google, his visa sponsor.
  He says he feels, on one hand, great gratitude that America gave him extraordinary opportunity. But he says he fulfilled his side of the bargain by striving and succeeding. ''Dude, I love this country,'' he said. 
  But he doesn't feel loved back: ''My devotion is unrequited.''
  To Stay or to Go
  On each of Mr. Mavinkurve's twice-monthly visits to the United States (he keeps a room not far from Google), he meets with two friends at the Red Mango frozen yogurt shop on University Avenue in the heart of Palo Alto. Over scoops of green tea yogurt, they brainstorm for their next venture. 
  But he is not sure he can start a company -- at least in America. Unless he gets his green card and his wife can work, he would be the only breadwinner, risking his savings, and he says they would be unhappy. 
  ''Quitting Google means saying goodbye to my green card,'' he said.  
  If America will not have him, he might have to stay in Canada. The proof is on the wall of the two-bedroom high-rise apartment he shares with his wife -- who is pregnant -- and his parents, who have moved in with them. On the living room wall is a Canadian flag.
  ''Quality stitching,'' he said, fingering it.
  Mr. Mavinkurve, who once hung American flags in his dorm room and then in Google's hallway, still loves America. But the Internet-era immigrant, who moves so quickly between worlds, cannot decide where to land. 
  Where is Sanjay? Even he is not sure where he belongs.
  ''I'm not sure I want to go back,'' he said of the possibility of moving back to the United States. ''I'm not sure I can.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


An article last Sunday about immigration policies that are hindering efforts by technology companies to hire foreign-born engineers misstated the birthplace of Jerry Yang, co-founder of Yahoo. He was born in Taiwan, not China. The article also misstated the Hungarian-born Andrew S. Grove's role in the start-up of the Intel Corporation. He was brought in by Robert N. Noyce and Gordon E. Moore to operate the company at its founding in 1968; he was not a co-founder.
An article on April 12 about immigration policies that are hindering efforts by technology companies to hire foreign-born engineers overstated the number of Google employees who were born abroad and work at the company on temporary visas. The number ranges from 1,200 to 1,800; it is not 2,000.
Correction-Date: April 23, 2009

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Sanjay Mavinkurve of Google lives in Canada because his wife can't get an American work visa. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A1)
Google's home base in Mountain View, Calif., is a corporate United Nations, where 1 in 10 employees is on a temporary visa and more are from overseas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
The Mountain View office celebrates Google's global ambition and work force. Work rooms are named for foreign cities, like Navrongo in Ghana. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Even though Google sponsored a work visa for Sanjay Mavinkurve, he lives in Toronto with his wife, Samvita Padukone, and his parents. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM ROSS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A20) CHARTS: BRAIN GAIN: A flood of skilled immigrants have moved into better-paying jobs in the United States. The high-tech industry says they are critical to keeping the nation competitive.
RELYING ON IMMIGRANTS: Jobs dominated by immigrants include many low-skilled categories. But the list has also come to include high-skilled jobs, and the number of high-paid immigrants is growing rapidly.
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES
ROOM AT THE TOP (Sources: Census
''Higher Education, Innovation and Growth'' by Giovanni Peri, 2007
''American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Professionals on U.S. Comptetitiveness'' by Stuart Anderson and Michaela Platzer, 2006
''The Ethnic Composition of U.S. Inventors'' by William R. Kerr, 2006
''America's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs'' by Vivek Wadhwa, et al., 2007, Kaufman Foundation
 Foreign Labor Certification Data Center) (pg.A21)                                               

Load-Date: April 12, 2009


End of Document
The Visas and the Fury; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 06:02 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1683 words
Highlight: As President Trump moves to restrict work-based immigration, the business world — particularly Silicon Valley — is speaking out.
Body


Want this in your inbox every day? Sign up here.
Corporate America’s visa anger
President Trump moved again yesterday to restrict immigration, this time targeting work-based visas. The business world — particularly Silicon Valley — is angry.
Mr. Trump suspended H-1Bs and other work visas through at least the end of the year, denying employment permits for hundreds of thousands of skilled foreign workers like programmers. Seasonal hospitality workers and work-study students are also affected.
 The restrictions also block multinationals from transferring foreign workers to the U.S. for extended stints, and also apply to the spouses of foreigners working for U.S. companies.
 Trump administration officials say the move, combined with extended restrictions on new green cards, could bar a half-million foreign workers from the U.S. in the rest of this year.
The president cited the pandemic, saying that “certain nonimmigrant visa programs authorizing such employment pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers.” (A recent Pew Research Center poll showed 64 percent of Americans think that legal immigrants fill jobs Americans don’t want.)
Business leaders were aghast, particularly in tech, which accounts for about three-quarters of all H-1B visas:
 “This is a full-frontal attack on American innovation and our nation’s ability to benefit from attracting talent from around the world,” said Todd Schulte of FWD.us, a pro-immigration advocacy group for big tech companies.
 “America’s continued success depends on companies having access to the best talent from around the world,” Google said. The tech giant’s C.E.O., Sundar Pichai — who was born in India — tweeted: “Disappointed by today’s proclamation.”
 “Preventing high skilled professionals from entering the country and contributing to America’s economic recovery puts American’s global competitiveness at risk,” Amazon said.
 “Highly-skilled visa holders play a critical role in driving innovation,” Facebook said, “and that’s something we should encourage, not restrict.”
 “Putting up a ‘not welcome’ sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won’t help our country, it will hold us back,” said Thomas Donohue of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Twitter’s Canadian chairman, Patrick Pichette, offered an alternative. “A message to all you H-1B seekers; just look to the North, where we welcome you (and your family) with open arms,” he tweeted, adding, “Did I mention free healthcare?”
It ain’t over till it’s over
For a few hours last night, investors thought that the U.S.-China trade deal was dead. Why? The White House trade adviser, Peter Navarro, said in a Fox News interview: “It’s over.”
The “turning point” was China’s response to the coronavirus, according to Mr. Navarro. Beijing failed to warn Washington about the spread of the disease, he said, which was gaining pace when the two sides signed a “Phase 1” pact in January. Markets promptly dropped, with S&amp;P 500 futures falling around 2 percent in after-hours trading.
… Then it wasn’t over. Larry Kudlow, the White House’s chief economic adviser, said the U.S. “remains engaged” in the deal. Shortly afterward, Mr. Navarro said his comments were taken “wildly out of context,” and he was speaking broadly about trust between the two countries. Then President Trump said that the deal was “fully intact.” Markets promptly rallied, regaining all the lost ground. (At the time of writing, futures suggest that stocks will open higher this morning.)
A preview of things to come? Many analysts believe that tensions with China could ramp up as the U.S. presidential election approaches and Mr. Trump adopts a campaign stance. “The trade deal is most at risk in September and October,” Paul Donovan of UBS wrote in a note to clients.
Apple flexes its chip power
The tech giant will design the processors for its computers, breaking with Intel after 15 years. It’s a sign of Apple’s strength, and a blow to America’s best-known chip maker.
Apple already designs the chips that run iPhones and iPads, drawing on engineers it has acquired by buying start-ups like PA Semi and Intrinsity. And it will rely on Asian manufacturing partners like T.S.M.C. to make the chips.
 Moving to custom chips will make Macs faster and more power-efficient, Apple says. And iPhone and iPad apps will work directly on Macs after the transition, which will take two years.
It’s a disappointment for Intel, which has long been the standard-bearer for the semiconductor industry. Macs make up just 5 percent of Intel’s annual sales, but the company’s reputation for building the most powerful processors around — and the profits that come with that — may be at risk.
Here’s what’s happening
Florida is worried about a rise in coronavirus cases. State officials are fretting about the spread of the virus, but divided on how to respond. The numbers are creating unease about the restart of the N.B.A. season in Orlando next month and the Republican National Convention in Jacksonville in August.
Wirecard’s ex-C.E.O. was arrested in Germany today, after the tech payment platform admitted that 1.9 billion euros ($2.1 billion) reported in its accounts probably “do not exist.” Markus Braun had resigned on Friday. The company has had a long fight with The Financial Times over its accounting practices.
Delta Air Lines will restart passenger flights to China this week, the first U.S. airline to do so. Major carriers suspended routes in late January as the Trump administration imposed travel restrictions.
Small businesses accused Square of withholding money without warning. Users of the payments service say it’s withholding up to 30 percent of their sales. The company has described this as a “rolling reserve” to cover disputes, refunds and fees.
A Japanese supercomputer was crowned as the world’s fastest. Fugaku, a system installed in Kobe, carried out 2.8 times more calculations a second than IBM’s runner-up. Chinese and American supercomputers have dominated the top 500.
Win some, lose some
SoftBank, the embattled tech conglomerate, announced its latest big deal yesterday — just as another of its investments looks to be crumbling.
The company finally announced plans to sell $21 billion worth of T-Mobile shares, which it acquired when it sold Sprint to the telecom. Selling that stake, about two-thirds of its holdings in T-Mobile, will give SoftBank much-needed cash after reporting a nearly $13 billion operating loss for its latest fiscal year.
 Because things are rarely straightforward with SoftBank, the group is also lending money to its C.O.O., Marcelo Claure, to let him spend $500 million on T-Mobile shares. (He previously ran Sprint for the conglomerate.)
But SoftBank executives have been hit by the collapse of Wirecard. Last year, SoftBank invested $1 billion in the German company, funded by several senior employees, and, thanks to complicated financial engineering, showed an instant profit. The huge drop in Wirecard’s stock has largely wiped that out.
Business as seen through a block of cheese
Cheese is fetching record wholesale prices, for reasons that reflect the strange state of the economy, The Times’s Matt Phillips writes.
“If there was a cheese VIX index, it would have been spiking,” a dairy commodity consultant told Matt. The price of a 40-pound block of Cheddar, the benchmark for cheese traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, collapsed in early April, when restaurants and other trade buyers shuttered. Retail demand soared, but it wasn’t enough to make up the difference.
Washington helped push the price back up  when it stepped in to buy $3 billion in agricultural goods as part of stimulus efforts. More recently, the reopening of restaurants and other institutions has led to a sudden spike in demand — milk suppliers are struggling to catch up. And retail sales are still higher than they used to be, as people cook at home more often; some of that shift may be permanent.
What does it mean? The cheese industry, like so many others, has been whipsawed by economic uncertainty, navigating a compressed boom-and-bust cycle that makes planning next to impossible. Matt dug into his Cheddar-stained notebook and told us:
Although things look much better now, “we’re all scared to death” of another outbreak, Jeff Schwager of Sartori Cheese in Wisconsin told me. The hard cheeses the company produces typically require somewhere between six months and two years of aging, meaning production decisions today have to be made about how the pandemic will be affecting the economy in the future — including whether there will be more lockdowns. “It’s anybody’s guess where we are going to be a year from now,” he said. “So how much cheese do we make?”
The speed read
Deals
 Six investment firms agreed to pump $10 billion into a new subsidiary of Abu Dhabi’s state-owned oil company. (CNBC)
 A publicly traded “blank check” investment fund run by Bill Ackman is seeking to raise as much as $6.5 billion to buy another company. (Business Insider)
Politics and policy
 A federal agency quietly halted funding for treatments of coronavirus-related lung ailments, after pledging billions for vaccine development. (NYT)
 Republicans are increasingly worried about blowback from their drive to end Obamacare during the pandemic. (NYT)
 The U.S. trade fight with Europe has cost American whiskey distillers $300 million. (Fortune)
Tech
 Google’s ad revenue in the U.S. is poised to drop for the first time, according to eMarketer. (CNBC)
 Microsoft has abandoned its gaming streaming service and will partner with Facebook. (Business Insider)
Best of the rest
 There are billions to be made in virus-proofing offices. In the meantime, here’s how to use the elevator. (NYT, WaPo)
 Why ardent fans of Korean pop are becoming political activists. (NYT)
 “Sergey Brin Has a Secret Disaster Relief Squad.” (Daily Beast)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Google is one of the biggest U.S. employers of foreign skilled workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Henry for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Bill to Increase Work Visas for Foreigners Gets New Lease on Life
The New York Times
October 14, 1998, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section C; ; Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 423 words
Byline: By JERI CLAUSING 

By JERI CLAUSING 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13
Body


Congressional leaders revived legislation today that would nearly double the number of employment visas available for skilled foreign workers.
The measure, which is sought by high-technology industries, appeared dead on Friday night, but budget negotiators agreed today to include it in the omnibus spending bill that Congress is trying to finish this week so it can adjourn.
"This is a big victory for the economy, which is being fueled in large part by our high-tech industries," said the author of the legislation, Senator Spencer Abraham, a Michigan Republican. "The legislation strikes the right balance in safeguarding America's competitive edge and protecting U.S. jobs."
The final proposal represents a hard-fought compromise with the White House, which had opposed Senator Abraham's original measure because of concerns that it lacked proper protections for American workers.
Silicon Valley companies have pushed hard for the visa legislation, contending that they cannot find enough skilled Americans to fill crucial jobs.
The industry won another victory today with the passage of the Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act, which is intended to protect technology and other start-up companies from lawsuits in state courts over stock price fluctuations. The compromise measure, now endorsed by both houses of Congress, imposes a single national standard for such suits.
The legislation to increase the number of so-called H1-B work visas, a result of months of wrangling with the White House, appeared to have been killed on Friday night after Senator Tom Harkin, an Iowa Democrat, questioned the validity of the high-technology industries' claims of worker shortages and blocked a final vote.
The final version increases from 65,000 to 115,000 the number of H1-B visas available in each of the next two years and sets the number at 107,500 in the third year.
It requires that if 15 percent or more of a company's work force consists of employees on H1-B visas, it must attest that they have not replaced American workers.
Companies hiring H1-B workers with master's degrees or higher or at salaries of $60,000 or more would be exempt from that requirement. There are also special exemptions for small businesses and start-up companies.
The legislation also authorizes the Labor Department to investigate suspected abuses of the program and imposes a $500 filing fee on visa applications and renewals. The more than $75 million raised by these fees would be used for training and scholarship programs for United States citizens.
      

Load-Date: October 14, 1998


End of Document
A Davos Deferred; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
December 20, 2021 Monday 08:30 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1731 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Jason Karaian, Sarah Kessler, Stephen Gandel, Michael J. de la Merced, Lauren Hirsch and Ephrat Livni
Highlight: The World Economic Forum postponed its annual gathering of business and government leaders over fears of the Omicron variant.
Body


The World Economic Forum postponed its annual gathering of business and government leaders over fears of the Omicron variant.
Omicron forces another change 
The World Economic Forum said this morning that it was postponing its annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland, from next month to “early summer,” citing the spread of the Omicron variant. The move suggests new uncertainties for business travel, yet another headache for C.E.O.s amid rising case counts and new questions about government efforts to contain the coronavirus. Meanwhile, U.S. stock futures are down sharply, following European and Asian markets.
Many businesses are becoming increasingly cautious. The World Economic Forum, after consulting with experts and the Swiss government, said it will instead hold virtual sessions next month. (Travel, business and otherwise, faces new pressures: Israel added the U.S. to its no-fly list, while the N.H.L. called off games involving cross-border travel until after Christmas.) In other developments:
    • “Saturday Night Live” sent home its audience and most of its cast and crew at the last minute, while Radio City canceled the rest of the Rockettes’ performances for the year. CNN barred all nonessential employees from its U.S. offices.
    • JPMorgan Chase told American workers who don’t work in bank branches that each team should determine who needs to come into the office over the next few weeks.
    • Not even top executives are unaffected: Rich Handler, the C.E.O. of the investment bank Jefferies, said he has been quarantining after testing positive for the coronavirus. (Lawmakers including Senator Elizabeth Warren also tested positive recently.)
The fate of a federal vaccine mandate for large companies became cloudier. On Friday, a federal appeals courtlifted a legal block on the rule, though appeals to the Supreme Court were immediately filed. The next day, OSHA pushed back the deadline for full enforcement of the rule until February.
Another matter that may become more confusing is what counts as “fully vaccinated.” While the Labor Department doesn’t currently require booster shots as part of its rule for large companies, it is strongly encouraging them. Some local authorities, like New York City, have already said they plan to change the definition of fully vaccinated to include boosters, as are companies like Jefferies. On the other hand, the Olympics isn’t mandating boosters for athletes. Douglas Brayley, an employment lawyer at the law firm Ropes &amp; Gray, suggested that companies are increasingly facing a difficult choice: “I wonder if there’s some reluctance to go back to people who they already had to cajole into getting the vaccine, ‘Oh, and by the way, please get one more shot.’”
Other challenges lie ahead. The spike in Omicron cases is straining America’s testing capacity, making it harder for employers who want to make regular Covid checks part of their office protocol. In Britain, the country’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, wouldn’t rule out further restrictions before Christmas.
More pandemic news:
    • Moderna said new data show a booster shot of its vaccine significantly raises antibody levels to combat the Omicron variant.
    • The N.F.L. is ending weekly Covid testing for vaccinated players who are asymptomatic.
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
Peng Shuai retracts her sexual assault claim. The Chinese tennis star told a Singaporean newspaper that she had never been sexually assaulted, apparently walking back an accusation made on social media against a top government official. Her disappearance after that post stirred worldwide concern about her safety and spurred calls to boycott the Winter Olympics in Beijing next month.
A Chinese A.I. giant revives its I.P.O. plans. SenseTime revised its listing plans, with a goal of trading on the Hong Kong stock market by year end. The company had pulled its I.P.O. after the U.S. imposed new sanctions on it over Beijing’s use of its products against ethnic Muslim minorities in the Xinjiang region.
Elon Musk puts a price tag on his taxes. The Tesla chief tweeted that he will end up paying over $11 billion this year — potentially the biggest tax bill in U.S. history — in an effort to knock back criticism that he paid little to no taxes in recent years. That said, he always faced a big tax liability because of Tesla stock options he was granted.
The fate of Tony Hsieh’s fortune is stuck in court. One year after the Zappos founder died from injuries from a mysterious fire, his $500 million estate remains the subject of legal fighting between his family and his friends, The Wall Street Journal reports. Challenges in sorting out the mess include sorting through promises to associates, some scribbled on sticky notes.
“Spider-Man: No Way Home” breaks box-office records. The latest Marvel film collected over $253 million in sales in the U.S. and Canada, for the third-highest opening weekend in Hollywood history. That gives some hope for the movie industry, as the pandemic and the rise of streaming services ate into theater ticket sales.
Wall Street gives up on Biden’s big bill 
After Senator Joe Manchin, the West Virginia Democrat whose vote was crucial to passing President Biden’s $2.2 trillion social spending bill, said he would oppose the legislation as written, he did more than set off blowback from the White House. Manchin also forced many Wall Street prognosticators to quickly rewrite their forecasts for 2022.
The news will likely add more volatility to the market. Whether the bill is officially dead, delayed or poised for a major rewrite, investors must grapple with yet more political uncertainty on top of worries about the Omicron variant and inflation. 
Goldman Sachs, for one, lowered its growth expectations. Strategists there told clients last night that it was cutting its real G.D.P. forecast for 2022, including to 2 percent in the first quarter from 3 percent. The Goldman team said Democrats may yet pass some provisions in the Biden bill, focused on manufacturing and supply chain issues, but were less likely to approve measures like extending the expanded child tax credit.
But Wall Street is likely to cheer the demise of some other provisions. The Goldman strategists said it was less likely now that corporate taxes would go up, having previously predicted that those higher rates would reduce the S&amp;P 500’s earnings by 3 percent next year. Many investors also feared, as Manchin does, that the bill would have increased inflation, even as multiple economists said that likely wasn’t true.
“Is the conservator making decisions in the best interest of the conservatee or the business manager who they owe a debt to?” 
— Anthony Palmieri, the incoming head of the National Guardianship Association, on new revelations by The Times about a loan from Louise Taylor, who was Britney Spears’s business manager, and James Spears, who kept Spears in a conservatorship for years.
Suiting up for the Big Board 
Today, the luxury men’s suit maker Ermenegildo Zegna will become, it says, the first Italian fashion brand to list on the New York Stock Exchange. It’s doing so via one of Wall Street’s big trends, a special-purpose acquisition company, DealBook’s Lauren Hirsch and The Times’s Vanessa Friedman write.
Meet the new Zegna. It’s going public by merging with a SPAC run by the former UBS leader Sergio Ermotti. The deal values Zegna — which will drop “Ermenegildo,” the first name of both its founder and his grandson, the company’s current C.E.O. — at about $3 billion. New investors will inject $760 million in new capital into the business, which the company may use in part to keep investing in its Italian textile supply chain. The Zegna family will still keep a roughly 66 percent stake.
The deal represents multiple bets:
    • A rebound in luxury. Rising consumer confidence pushed the luxury market’s growth this year up nearly 30 percent over 2020. Zegna itself expects to bring in about $1.35 billion in sales this year.
    • An ability to keep moving beyond suits. Zegna generated about half of its sales from leisurewear, up from 38 percent in 2016, and plans to keep focusing on that category and other areas like children’s wear. “They’ve done a lot of homework to be more credible and more appealing outside of formal wear — and I think they’ve gone a long way with that work,” Luca Solca, an analyst at Bernstein, told The Times.
    • A bigger future. As it competes against French luxury conglomerates like LVMH and Kering, Zegna has ambitions to grow as well. It has acquired the label Thom Browne and invested millions in Italian textile manufacturers, and may take advantage of its stock and easier access to financing for future acquisitions. “One part of the reason we did what we did is because of scale,” Gildo Zegna, the company’s C.E.O., told The Times. “Don’t ask me how big scale would be, but surely bigger than what it is right now.”
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
    • Canada’s Bank of Montreal will buy Bank of the West from BNP Paribas for $16.3 billion, in one of the biggest banking takeovers in recent memory. (Bloomberg)
    • The Chinese real estate developer Kaisa failed to make several bond payments on dollar bonds and has begun financial restructuring talks with creditors. (WSJ)
    • Mondee, whose software helps agents find flight deals, is reportedly near a deal to go public by merging with a SPAC. (WSJ)
    • How oil giants like Exxon Mobil and Shell became big targets for activist investors. (FT)
Policy
    • Business leaders and lawmakers worry about dwindling federal pandemic aid amid the surge of the Omicron variant. (WaPo)
    • President Biden’s approach to overhauling the H-1B worker visa program may put him at odds with other Democrats. (Politico)
    • Some Amazon shareholders asked the e-commerce giant’s board to conduct an independent audit of workplace safety at the company. (The Verge)
Best of the rest
    • Jeffrey Epstein was so close to the family of the financier Glen Dubin that Dubin’s children called him “Uncle F.” (Bloomberg)
    • No more 8 a.m. meetings, and other resolutions for 2022. (NYT)
    • Generation Z is increasingly choosing e-sports over physical ones. (NYT)
    • A peppermint shortage has left some candy stores short of canes days before Christmas. (Insider)
    • “So much happened in 2021. But did it?” (NYT)
We’d like your feedback! Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Denis Balibouse/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: December 20, 2021


End of Document
Workers, and Bosses, in a Visa Maze 
 The New York Times
April 29, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3464 words
Byline:  By LESLIE WAYNE 
Dateline: ISELIN, N.J.  
Body


AT the Delhi Darbar restaurant, where the Indian expatriate community here comes to eat, the talk is not about the food, but about the uncertainty of life in America these days. Gathered around the table are four computer programmers, born in India and educated at top schools there, who now work in high-technology jobs in the New York area. Along with their wives and children, they came here nearly six years ago, on the promise of a job paying 10 times more than they could earn back home and the expectation of pursuing the American dream.
     But they cannot. The four -- and up to 420,000 others like them -- are caught up in a labyrinth of immigration laws, Congressional politics, the competing forces of the high-tech industry and organized labor and a tortuous, dysfunctional process of gaining "green cards" that allow permanent residency here. As a result, while they write the Java computer programs or manage the C++ computer projects that American business needs, they are never quite sure which end of the earth -- the United States or India -- they should call home. 
 "All of us are in limbo," said Shailesh Gala, one of the four, as they munched on chicken tikka and curries. "They created a false promise for us. Everyone who comes here has worked hard. We are waiting. Waiting. Waiting. Waiting, and nothing is happening." As heads nodded in agreement, another programmer, Bhushan Sethi, said: "We are migrating through legal ways. We are here when the country needed us. But when we need this country, it is not there. Give us the opportunity to stay."
The companies that hire these workers, called H-1B's for the visa that lets them work for six years while seeking green cards, say much the same. From Microsoft to Intel, from Goldman Sachs to Merrill Lynch, from Deloitte Consulting to Ernst & Young, H-1B's are being hired by the planeload to fill a gap in computer skills, especially at higher levels, because Americans have been cool to the computer science and engineering education that foreign students embrace.
The H-1B visa program has its champions. High-tech superstars like Bill Gates, Andy Grove and Scott McNealy have lobbied Congress to expand it. And holders of H-1B's, besides many faceless programmers, have included Linus Torvalds, 31, the Finnish inventor of the Linux operating system, a software rival to Microsoft's Windows, who recently traded his visa for a green card. 
But as the program has grown, so have its problems -- as even its backers acknowledge. 
Both a guest worker program and a road to a green card, the H-1B visa system has become a lightning rod of controversy over immigration policy. High-tech companies say the program is so riddled with bureaucratic delays that they have had to hire whole staffs to keep everything straight. The period for getting green cards now stretches for years, keeping the lives of H-1B's -- and the plans of corporations -- up in the air. After investing in and training an H-1B employee for up to six years, a company may well see him sent packing on the next airplane out. 
Moreover, under pressure from organized labor, Congress enacted complicated rules making it hard for corporations to promote H-1B workers or reward them with more challenging assignments.
The government isn't happy, either. Three agencies -- the Labor and State Departments and the Immigration and Naturalization Service -- administer the program, leading to regulatory gridlock and, according to a blistering report from the General Accounting Office, a breakdown in federal oversight.
As a result, nearly everyone involved with the program -- supporters and detractors -- complains about its flaws, often using words like "disaster" and "train wreck" as descriptions.
"The H-1B system needs to work for everybody and now it works for no one," said Jenifer Eisen Verdery, manager of education and work-force policy at Intel, the fifth-largest employer of H-1B's. "It doesn't work for the immigrant who has it. It doesn't work for the employers who hire them. It doesn't work for agencies that run it."
The H-1B program has its roots in temporary visa programs begun in the 1950's. But it took off in the 1980's and, again, in the late 1990's, as high-tech industries blossomed. 
Late last year, with hefty campaign contributions and a lobbying juggernaut, employers persuaded Congress to increase the number of H-1B visas granted annually to 195,000. And estimates show that the total number of H-1B's here could reach a high of 710,000 over the next three years. Compared with a national work force of 140 million, that number is minuscule. But it is a sizable and growing minority in information technology, where up to 20 percent of the five million high-tech workers are foreign-born, with about half of those coming from the H-1B program. It is too early to tell what impact, if any, the current economic downturn will have on the numbers.
HIGH-TECH companies say they have no choice but to hire H-1B's. "Of course, we make every effort to find skills within U.S. workers," said Zoanne Hennigan, director of immigration at Intel, which hires H-1B's as software, network and component design engineers. "But when there is a skill shortage, H-1B has been absolutely instrumental to making sure our business goals are met. The H-1B program is critical to the success of our company."
Such talk, however, holds little sway with organized labor and American-born computer programmers who have thrown obstacles in the program's way for the last decade. They contend that the program is just a way for high-tech companies, which are largely not unionized, to get programmers on the cheap, hold them captive in jobs where they have little voice over working conditions and jettison them when they are no longer needed. 
These groups have been among the most vocal in pointing out H-1B abuses -- cases of underpayment, fraud and exploitation of a vulnerable, compliant work force. But while waving the banner for worker protection, organized labor has succeeded only in convincing Congress to enact measures that have made the system more byzantine -- and unintentionally made it more open to potential abuse. For example, the paperwork required of high-tech companies to show that they have not replaced American citizens with H-1B's has become so onerous that, as a practical matter, it makes it difficult for H1-B's to change jobs.
"There isn't anything I like about the program," said Paul E. Almeida, president of the Department of Professional Employees at the A.F.L.-C.I.O. "It looks to me like it is just used to suppress wages. These employers don't want to invest in workers if they don't have to. This opens the door to low-wage workers." 
SOME American programmers, who have started Web sites opposed to H-1B, share this fervor. One well-known site, created by John Miano, head of the Programmers Guild, a trade group, features banner headlines like "Slave Trade Still Alive in the U.S." 
"Most H-1B's are blithering incompetents," said Mr. Miano, adding that he has worked alongside H-1B's and has had to correct their mistakes. "They are unbelievably bad. They are not highly skilled, it's laughable. This is not a program for the best and the brightest. Anyone could be packaged by a lawyer and get an H-1B."
Whether a shortage of high-tech workers truly exists -- statistics are inconclusive -- H-1B visa holders are largely highly educated, government reports show. Many are educated at India's well-established engineering schools and, increasingly, at American universities. 
Almost 98 percent of them have bachelor's degrees or higher, and 41.5 percent have master's degrees or higher. The jobs generally pay $45,000 to $150,000 -- versus a more typical $6,000 for similar jobs in India, the biggest source of supply. (While the vast majority of H-1B's are in high-tech industries, a small number of the visas are issued for teachers, medical personnel, artists, fashion models and others.) 
About one-quarter of high-tech H-1B's were already here before getting their visas, typically attending American universities on student visas. Government data from 1998, the most recent available, shows that 35 percent of all high-tech master's degrees at American universities went to foreign nationals, as did about half of all high-tech doctorates. 
In Silicon Valley, many companies recruit these foreign students -- many of whom would otherwise have to leave -- right after graduation. Corporations also send recruiters to India, find workers through Internet job postings or bring them here from previous projects overseas. And some companies, both in high technology and on Wall Street, hire H-1B's from consulting firms working as subcontractors on specific technical projects. 
"The H-1B program takes the creme de la creme," said Sheela Murthy, an immigration lawyer in Owings Mills, Md., and a native of India. "These are not people who are coming here to clean toilets. Many of them have master's degrees and attended top-notch universities. They are coming with a dream and a desire to do something with their lives."
Yet in accepting the visas, high-tech workers often walk into a nightmare. The visa allows workers and their families to stay here for six years, but the lag in getting green cards has grown to four, five or six years. As a result, thousands of H-1B holders, many of whom filed for green cards immediately upon receiving their H-1B's, are bumping against that six-year limit. Some may receive one-year extensions, but others may be forced to leave.
Employers are equally anxious. "An employer has found a person and wants them to stay, and what then, after six years you have to let them go?" said Theresa Cardinal Brown, associate director of the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
The wait for green cards results not only from delays at the immigration service, which now has 900,000 people in its green-card backlog, but also from supply-and-demand imbalances. At a time when the United States is admitting up to 195,000 new H-1B's annually, there are only 140,000 employment-based green cards available annually for H-1B's -- and their spouses, who are usually admitted on a different visa, an H-4. 
There are few specific criteria for obtaining a green card -- an employer must simply certify that the applicant has needed skills, and applicants must not have criminal records. The I.N.S. keeps no statistics on the number of H-1B's who eventually get green cards. 
The squeeze is tightest for citizens of India and China, who represent 57 percent of all H-1B's. Until recently, those two nations were each allotted 9,800 green cards, the same number set aside for citizens of any other country -- for instance, Iceland or Belgium. Late last year, Congress lifted those quotas, allowing for the transfer of unused allocations from small countries to larger ones. But regulations to put the changed law into effect are still in the works.
"The H-1B program is mismanaged," said B. Lindsay Lowell, an immigration specialist at Georgetown University. "People don't think through the connections between the temporary visa program and permanent residency, and it leaves people in these hazily defined roles. There is backlog on backlog. We are increasing the numbers willy-nilly in a system that cannot process the paperwork, and it is a disaster."
By contrast, other countries, particularly Canada, are actively wooing these same workers. Starting in 1998, Canada began to speed up its processing of high-tech workers, allowing them to gain permanent residency in a matter of months if they score enough points on a ranking that considers their education and the needs of the country. Australia and New Zealand have adopted similar changes, and England, Ireland, Germany and Austria are relaxing their rules, too. 
THE I.N.S. is aware of the competition: "Canada has made it a national policy to increase their market share of high-tech workers," said Jacquelyn Bednarz, a special policy assistant at the I.N.S. "They are courting them with attractive ads. They are welcoming them and aggressively pursuing them."
For H-1B's in the United States, the protracted process has practical consequences: They must pay taxes, including Social Security, with no assurance of ever receiving the future benefits. Their spouses are not allowed to work. They raise children as Americans, even though they may, one day, have to go to a country that is foreign to them. 
Because the visa is issued for a specific job, many H1-B's fear that they will hurt their chances of getting green cards if they try to switch employers, despite new rules allowing them to do that. As a result, until they get their green cards, many H-1B's remain tied to their first employers. 
"The bond between me and my employer is stronger than between me and my wife," said Murali Krishna, who works in Silicon Valley. "Break the umbilical cord and let me come and work for who I want to and negotiate what I can get. That way employers can't exploit me. If you want to be legal, you cannot be ambitious and grow."
Similarly, as a practical matter, it is impossible for H-1B's to become high-tech entrepreneurs, no matter how much brain power and drive they may have, because they would lose their green-card sponsors. "I have great business ideas, but I cannot start a company," said Mr. Sethi, one of those dining at the Delhi Darbar restaurant. "The environment in the U.S. makes you think about becoming an entrepreneur. But this process cuts you down."
Many H-1B's say they live in a constant fear of being deported, should they lose their jobs. The I.N.S. has said it plans to be lenient in the current high-tech downturn, but if an H-1B worker is out of work for more than 10 days, he is "out of status" and can be told to leave immediately. While the I.N.S. has had no reports of deportations recently, serious life decisions, like buying a home and car, having children, and firming up a career, are made more difficult by such uncertainty.
Consider S. Samuels, an H-1B computer programmer who spoke on condition that his first name not be used. He came to the United States to get an M.B.A., after graduating from India's top engineering school, the Indian Institute of Technology. That was more than five years ago. Now, with a pregnant wife and one child who knows only of life here, he is worried.
"If a citizen or a green-card holder loses their job, they lose time or money," Mr. Samuels said. "For us, we can lose our whole life."
Moreover, the lengthy green-card process makes H-1B's much more vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, like underpayment or a practice called "benching," in which H-1B's working for computer consulting firms are not paid for time spent waiting between assignments. Many of these consulting firms, also called "body shops," act as middlemen, hiring H-1B's and sending them on temporary assignments for Fortune 500 companies.
While reports of "body shop" abuse are common among H-1B's, it is hard to come up with hard evidence, since workers fear being sent back to their home country if they challenge their employer. But some have. 
Earlier this month, in response to a suit filed by an H1-B worker, a California superior court ordered a Silicon Valley consulting firm, Compubahn, to drop a restrictive noncompete clause requiring H-1B's to pay the firm $25,000 if they quit. The firm is appealing. H-1B's have complained in computer chat rooms about this practice elsewhere. 
Fraud in obtaining visas has also been found, including one tragic case in Berkeley, Calif., in which three Indian girls were brought in on H-1B visas for sexual purposes. The case came to light in November 1999 after one of the three, a 17-year-old pregnant girl, died of carbon monoxide poisoning in the rented apartment the girls shared. Last month, the landlord, Lakireddy Reddy, 63, a native of India worth more than $50 million, pleaded guilty in federal court in Oakland, as did two of his relatives. His two sons have also been charged in the case, in which the group is accused of fraudulently bringing Indian nationals to the United States for cheap labor and sex.
BEYOND the headlines, it is difficult to determine how much abuse has occurred. By most accounts, it is a small but troubling aspect of the program. In the 2000 fiscal year, the Department of Labor received 140 complaints from H-1B workers and ordered back wages of $1.6 million to 339 people. But the statistics may understate the problem, because H-1B workers' dependence on their employers may make them reticent. "There is a huge disincentive for H-1B's to complain," said a labor department enforcement official. "They are very unwilling to come to us."
One advocate of a speedier green-card process is Mr. Torvalds, the inventor of the Linux computer operating system, who received his green card five months ago. Mr. Torvalds, who lives in Silicon Valley and is chief scientist at the Transmeta Corporation, which sponsored him for a green card, was luckier than most -- he came from Finland, a country with no waiting list. 
Yet even he faced the same difficulties as many other H-1B's. He paid cash for his home to avoid problems in getting a mortgage; he was put in the "problem queue" at United States Customs whenever returning from overseas trips, adding hours to his journey; and it took him more than nine months to get a California driver's license because of the need for immigration paperwork.
"People who end up coming on the program are pretty much at the mercy of the system," Mr. Torvalds said in an interview by e-mail. "That makes people nervous. It can cause total disruption in your life if the six-year clock runs out and you have to go back to a life you've long since left behind. That uncertainty is the nasty kind. 
"Right now," he added, "the whole process is nothing but bureaucracy, with nobody driving it, and nobody really responsible."
On the front lines of many of these problems are employers, who pay $1,000 for the visa, an additional $3,500 to $5,000 in legal fees and untold dollars in employee time to hire H-1B's. Under pressure from organized labor, Congress enacted a cap in 1990 to limit the number of H-1B visas. And, in the mid-1990's, labor pressed Congress to require that all H-1B employers file a "labor condition application" with the Labor Department to protect American workers from being displaced.
The paperwork for this application has grown; the regulations for it now run to 150 pages. At a minimum, an employer must show he has advertised the job to the local work force, is not paying an H-1B any more or any less than comparable workers, is not using H-1B's as strikebreakers and has sought to hire an American citizen first. As a result, the hiring of an H-1B can take months. 
One Wall Street firm has employees who are designated to process H-1B's, including counseling for the bosses of H-1B workers to understand the complications. "They have no idea of the intricacies of the process," said a representative of the firm, which asked not to be named. "And explaining it can last up to a couple of hours."
This mountain of paperwork also discourages companies from promoting H-1B workers or transferring them to another job site. 
"One of the major problems is that an employee is locked into a post," said Sandra J. Boyd, a lobbyist for the National Association of Manufacturers, a trade group. "If they want to move up the ladder, all this paperwork has to start again."
SOME employers, especially those in small companies, have even adopted a no-H-1B policy. A search of popular Internet high-tech employment sites like www.Dice.com finds dozens of solicitations for software engineers with the following designation: "U.S. citizens and green-card holders only." Calls to recruiters placing these ads resulted in the same responses -- that many employers do not want to face the costs, paperwork or delays that come with hiring an H-1B. 
"A lot of companies want someone right away," said one recruiter, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "Time kills these deals."
So does money. Last December, Congress increased H-1B visa fees from $500 to $1,000, to pay for government-sponsored job training programs for high-tech workers. In the current fiscal year, the Department of Labor estimates that it will receive $180 million for these training programs and $213 million next year. 
But will this money go toward training United States citizens to take the highly-skilled jobs now filled by H-1B's? It is hard to say. The training program is still in its infancy. So far, a large portion of the money is going into basic programs to train disadvantaged youths, single parents and the unemployed in entry-level computer jobs -- jobs not filled by H-1B's, but largely by American workers.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Shailesh Gala, an H-1B visa holder, with his wife, Varsha, and daughter, Rashi. The visa system "created a false promise," he said. (Nancy Wegard for The New York Times); The Web site of the Programmers Guild, above, condemns the H-1B program, which lets foreign workers fill U.S. jobs. Other sites support the idea. (pg. 1); High-tech industries have attracted Indian immigrants to places like Iselin, N.J. Women tried on wedding saris, above, at Libaas, a local shop. Iselin, in Middlesex County, supports many other Indian businesses, like a restaurant, left. (Photographs by Nancy Wegard for The New York Times)(pg. 12) Chart: "Bringing Expertise From Abroad"H1-B visas have been rising steadily as more technology companies look abroad to find the specialized workers they need. India, with its longstanding tradition of science and engineering education, has been a ready source of systems analysts and programmers. Graph shows number of H-1B visas granted from 1989-1999. VISAS GRANTED, BY COMPANY, OCT. 1999 TO FEB. 2000 Motorola: 618Oracle: 455Cisco Systems: 398Mastech: 389Intel: 367Microsoft: 362Rapidigm: 357Syntel: 337Wipro: 327Tata Consultancy Services: 320PricewaterhouseCoopers: 272People.com Consultants: 261Lucent Technologies: 255Infosys Technologies: 239Nortel Networks: 234 SHARE OF VISAS GRANTED, BY COUNTRY, MAY 1998 TO JULY 1999* Other countries: 27.8Japan: 2.0Taiwan: 2.1South Korea: 2.3Philippines: 2.7Canada: 3.0Britain: 3.2China: 9.3India: 47.5% *Figures do not add to 100 because of rounding(Sources: State Department; Immigration and Naturalization Service)(pg. 12)

Load-Date: April 29, 2001


End of Document
An Easier Path For Foreigners In Biden's Plan
The New York Times
May 31, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1916 words
Byline: By Michael D. Shear and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Body


Documents obtained by The New York Times show far-reaching efforts by President Biden to remake the immigration system and undo much of his predecessor's legacy.
WASHINGTON -- If President Biden gets his way, it will soon be far easier to immigrate to the United States. There will be shorter, simpler forms and applicants will have to jump through fewer security hoops. Foreigners will have better opportunities to join their families and more chances to secure work visas. 
  A 46-page draft blueprint obtained by The New York Times maps out the Biden administration's plans to significantly expand the legal immigration system, including methodically reversing the efforts to dismantle it by former President Donald J. Trump, who reduced the flow of foreign workers, families and refugees, erecting procedural barriers tougher to cross than his ''big, beautiful wall.''
  Because of Mr. Trump's immigration policies, the average time it takes to approve employer-sponsored green cards has doubled. The backlog for citizenship applications is up 80 percent since 2014, to more than 900,000 cases. Approval for the U-visa program, which grants legal status for immigrants willing to help the police, has gone from five months to roughly five years.
  In almost every case over the last four years, immigrating to the United States has become harder, more expensive and takes longer.
  And while Mr. Biden made clear during his presidential campaign that he intended to undo much of his predecessor's immigration legacy, the blueprint offers new details about how far-reaching the effort will be -- not only rolling back Mr. Trump's policies, but addressing backlogs and delays that plagued prior presidents.
  The blueprint, dated May 3 and titled ''D.H.S. Plan to Restore Trust in Our Legal Immigration System,'' lists scores of initiatives intended to reopen the country to more immigrants, making good on the president's promise to ensure America embraces its ''character as a nation of opportunity and of welcome.''
  ''There are significant changes that need to be made to really open up all avenues of legal immigration,'' said Felicia Escobar Carrillo, the chief of staff at U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, of the efforts to reverse Mr. Trump's agenda. ''In the same way that they took a broad-stroke approach to closing off avenues, I think we want to take a broad approach toward opening up the legal avenues that have always been available but that they tried to put roadblocks up on.''
  Since taking office four months ago, Mr. Biden has struggled with a historic surge in migration by Central American children and teenagers that has prompted some Republicans to accuse the president of flinging open the nation's borders to people trying to enter the country illegally, a charge the White House rejects.
  In fact, Mr. Biden does want to open the country to more immigrants. His ambition, as reflected in the blueprint, is to rebuild and expand the opportunities for foreigners to enter the United States -- but to do so legally.
  Divided into seven sections, the document offers detailed policy proposals that would help more foreigners move to the United States, including high-skilled workers, trafficking victims, the families of Americans living abroad, American Indians born in Canada, refugees, asylum-seekers and farm workers. Immigrants who apply online could pay less in fees or even secure a waiver in an attempt to ''reduce barriers'' to immigration. And regulations would be overhauled to ''encourage full participation by immigrants in our civic life.''
  Even with a more restrictive and slower immigration system, about 1 million people obtained green cards in 2019, the last full year before the pandemic. Most had been waiting for years. In the final year of the Obama administration, 1.2 million people received green cards.
  But if Mr. Biden accomplishes everything in the document, he will have gone further than just reversing the downward trend. He will have significantly increased opportunities for foreigners around the globe to come to the United States, embracing robust immigration even as a divisive, decades-long political debate continues to rage over such a policy.
  Most of the changes could be put into practice without passage of Mr. Biden's proposed overhaul of the nation's immigration laws, which would provide a pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented people living in the United States but has stalled in a bitterly divided Congress. While surveys show that most Americans support increased immigration, many Republican voters have eagerly backed Mr. Trump's more restrictive policies.
  White House officials declined to comment directly on the Homeland Security Department's blueprint, saying that such documents go through many drafts and that decisions about specific steps to address legal immigration remain in flux. But they said the president remained committed to significantly rolling back the restrictions imposed by his predecessor.
  That effort will take time and has not yet caught the public's attention like the surge of crossings at the southwest border. But conservative activists who have for years demanded lower levels of legal immigration are vowing a fight to stop Mr. Biden and extract a political price for his actions.
  ''They just want to shovel people in here,'' said Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, a former Virginia attorney general who served as the acting head of Citizenship and Immigration Services under Mr. Trump. ''They are not running an immigration system for the benefit of America, and certainly not for the benefit of ordinary Americans. ''
  Most research has shown that legal immigration to the United States has benefits for the country's economy, especially at a time when the country's population growth is slowing. But Mr. Cuccinelli and others who favor severe restrictions on immigration say it is obvious to them that letting foreigners compete for jobs -- especially when the country is still recovering from an economic downturn like the one created by the pandemic -- will hurt the prospects for American citizens.
  ''The number one job for the immigration services is to make sure that immigration does not hurt Americans,'' said Roy Beck, the founder of NumbersUSA, a group dedicated to far lower levels of legal immigration.
  Motivated by that belief, Mr. Cuccinelli set in motion a transformation of the government's legal immigration system during the Trump administration -- changing his agency from one that confers benefits on foreigners into a ''vetting agency,'' in part by issuing numerous restrictions on offering asylum for immigrants and trying to raise fees.
  The increased vetting, as well as travel restrictions imposed during the pandemic, helped contribute to the result the Trump administration had sought: The influx of immigrants slowed significantly, as winning legal approval to enter the United States became much harder.
  With fewer immigrants coming through the pipeline, there has been less money to finance Citizenship and Immigration Services, which is supported almost entirely by fees paid by immigrants. Restoring the agency to full capacity is at the heart of Mr. Biden's effort to expand legal immigration, according to the document and interviews with administration officials.
  A central element of the blueprint is addressing backlogs in the immigration system.
  The administration is planning to fast-track immigration applications by expanding virtual interviews and electronic filing, as well as limiting the requests for evidence from applicants. Mr. Biden has tapped Cass R. Sunstein, a former Obama administration official and legal scholar at Harvard Law School, to remake the immigration system so it is ''more effective and less burdensome'' than it has been in decades by ''reducing paperwork and other administrative requirements.''
  Mr. Biden wants to restore opportunities for foreign employees through the existing H-1B visa program, which is intended for workers with special skills. The administration also intends to create new pathways for foreign entrepreneurs who wish to ''start-up businesses and create jobs for U.S. workers,'' according to the document.
  Officials are working on a regulation that could allow migrants to win asylum in the United States if they are victims of domestic violence or their relatives were persecuted. During the Trump era, Attorney General William P. Barr moved to end asylum protection for those who claimed they deserved it for those reasons.
  Mr. Biden is also aiming to expand immigration opportunities for L.G.B.T.Q. refugees from countries where they are persecuted or where same-sex marriages are not recognized.
  In addition, he wants to revamp a program that provides a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who help law enforcement by cooperating with police or testifying in court.
  The waiting list for the U-Visa program has ballooned, leaving crime victims and survivors of domestic abuse vulnerable to abusers who may threaten to report them for deportation if they continue to talk to the police, said Leslye E. Orloff, director of the national immigrant women's advocacy project at American University.
  The Biden administration is considering extending protections to immigrants who cooperate even before they make it on the official waiting list for the visa, according to the document.
  ''They're recognizing that there's danger for these victims,'' Ms. Orloff said.
  Critics say the Biden administration is ignoring the negative consequences of their efforts. The H-1B program has been attacked as a loophole for tech companies to import cheap foreign workers to compete for jobs. Granting asylum to the victims of domestic abuse could open the door to accepting millions of additional people. And some Republicans say Mr. Biden should not loosen vetting of foreigners, though officials insist they will continue to screen for terrorists and other threats.
  As the Biden administration pushes forward with the changes, officials appear willing to use emergency rules and presidential memos to avoid the lengthy regulatory process, in much the same way that Mr. Trump put his own agenda in place. But that could make Mr. Biden's immigration legacy subject to a similar reversal by a Republican president in the future.
  ''The question looming over all of this work is how do you do this in a way that isn't easily so capsized next time around,'' said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship.
  Change could not come soon enough for Jenn Hawk, 37, who is currently living in with her Argentine husband in Poland, where he works, even though her autistic son is in the Washington area with his father.
  Because of delays in processing her husband's immigration application, she is faced with a choice: stay in Poland with the man she married, or go back to the United States alone to be with her 10-year-old son.
  Ms. Hawk filed to sponsor her husband's immigration to the United States in October of 2020, spending $575 on the application. But they are facing a delay of more than a year and a half before they can even submit their financial and medical information, let alone get an interview with an immigration officer.
  ''I just want to go home,'' Ms. Hawk said. ''It seems like they're doing everything in their power to restrict that from being a possibility.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/30/us/politics/biden-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Dozens of asylum-seeking migrants waiting to be taken to a U.S. Border Patrol facility after crossing the Rio Grande into Texas on May 5. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADREES LATIF/REUTERS) (A15)               

Load-Date: May 31, 2021


End of Document
Latest Product Of Tech Firms: Immigrant Bill
The New York Times
May 5, 2013 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1800 words
Byline: By ERIC LIPTON and SOMINI SENGUPTA; Eric Lipton reported from Washington, and Somini Sengupta from San Francisco. Neha Thirani contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The television advertisement that hit the airwaves in Florida last month featured the Republican Party's rising star, Senator Marco Rubio, boasting about his get-tough plan for border security.
But most who watched the commercial, sponsored by a new group that calls itself Americans for a Conservative Direction, may be surprised to learn who bankrolled it: senior executives from Silicon Valley, like Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and Reid Hoffman of LinkedIn, who run companies where the top employees donate mostly to Democrats.
The advertising blitz reflects the sophisticated lobbying campaign being waged by technology companies and their executives.
They have managed to secure much of what they want in the landmark immigration bill now pending in Congress, provisions that would allow them to fill thousands of vacant jobs with foreign engineers. At the same time, they have openly encouraged lawmakers to make it harder for consulting companies in India and elsewhere to provide foreign workers temporarily to this country.
Those deals were worked out through what Senate negotiators acknowledged was extraordinary access by American technology companies to staff members who drafted the bill. The companies often learned about detailed provisions even before all the members of the so-called Gang of Eight senators who worked out the package were informed.
''We are very pleased with the progress and happy with what's in the bill,'' said Peter J. Muller, a former House aide who now works as the director of government relations at Intel. ''It addresses many of the issues we've been advocating for years.''
Now, along with other industry heavyweights, including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the technology companies are trying to make sure the law gets passed -- which explains the political-style television advertising campaign, sponsored by a group that has revealed no details about how much money it gets from its individual supporters.
The industry also hopes to get more from the deal by working to remove some regulatory restrictions in the proposal, including on hiring foreign workers and firing Americans.
Silicon Valley was once politically aloof before realizing in recent years that its future profits depended in part on battles here in Washington. Its effort to influence immigration legislation is one of its most sophisticated.
The technology industry ''understands there's probably not a tremendous amount of resistance to their part of the bill,'' Mr. Rubio said in an interview last week, saying he welcomed the industry support. ''But their future and getting the reform passed is tied to the overall bill.''
The bill has a good chance of winning passage in the Senate. The hardest sell will come in the House, where many conservative Republicans see the deal as too generous to immigrants who came to this nation illegally.
Rob Jesmer, a former top Republican Senate strategist who helps run the new Zuckerberg-backed nonprofit group that sponsored the Rubio ad, insisted that his organization's push is based on the personal convictions of the executives who donated to the cause and who believe immigration laws need to be changed. Those convictions just happen to line up with what their corporations are lobbying for as well, he said.
''It will give a lot of people who are educated in this country who are already here a chance to remain in the United States,'' Mr. Jesmer said, ''and encourage entrepreneurs from all over the world to come to the United States and create jobs.''
The profound transition under way inside Silicon Valley companies is illustrated by their lobbying disclosure reports filed in Congress. Facebook's lobbying budget swelled from $351,000 in 2010 to $2.45 million in the first three months of this year, while Google spent a record $18 million last year.
That boom in spending translates into hiring of top talent in the art of Washington deal-making. These companies have hired people like Joel D. Kaplan, a onetime deputy chief of staff in the Bush administration who now works for Facebook; Susan Molinari, a former House Republican from New York who is now a Google lobbyist; and outside lobbyists like Steven Elmendorf, a former chief of staff to Richard A. Gephardt, a former House majority leader, who works for Facebook.
The immigration fight, which has unified technology companies perhaps more than any other issue, has brought the lobbying effort to new heights. The industry sees it as a fix to a stubborn problem: job vacancies, particularly for engineers.
''We are not able to fill all the jobs that we are creating,'' Brad Smith, Microsoft's general counsel, told the Senate Judiciary Committee late last month.
Chief executives met with President Obama to discuss immigration. Venture capitalists testified in Congress. Their lobbyists roamed the Senate corridors to make sure their appeals were considered in the closed-door negotiations among the Gang of Eight, which included Mr. Rubio and Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, who have been particularly receptive.
In the many phone calls and hallway asides on Capitol Hill this year, those lobbyists realized that they had to give a little to get a lot of what they wanted. At the top of their wish list was an expansion of a temporary visa program called the H-1B, which allows companies to hire foreigners for jobs in the United States. There are a limited number of H-1Bs available each year, and competition for them is fierce.
Companies like Facebook and Intel use them largely to bring workers to their own offices. Consulting companies like Tata, based in India, use them to supply computer workers at American banks, oil companies and sometimes software firms.
Critics of H-1B visas point out that they mostly bring workers at the lowest pay scales. The technology industry's main rivals in these negotiations were lawmakers who have long been critical of guest worker visa programs, chiefly Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and groups that represent American engineers.
Silicon Valley lobbyists told Senate negotiators they agreed that the H1-B visa system had been subject to abuse. Go after the companies that take advantage of guest worker visas and give us the benefit of the doubt, they told the Senate staff members, according to interviews with several lobbyists.
''You know and we know there are some bad people in this system,'' is how Scott Corley, the president of Compete America, a technology industry coalition, recalled the conversation. ''We are simply trying to make sure that as they are pursuing the rats they are not sinking the ship.''
That acknowledgment, several lobbyists said privately, helped unlock an impasse in negotiations.
What emerged was a Senate measure that allows American technology companies to procure many more skilled guest worker visas, raising the limit to 110,000 a year from 65,000 under current law, along with a provision to expand it further based on market demand. The bill would also allow these companies to move workers on guest visas more easily to permanent resident visas, freeing up more temporary visas for these companies.
But it requires them to pay higher wages for guest workers and to post job openings on a Web site, so Americans can have a chance at them. And it draws a line in the sand between these technology firms and the mostly Indian companies that supply computer workers on H-1B visas for short-term jobs at companies in the United States.
''This provision accomplishes the goal of discouraging abuse of the program while providing an important incentive for companies to bring top talent to work in the United States for the long-term, where they will contribute to our economy,'' said Mr. Kaplan, the former Republican White House aide who is now the vice president for United States public policy at Facebook.
The bill is written in such a way that it penalizes companies that have a large share of foreign guest workers among their United States work forces, eventually making it impossible for them to bring in any more. It allows large American companies that have many more American workers to continue to import workers. And it includes a provision that exempts from the guest worker count those employees that companies sponsor for green cards, essentially a bonus to American businesses like Facebook whose work forces are growing fast.
Companies that provide temporary foreign workers say the move is intended to push them out of the American market.
These companies, mostly based in India, have far less good will on Capitol Hill. Their hope now rests with convincing lawmakers that it would be counterproductive to punish them.
''Why are we in the United States? We are there because American corporations want us,'' said Som Mittal, the president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, which represents Indian companies. ''We help them become competitive and serve their customers better.''
In interviews, Mr. Rubio and an aide to Mr. Schumer said the draft bill takes a balanced approach to penalize those who do not hire American workers for jobs here. They say the proposal is good for the country, even as it may benefit American technology firms.
In March, some of the biggest figures in the technology industry, including Mr. Zuckerberg, the Microsoft founder Bill Gates and the venture capitalist John Doerr, unveiled a new nonprofit advocacy group, called Fwd.Us, with its first mission being to push Congress to overhaul immigration law. The group has hired lobbyists and a staff of veteran political operatives.
One of its first campaigns was to bankroll the television ad for Mr. Rubio. Two other ads backed Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, and Senator Mark Begich, Democrat of Alaska, who is considered a critical swing vote, in a state where there are many critics of the legislation. Mr. Jesmer said the group spent ''in the seven figures'' on the ads.
Mr. Rubio has been a vocal ally. He says he understands the industry's need for talent and wants to prevent companies from having to ship work overseas.
To negotiate the details on the immigration bill, Mr. Rubio hired Enrique Gonzalez, who took a leave from a law firm that handles H-1B visa applications for many technology companies. Mr. Gonzalez said the assignment presented no conflict of interest because he works with universities handling visas, not technology companies.
The fact that technology lobbyists were given an unusual degree of access to the negotiators on the bill is entirely justified, he said. ''Because of the unique needs of the technology industry, the newness of it, the novelty of a lot of the issues they are confronting, I think that was why there were more engaged than some of the other industries were,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/05/us/politics/tech-firms-take-lead-in-lobbying-on-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, at lectern, with other senators who worked on an immigration overhaul now under consideration. The plan is being heavily promoted by senior executives from Silicon Valley, including Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook, left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)       

Load-Date: May 5, 2013


End of Document
Biden Aims to Rebuild and Expand Legal Immigration
The New York Times 
May 31, 2021 Monday 21:27 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1928 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Highlight: Documents obtained by The New York Times show far-reaching efforts by President Biden to remake the immigration system and undo much of his predecessor’s legacy.
Body


Documents obtained by The New York Times show far-reaching efforts by President Biden to remake the immigration system and undo much of his predecessor’s legacy.
WASHINGTON — If President Biden gets his way, it will soon be far easier to immigrate to the United States. There will be shorter, simpler forms and applicants will have to jump through fewer security hoops. Foreigners will have better opportunities to join their families and more chances to secure work visas.
A 46-page draft blueprint obtained by The New York Times maps out the Biden administration’s plans to significantly expand the legal immigration system, including methodically reversing the efforts to dismantle it by former President Donald J. Trump, who reduced the flow of foreign workers, families and refugees, erecting procedural barriers tougher to cross than his “big, beautiful wall.”
Because of Mr. Trump’s immigration policies, the average time it takes to approve employer-sponsored green cards has doubled. The backlog for citizenship applications is up 80 percent since 2014, to more than 900,000 cases. Approval for the U-visa program, which grants legal status for immigrants willing to help the police, has gone from five months to roughly five years.
In almost every case over the last four years, immigrating to the United States has become harder, more expensive and takes longer.
And while Mr. Biden made clear during his presidential campaign that he intended to undo much of his predecessor’s immigration legacy, the blueprint offers new details about how far-reaching the effort will be — not only rolling back Mr. Trump’s policies, but addressing backlogs and delays that plagued prior presidents.
The blueprint, dated May 3 and titled “D.H.S. Plan to Restore Trust in Our Legal Immigration System,” lists scores of initiatives intended to reopen the country to more immigrants, making good on the president’s promise to ensure America embraces its “character as a nation of opportunity and of welcome.”
“There are significant changes that need to be made to really open up all avenues of legal immigration,” said Felicia Escobar Carrillo, the chief of staff at U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, of the efforts to reverse Mr. Trump’s agenda. “In the same way that they took a broad-stroke approach to closing off avenues, I think we want to take a broad approach toward opening up the legal avenues that have always been available but that they tried to put roadblocks up on.”
Since taking office four months ago, Mr. Biden has struggled with a historic surge in migration by Central American children and teenagers that has prompted some Republicans to accuse the president of flinging open the nation’s borders to people trying to enter the country illegally, a charge the White House rejects.
In fact, Mr. Biden does want to open the country to more immigrants. His ambition, as reflected in the blueprint, is to rebuild and expand the opportunities for foreigners to enter the United States — but to do so legally.
Divided into seven sections, the document offers detailed policy proposals that would help more foreigners move to the United States, including high-skilled workers, trafficking victims, the families of Americans living abroad, American Indians born in Canada, refugees, asylum-seekers and farm workers. Immigrants who apply online could pay less in fees or even secure a waiver in an attempt to “reduce barriers” to immigration. And regulations would be overhauled to “encourage full participation by immigrants in our civic life.”
Even with a more restrictive and slower immigration system, about 1 million people obtained green cards in 2019, the last full year before the pandemic. Most had been waiting for years. In the final year of the Obama administration, 1.2 million people received green cards.
But if Mr. Biden accomplishes everything in the document, he will have gone further than just reversing the downward trend. He will have significantly increased opportunities for foreigners around the globe to come to the United States, embracing robust immigration even as a divisive, decades-long political debate continues to rage over such a policy.
Most of the changes could be put into practice without passage of Mr. Biden’s proposed overhaul of the nation’s immigration laws, which would provide a pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented people living in the United States but has stalled in a bitterly divided Congress. While surveys show that most Americans support increased immigration, many Republican voters have eagerly backed Mr. Trump’s more restrictive policies.
White House officials declined to comment directly on the Homeland Security Department’s blueprint, saying that such documents go through many drafts and that decisions about specific steps to address legal immigration remain in flux. But they said the president remained committed to significantly rolling back the restrictions imposed by his predecessor.
That effort will take time and has not yet caught the public’s attention like the surge of crossings at the southwest border. But conservative activists who have for years demanded lower levels of legal immigration are vowing a fight to stop Mr. Biden and extract a political price for his actions.
“They just want to shovel people in here,” said Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, a former Virginia attorney general who served as the acting head of Citizenship and Immigration Services under Mr. Trump. “They are not running an immigration system for the benefit of America, and certainly not for the benefit of ordinary Americans. ”
Most research has shown that legal immigration to the United States has benefits for the country’s economy, especially at a time when the country’s population growth is slowing. But Mr. Cuccinelli and others who favor severe restrictions on immigration say it is obvious to them that letting foreigners compete for jobs — especially when the country is still recovering from an economic downturn like the one created by the pandemic — will hurt the prospects for American citizens.
“The number one job for the immigration services is to make sure that immigration does not hurt Americans,” said Roy Beck, the founder of NumbersUSA, a group dedicated to far lower levels of legal immigration.
Motivated by that belief, Mr. Cuccinelli set in motion a transformation of the government’s legal immigration system during the Trump administration — changing his agency from one that confers benefits on foreigners into a “vetting agency,” in part by issuing numerous restrictions on offering asylum for immigrants and trying to raise fees.
The increased vetting, as well as travel restrictions imposed during the pandemic, helped contribute to the result the Trump administration had sought: The influx of immigrants slowed significantly, as winning legal approval to enter the United States became much harder.
With fewer immigrants coming through the pipeline, there has been less money to finance Citizenship and Immigration Services, which is supported almost entirely by fees paid by immigrants. Restoring the agency to full capacity is at the heart of Mr. Biden’s effort to expand legal immigration, according to the document and interviews with administration officials.
A central element of the blueprint is addressing backlogs in the immigration system.
The administration is planning to fast-track immigration applications by expanding virtual interviews and electronic filing, as well as limiting the requests for evidence from applicants. Mr. Biden has tapped Cass R. Sunstein, a former Obama administration official and legal scholar at Harvard Law School, to remake the immigration system so it is “more effective and less burdensome” than it has been in decades by “reducing paperwork and other administrative requirements.”
Mr. Biden wants to restore opportunities for foreign employees through the existing H-1B visa program, which is intended for workers with special skills. The administration also intends to create new pathways for foreign entrepreneurs who wish to “start-up businesses and create jobs for U.S. workers,” according to the document.
Officials are working on a regulation that could allow migrants to win asylum in the United States if they are victims of domestic violence or their relatives were persecuted. During the Trump era, Attorney General William P. Barr moved to end asylum protection for those who claimed they deserved it for those reasons.
Mr. Biden is also aiming to expand immigration opportunities for L.G.B.T.Q. refugees from countries where they are persecuted or where same-sex marriages are not recognized.
In addition, he wants to revamp a program that provides a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who help law enforcement by cooperating with police or testifying in court.
The waiting list for the U-Visa program has ballooned, leaving crime victims and survivors of domestic abuse vulnerable to abusers who may threaten to report them for deportation if they continue to talk to the police, said Leslye E. Orloff, director of the national immigrant women’s advocacy project at American University.
The Biden administration is considering extending protections to immigrants who cooperate even before they make it on the official waiting list for the visa, according to the document.
“They’re recognizing that there’s danger for these victims,” Ms. Orloff said.
Critics say the Biden administration is ignoring the negative consequences of their efforts. The H-1B program has been attacked as a loophole for tech companies to import cheap foreign workers to compete for jobs. Granting asylum to the victims of domestic abuse could open the door to accepting millions of additional people. And some Republicans say Mr. Biden should not loosen vetting of foreigners, though officials insist they will continue to screen for terrorists and other threats.
As the Biden administration pushes forward with the changes, officials appear willing to use emergency rules and presidential memos to avoid the lengthy regulatory process, in much the same way that Mr. Trump put his own agenda in place. But that could make Mr. Biden’s immigration legacy subject to a similar reversal by a Republican president in the future.
“The question looming over all of this work is how do you do this in a way that isn’t so easily capsized next time around,” said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship.
Change could not come soon enough for Jenn Hawk, 37, who is currently living in with her Argentine husband in Poland, where he works, even though her autistic son is in the Washington area with his father.
Because of delays in processing her husband’s immigration application, she is faced with a choice: stay in Poland with the man she married, or go back to the United States alone to be with her 10-year-old son.
Ms. Hawk filed to sponsor her husband’s immigration to the United States in October of 2020, spending $575 on the application. But they are facing a delay of more than a year and a half before they can even submit their financial and medical information, let alone get an interview with an immigration officer.
“I just want to go home,” Ms. Hawk said. “It seems like they’re doing everything in their power to restrict that from being a possibility.”
PHOTO: Dozens of asylum-seeking migrants waiting to be taken to a U.S. Border Patrol facility after crossing the Rio Grande into Texas on May 5. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADREES LATIF/REUTERS) (A15)

Load-Date: October 29, 2021


End of Document
Compassion That Hurts
The New York Times
April 9, 2006 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 753 words
Byline: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF
Body


In 1951 America welcomed an East European refugee who spoke no English. His first job in the U.S. was at a logging camp in Oregon, and I suppose that if that job hadn't gone to my father, it would have gone to an American.
  That's the nub of the problem: it's hypocritical of us to close the doors behind us (unless you're a pure Navajo), yet there's a genuine problem with the impact of immigration on the poorest Americans.
I used to favor a program to allow in guest workers, thinking it would be good for them and also great for America by providing a source of low-cost labor -- just as it was good for America to admit our own ancestors. And illegal immigrants overwhelmingly are hard-working people who keep the economy humming, so they deserve respect rather than xenophobic resentment and a marginalized life in the shadows.
  But I've changed my mind on a guest worker program, because of growing evidence that low-wage immigration hurts America's own poor. 
  The most careful study of this issue, done by George Borjas and Lawrence Katz and published by the National Bureau of Economic Research, found that the surge of immigration in the 1980's and 1990's lowered the wages of America's own high school dropouts by 8.2 percent. ''The large growth and predominantly low-skilled nature of Mexican immigration to the United States over the past two decades appears to have played a modest role in the widening of the U.S. wage structure,'' the study concluded.
  Another study, by Steven Camarota of the Center for Immigration Studies, reached similar conclusions. Between 2000 and 2005, he found, immigrant workers with a high school degree or less rose by 1.5 million, while employment of native workers at that education level fell by 3.2 million. 
  It's often said that immigrants take jobs that Americans won't take. But look at employment statistics, and you see that even among maids and agricultural workers, only four out of 10 people are immigrants.
  I can't write about this issue without thinking of Elmer, a neighbor when I was growing up. He's a high school dropout now in his 50's, but when I met him in 1971, he was earning $26 an hour in a union job. He's very hard-working, but for the last decade he's been reduced to janitorial jobs paying not much over minimum wage. People like Elmer haven't been heard from in the immigration debate, but they have the most at stake.
  The 1986 immigration amnesty ended up bringing in waves of unskilled workers. They care for our children and mow our lawns. But as they raise living standards for many of us, they lower the living standards of Americans like Elmer.
  That's a trade-off we need to face squarely. The impulse behind immigration reforms is a generosity that I admire. But the cold reality is that admitting poor immigrants often means hurting poor Americans. We can salve the pain with job programs for displaced Americans, but the fundamental trade-off is unavoidable.
  Children are hit particularly hard, because they are disproportionately likely to be poor. Nearly half of American children depend on a worker with a high school education or less.
  The broader problem is that our immigration program is structured so as to bring in cheap laborers more than brilliant minds. At last count, only 16 percent of admissions for permanent residence went to those with employment qualifications, while the great majority went to applicants on the basis of family ties.
  When I lived in China, American diplomats complained that under the law they had to deny visas to brilliant physicists while granting immigrant visas to elementary-school dropouts who had a relative in Chicago.
  So let's go ahead and regularize longtime illegals, rather than leaving them forever in the shadows. But instead of bringing in a new flood of guest workers, let's recast our generosity more toward biologists and computer programmers. The H1-B visa program enriches America by bringing in high-tech workers, but the nominal ceiling on these visas has dropped to 65,000, after temporarily rising to 195,000 in the 1990's. That's the immigration flow to expand.
  In contrast, bringing in 325,000 or more guest workers annually (as various versions of the current Senate bills provide) would be particularly tough on America's poor at this time. They are reeling from Bush program cuts and the fraying of medical safety nets. An influx of hundreds of thousands more unskilled laborers would impoverish them further -- and to me, that does not feel like compassion. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 9, 2006


End of Document
Overhaul May Benefit, Not Hurt, U.S. Workers
The New York Times
June 26, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18; ECONOMIX
Length: 943 words
Byline: By EDUARDO PORTER
Body


Are American workers are about to experience unwelcome new competition for their jobs? The bill moving through Congress to overhaul the nation's immigration laws, if approved, would give employers access to expanded visa programs that would admit hundreds of thousands of immigrant workers, of both low and high skills, to toil in workplaces from strawberry fields to technology companies.
The legislation also offers legal status to millions of immigrants working illegally across the country, and ultimately a shot at citizenship. The change would encourage many to roam freely throughout the economy, leaving dead-end jobs in immigrant-heavy sectors of the labor market to seek higher pay elsewhere.
But by many accounts, most American workers need not worry about the prospect of hordes of workers entering the country with an eye on their jobs. Rather, immigration is seen as more likely to leave American workers better off.
The latest organization to come to this conclusion is the Congressional Budget Office, which issued a report this month concluding that the immigration bill would add six million workers to the American job market by 2023 and nine million by 2033 -- increasing the labor force by 5 percent.
In the beginning, the jump in immigration would hit pay, the office said. It expects that by 2023 average wages would be 0.1 percent lower, on average, than they would have been absent a change in law.
Still, most American workers would have little to worry about. Average wages would decline to a large extent because most of the new immigrant workers would be paid less than domestic laborers, pulling the average down. Most importantly, the decline would only be temporary. Wages would rise as businesses invested to take advantage of the expanded labor force. By 2033, the C.B.O. forecast, average wages would be 0.5 percent higher than they would have been without the new immigrants.
These conclusions may seem to fly in the face of the laws of supply and demand. But they are not quite so odd. They can become obvious, in fact, when accounting for the response of American companies, and workers, to the inflows of foreign labor.
The belief that immigration would simply displace American workers relies on the assumption that employers would do nothing but replace a costlier domestic labor force with cheaper imports. But companies actually invest and expand to reap the higher profits that the new labor allows. This provides new opportunities for immigrants and domestic workers alike.
In other words, immigration can produce jobs for Americans, too. Restaurants are much less common in Norway than the United States because Norway lacks the cheap labor -- making a dinner out in Oslo prohibitively expensive. In many New York restaurants, the American waiters and maitre d' owe their jobs to the underpaid immigrants working illegally in the kitchen, whose low wages allow the restaurant to exist.
What's more, immigration expands productivity. Highly skilled immigrant workers generate more productive innovations. And the influx of new workers of a variety of skills, high and low, would promote specialization.
Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis, and Chad Sparber of Colgate University found that American workers in states with large shares of less-educated immigrants gravitate towards communications-related occupations, their area of comparative advantage, while the immigrants stick to manual tasks and physical labor.
This increases the growth rate of the economy and pushes wages higher. Mr. Peri estimated that the wave of immigrants that entered the United States between 1990 and 2007 increased workers' incomes by about $5,100 a year on average, in 2005 dollars. This amounts to more than a fifth of the income gains over the period.
There will be losers, especially among the workers most like the newcomers. A 50-year-old janitor with no high school diploma, for instance, will find it hard to make a transition into another job when immigrants move into the building maintenance business. But this group is probably small, and composed mostly of illegal immigrants already in the workplace.
George Borjas of Harvard University argues that those without a high school diploma -- about 8 percent of the labor force -- are easily replaced by immigrants and are likely to suffer a noticeable drop in wages if low-skill immigration increases. Mr. Peri disagrees. He argues that high-school dropouts could find jobs in parts of the labor market that might even benefit from new immigrants' arrival.
The Congressional Budget Office looked at it differently. Rather than split the work force by educational attainment, it sliced it into five equal cohorts of skill, from the least educated fifth to the most. It found that none of these groups is hurt by immigration over the long run, in absolute terms. Some gain more, and some gain less.
Unskilled American workers -- who never completed high school, or maybe got an equivalency diploma -- would do relatively poorly. So would highly educated workers, who would face more competition from new immigrant scientists and engineers with H1-B visas.
Average wages in both these slices would decline 0.3 percent relative to the average by 2033. The rest of workers, by contrast, would see their relative wages rise by 0.5 percent.
But even though the gains would not be distributed evenly, according to the study, every group would win. ''Average wages would be higher under the bill than under current law for workers in all quintiles of the skill distribution,'' it said.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/06/25/immigration-and-the-labor-market/

Load-Date: June 26, 2013


End of Document
In Ohio Senate Primary, Republicans Feel Strain Of Party's Identity Crisis
The New York Times
May 3, 2022 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 1514 words
Byline: By Jazmine Ulloa and Jonathan Weisman
Body


Republicans agree that values they view as traditional are at risk, but they're wrestling with whether isolationism is the answer to their misgivings about global interconnectedness.
CLEVELAND -- The homestretch of Ohio's contentious Republican Senate primary has revealed a party united in its conviction that American values, indeed the nation's way of life, are under attack, but divided on whether to embrace a strict isolationism to address its mounting misgivings about global interconnectedness and American leadership abroad. 
  That divide has played out in policy differences -- some subtle, others glaring -- in the candidates' approach to the economy, immigration and foreign policy. The strains reflect the broader splits in a party undergoing something of an identity crisis, with ideological conservatives, the old Republican establishment of big business, and the Trump-inspired newer rank and file all pulling in different directions.
  At the same time, Republicans have been searching for ways to relate to former President Donald J. Trump himself: a few by taking tentative steps away from him, others by falling in line with him wholeheartedly.
  All of the candidates competing in the primary on Tuesday appear united in their fierce opposition to the Biden administration, as they have sought to paint a nation grappling with rising food and energy prices, a ''radical'' Democratic Party overreaching on issues of race and gender, and what they describe as apocalyptic conditions at the U.S.-Mexico border.
  But the world beyond Mexico may be the brightest dividing line in the Republican Party, with conservatives split on what to do about Russian aggression, how far to distance the United States from its traditional alliances, and above all what to do about China, at once the nation's biggest competitor and one of its largest economic partners.
  Over the past weeks, Josh Mandel, Ohio's former treasurer and the onetime front-runner in the Senate primary, attacked a rival, Mike Gibbons, for making money off investments in China. J.D. Vance, the author and venture capital executive, attacked Mr. Mandel for accepting the help of the Club for Growth, the business-backed political group which he said supported business relations with China. And the sole woman in the race, Jane Timken, shares her last name with a company that is synonymous with Ohio manufacturing might -- and that includes vast operations out of Shanghai.
  Whoever wins Tuesday will have to deal with those divisions in the coming general election campaign, especially since the presumed Democratic candidate, Representative Tim Ryan, has no qualms about blasting China while backing U.S. involvement elsewhere.
  ''Voters don't always have long memories here, especially after a primary campaign, but certainly the anti-China feelings are going to resonate for a long time,'' said Paul Beck, a professor emeritus of political science at Ohio State University and a longtime Ohio politics watcher. ''They are hard-wired.''
  Divisions over the border are not so stark. Anger at Mexican criminal organizations that are distributing fentanyl to the north has become particularly salient in a state that has been ground zero for the national opioid crisis and experienced some of the country's highest overdose rates over the past three years.
  Mr. Vance, who won Mr. Trump's coveted endorsement, has even suggested, with a straight face but no evidence, that President Biden was intentionally allowing fentanyl into the country because of its potential to kill Republican voters, bringing the issue back to his mother, who as a nurse became addicted to pain medication. Fentanyl deaths did rise sharply in 2021, but they rose sharply in 2020 as well.
  ''My family was very affected and is still very affected by the fentanyl that comes across the U.S. southern border into Ohio and into all parts of our country,'' he told an audience in Newark, Ohio, on Saturday. ''I believe that if the poison coming across the Mexican border today had been coming across 10 years ago, I would have lost my mother.''
  Much of the debate and bluster on the border has been lacking in substance and filled with conjecture, with candidates proposing few policy solutions, conflating immigration and crime and resorting to language that dehumanizes unauthorized immigrants.
  But beneath the hard-right rhetoric, subtle differences can be seen between the pro-business, establishment Republicans of the past and the ascendant hard right.
  In stump speeches and a much-criticized campaign ad, Mr. Vance has falsely declared that people are entering the country to vote for Democrats. He has said he is in favor of an immigration process that creates legal paths to entering the country based on merit, rather than on familial ties, long a key feature of the nation's immigration system. And he opposes H-1B visas that allow employers to temporarily hire immigrant workers in various industries.
  At the other end of the issue is Matt Dolan, an Ohio state senator who has sought to put some distance between himself and the former president. Mr. Dolan, too, talks tough on immigration and the need to stop the flow of fentanyl. But he is just as concerned about economic development, supporting tax cuts, training for workers and reduced regulations for small businesses. And he favors the immigrant work visas, saying businesses rely on them.
  ''We have to secure the border first -- that has to be number one,'' Mr. Dolan said in an interview last week. ''And then improve our legal immigration.''
  Perhaps the most glaring examples in Ohio of the forces warring within the Republican Party have unfolded over competition with China, the war in Ukraine and American leadership abroad. Again setting himself apart, Mr. Vance has argued against deepening American involvement on Ukraine's behalf -- despite what many see as the gravest threat to world order in decades.
  Mr. Vance opposed the establishment of a European-led no-fly zone over Ukraine, and has drawn criticism for a statement he made in February in which he said he did not ''really care what happens to Ukraine one way or another.'' He has since sought to assure audiences he feels Ukrainians' pain, but has doubled down on his stance against U.S. intervention.
  ''At the end of the day, however tragic we find these images of what is going on in Ukraine, this is not our fight,'' Mr. Vance said in a debate last month.
  The distinctions could also be seen in the surrogates the Ohio candidates brought in to campaign with them in the final stretch.
  Mr. Mandel chose as his wingman for the final weekend Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, who in 2016 was Mr. Trump's biggest threat and remains fiercely conservative in ways the former president never was. Mr. Cruz has consistently attacked Mr. Biden as weak on foreign policy, going so far as to blame him for Russia's invasion of Ukraine. And Mr. Cruz, like Republican congressional leaders, has shied away from some of Mr. Trump's broader attacks on corporate America -- especially the pharmaceutical industry -- which often echoed Democratic talking points.
  Mr. Vance, by contrast, stumped over the weekend with two of the most polarizing figures of the far right: Representatives Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia and Matt Gaetz of Florida. Ms. Greene railed against the ''forever wars'' started under George W. Bush and talked up what she called ''the civil war in the G.O.P.,'' while Mr. Gaetz blasted the leaders of his own party and said he and Ms. Greene needed backup in Washington -- backup that Mr. Vance would provide.
  Mr. Gibbons, for his part, campaigned with Senator Rand Paul, the Kentuckian who espouses small government, low taxes and the avoidance of foreign entanglements at all cost. And Mr. Gibbons embraced a fringe movement to hold a constitutional convention aimed at curbing federal power, and mocked the Department of Homeland Security's new effort to counter disinformation as an Orwellian Ministry of Truth.
  One area in which there is broad agreement among the party's Senate candidates is on the conservative values many Ohio Republicans say they hold dear, from old standbys like support for gun rights and opposition to abortion, to current causes like preventing transgender women from playing women's sports and giving parents greater control over how race and gender are taught in schools.
  On those issues, consensus among the candidates was so fully realized that voters at events in Cleveland seemed widely split over whom to support, and many were still undecided.
  In Port Clinton, where Ms. Timken, Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Dolan all worked the crowd at a Knights of Columbus chicken barbecue lunch, Lisa Slobodzian said she was still sifting through her direct mail and studying the candidates' positions.
  ''I want power back to the people,'' said Ms. Slobodzian, 57, a retired national parks ranger and law enforcement specialist, digging into her plate. ''They should decide what their kids are taught in schools, and not some government agency.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/02/us/ohio-senate-republican-primary.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Voters casting early ballots for the primary election last month in Columbus, Ohio. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gaelen Morse/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: May 3, 2022


End of Document
High-Tech Titans Strike Out on Immigration Bill
The New York Times
June 25, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1317 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Laurie J. Flynn contributed reporting.
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 24 
Body


Bill Gates and Steven A. Ballmer of Microsoft have led a parade of high-tech executives to Capitol Hill, urging lawmakers to provide more visas for temporary foreign workers and permanent immigrants who can fill critical jobs.
  Google has reminded senators that one of its founders, Sergey Brin, came from the Soviet Union as a young boy. To stay competitive in a ''knowledge-based economy,'' company officials have said, Google needs to hire many more immigrants as software engineers, mathematicians and computer scientists. 
  The top executives of these and other high-tech companies have been making a huge effort to reshape the Senate immigration bill to meet their demand for more foreign workers. But they have had only limited success, as is often the case when strong-willed corporate leaders confront powerful members of Congress. 
  The Senate plans to resume work on the bill this week.  Much of the debate will focus on proposals for granting legal status to illegal immigrants. But the sections of the bill affecting high-tech industries could prove to be very important as well.
  High-tech companies want to be able to hire larger numbers of well-educated, foreign-born professionals who, they say, can help them succeed in the global economy. For these scientists and engineers, they seek permanent-residence visas, known as green cards, and H-1B visas. The H-1B program provides temporary work visas for people who have university degrees or the equivalent to fill jobs in specialty occupations including health care and technology. The Senate bill would expand the number of work visas for skilled professionals, but high-tech companies say the proposed increase is not nearly enough. Several provisions of the Senate bill are meant to enhance protections for American workers and to prevent visa fraud and abuse.
  High-tech companies were surprised and upset by the bill that emerged last month from secret Senate negotiations. E. John Krumholtz, director of federal affairs at Microsoft, said the bill was ''worse than the status quo, and the status quo is a disaster.''
  In the last two weeks, these businesses have quietly negotiated for changes to meet some of their needs. But the bill still falls far short of what they want, an outcome suggesting that their political clout does not match their economic strength.
  Stephen W. Yale-Loehr, a co-author of a treatise on immigration law, said: ''High-tech companies are very organized. They have numerous lobby groups. When Bill Gates advocates more H-1B visas and green cards for tech workers, everyone listens.
  ''But that supposed influence has not translated into legislative results,'' Mr. Yale-Loehr, who teaches at Cornell Law School, continued. ''High-tech companies have been lobbying unsuccessfully since 2003 for more H-1B visas. It's hard to get anything through Congress these days. In addition, anti-immigrant groups are well organized. U.S. computer programmers are constantly arguing that H-1B workers undercut their wages.''
  The Republican architects of the Senate bill, like Senators Jon Kyl of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, thought they were doing a favor for high-tech companies when they proposed a ''point system'' to evaluate immigrants seeking green cards. The point system would reward people who have advanced degrees and job skills needed in the United States.
  But the high-tech companies were upset because the bill would have stripped them of the ability to sponsor specific immigrants for particular jobs.
  The companies flooded Senate offices with letters, telephone calls and e-mail messages seeking changes to the bill. Mr. Ballmer, the blunt-spoken chief executive of Microsoft, Craig R. Barrett, the chairman of Intel, and other executives pressed their concerns in person. 
  These advocates have made some gains, which are embodied in an amendment to be proposed by Mr. Kyl and Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington.
  Edward J. Sweeney, senior vice president of National Semiconductor, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said, ''I've spent many hours in Washington talking with senators to get their support on this amendment.''
  Likewise, William D. Watkins, the chief executive of Seagate Technology, the world's largest maker of computer disk drives, said he met with five or six senators two weeks ago.
  Under the Kyl-Cantwell proposal, 20,000 green cards would be set aside each year for immigrants of extraordinary ability, outstanding professors and researchers and certain managers and executives of multinational corporations. The original bill would have eliminated the existing preference for such workers.
  In addition, the amendment would give employers five years to adjust their hiring practices to the new ''merit-based'' point system for obtaining green cards.
  ''For the first five years, employers would still have a say,'' Ms. Cantwell said in an interview. ''They could recruit the best and the brightest.''
  The number of green cards for employer-sponsored immigrants would gradually decline, to 44,000 in the fifth year from 115,000 in each of the first two years. No green cards would be set aside for employer-sponsored immigrants after that.
  Many high-tech companies bring in foreign professionals on temporary H-1B visas. The government is swamped with petitions. On the first two days of the application period in April, it received more than 123,000 petitions for 65,000 slots.
  The Senate bill would raise the cap to 115,000 in 2008, with a possible increase to 180,000 in later years, based on labor market needs.
  Many high-tech businesses want to hire foreign students who obtain advanced degrees from American universities, and many of the students want to work here, but cannot get visas.
  Under current law, up to 20,000 foreigners who earn a master's degree or higher from an American university are generally exempt from the annual limit on new H-1B visas. The Kyl-Cantwell proposal would double the number.
  The amendment would also establish a new exemption, providing 20,000 additional H-1B visas for people who have earned advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering or mathematics from a university outside the United States.
   The technology companies face a serious challenge from a different direction, as lawmakers of both parties worry about possible abuses in the H-1B program. 
  Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the Democratic whip, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, have a proposal that would overhaul the H-1 B program and give priority to American workers. Their proposal would also define, in great detail, the wages that must be paid to workers who have H-1B visas.
  Mr. Durbin contended that some companies have used foreign workers to undercut the wages of American workers. And in some cases, he said, foreign workers come to this country for a few years of training, then return home ''to populate businesses competing with the United States.''
  ''The H-1B visa program is being abused by foreign companies to deprive qualified Americans of good jobs,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''Some companies are so brazen, they say 'no Americans need apply' in their job advertisements.''
   High-tech companies said that the wage standards in the Durbin-Grassley proposal would, in effect, require them to pay some H-1B employees more than some equally qualified American workers who are performing the same duties. 
  The Government Accountability Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said that thousands of H-1B workers have been paid less than the prevailing wage. 
  One company, Patni Computer Systems, agreed this month to pay more than $2.4 million to 607 workers with visas after Labor Department investigators found that they had not been paid the wages required by federal law. The company's global headquarters are in Mumbai, India, and its American operations are based in Cambridge, Mass.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 25, 2007


End of Document
In Ohio Senate Fight, G.O.P. Shows Strains of Its Identity Crisis
The New York Times 
May 2, 2022 Monday 10:28 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1536 words
Byline: Jazmine Ulloa and Jonathan Weisman
Highlight: Republicans agree that values they view as traditional are at risk, but they’re wrestling with whether isolationism is the answer to their misgivings about global interconnectedness.
Body


Republicans agree that values they view as traditional are at risk, but they’re wrestling with whether isolationism is the answer to their misgivings about global interconnectedness.
Follow our live coverage of Tuesday’s primaries in Ohio and Indiana.
CLEVELAND — The homestretch of Ohio’s contentious Republican Senate primary has revealed a party united in its conviction that American values, indeed the nation’s way of life, are under attack, but divided on whether to embrace a strict isolationism to address its mounting misgivings about global interconnectedness and American leadership abroad.
That divide has played out in policy differences — some subtle, others glaring — in the candidates’ approach to the economy, immigration and foreign policy. The strains reflect the broader splits in a party undergoing something of an identity crisis, with ideological conservatives, the old Republican establishment of big business, and the Trump-inspired newer rank and file all pulling in different directions.
At the same time, Republicans have been searching for ways to relate to former President Donald J. Trump himself: a few by taking tentative steps away from him, others by falling in line with him wholeheartedly.
All of the candidates competing in the primary on Tuesday appear united in their fierce opposition to the Biden administration, as they have sought to paint a nation grappling with rising food and energy prices, a “radical” Democratic Party overreaching on issues of race and gender, and what they describe as apocalyptic conditions at the U.S.-Mexico border.
But the world beyond Mexico may be the brightest dividing line in the Republican Party, with conservatives split on what to do about Russian aggression, how far to distance the United States from its traditional alliances, and above all what to do about China, at once the nation’s biggest competitor and one of its largest economic partners.
Over the past weeks, Josh Mandel, Ohio’s former treasurer and the onetime front-runner in the Senate primary, attacked a rival, Mike Gibbons, for making money off investments in China. J.D. Vance, the author and venture capital executive, attacked Mr. Mandel for accepting the help of the Club for Growth, the business-backed political group which he said supported business relations with China. And the sole woman in the race, Jane Timken, shares her last name with a company that is synonymous with Ohio manufacturing might — and that includes vast operations out of Shanghai.
Whoever wins Tuesday will have to deal with those divisions in the coming general election campaign, especially since the presumed Democratic candidate, Representative Tim Ryan, has no qualms about blasting China while backing U.S. involvement elsewhere.
“Voters don’t always have long memories here, especially after a primary campaign, but certainly the anti-China feelings are going to resonate for a long time,” said Paul Beck, a professor emeritus of political science at Ohio State University and a longtime Ohio politics watcher. “They are hard-wired.”
Divisions over the border are not so stark. Anger at Mexican criminal organizations that are distributing fentanyl to the north has become particularly salient in a state that has been ground zero for the national opioid crisis and experienced some of the country’s highest overdose rates over the past three years.
Mr. Vance, who won Mr. Trump’s coveted endorsement, has even suggested, with a straight face but no evidence, that President Biden was intentionally allowing fentanyl into the country because of its potential to kill Republican voters, bringing the issue back to his mother, who as a nurse became addicted to pain medication. Fentanyl deaths did rise sharply in 2021, butthey rose sharply in 2020 as well.
“My family was very affected and is still very affected by the fentanyl that comes across the U.S. southern border into Ohio and into all parts of our country,” he told an audience in Newark, Ohio, on Saturday. “I believe that if the poison coming across the Mexican border today had been coming across 10 years ago, I would have lost my mother.”
Much of the debate and bluster on the border has been lacking in substance and filled with conjecture, with candidates proposing few policy solutions, conflating immigration and crime and resorting to language that dehumanizes unauthorized immigrants.
But beneath the hard-right rhetoric, subtle differences can be seen between the pro-business, establishment Republicans of the past and the ascendant hard right.
In stump speeches and a much-criticized campaign ad, Mr. Vance has falsely declared that people are entering the countryto vote for Democrats. He has said he is in favor of an immigration process that creates legal paths to entering the country based on merit, rather than on familial ties, long a key feature of the nation’s immigration system. And he opposes H-1B visas that allow employers to temporarily hire immigrant workers in various industries.
At the other end of the issue is Matt Dolan, an Ohio state senator who has sought to put some distance between himself and the former president. Mr. Dolan, too, talks tough on immigration and the need to stop the flow of fentanyl. But he is just as concerned about economic development, supporting tax cuts, training for workers and reduced regulations for small businesses. And he favors the immigrant work visas, saying businesses rely on them.
“We have to secure the border first — that has to be number one,” Mr. Dolan said in an interview last week. “And then improve our legal immigration.”
Perhaps the most glaring examples in Ohio of the forces warring within the Republican Party have unfolded over competition with China, the war in Ukraine and American leadership abroad. Again setting himself apart, Mr. Vance has argued against deepening American involvement on Ukraine’s behalf — despite what many see as the gravest threat to world order in decades.
Mr. Vance opposed the establishment of a European-led no-fly zone over Ukraine, and has drawn criticism for a statement he made in February in which he said he did not “really care what happens to Ukraine one way or another.” He has since sought to assure audiences he feels Ukrainians’ pain, but has doubled down on his stance against U.S. intervention.
“At the end of the day, however tragic we find these images of what is going on in Ukraine, this is not our fight,” Mr. Vance said in a debate last month.
The distinctions could also be seen in the surrogates the Ohio candidates brought in to campaign with them in the final stretch.
Mr. Mandel chose as his wingman for the final weekend Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, who in 2016 was Mr. Trump’s biggest threat and remains fiercely conservative in ways the former president never was. Mr. Cruz has consistently attacked Mr. Biden as weak on foreign policy, going so far as to blame him for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. And Mr. Cruz, like Republican congressional leaders, has shied away from some of Mr. Trump’s broader attacks on corporate America — especially the pharmaceutical industry — which often echoed Democratic talking points.
Mr. Vance, by contrast, stumped over the weekend with two of the most polarizing figures of the far right: Representatives Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia and Matt Gaetz of Florida. Ms. Greene railed against the “forever wars” started under George W. Bush and talked up what she called “the civil war in the G.O.P.,” while Mr. Gaetz blasted the leaders of his own party and said he and Ms. Greene needed backup in Washington — backup that Mr. Vance would provide.
Mr. Gibbons, for his part, campaigned with Senator Rand Paul, the Kentuckian who espouses small government, low taxes and the avoidance of foreign entanglements at all cost. And Mr. Gibbons embraced a fringe movement to hold a constitutional convention aimed at curbing federal power, and mocked the Department of Homeland Security’s new effort to counter disinformation as an Orwellian Ministry of Truth.
One area in which there is broad agreement among the party’s Senate candidates is on the conservative values many Ohio Republicans say they hold dear, from old standbys like support for gun rights and opposition to abortion, to current causes like preventing transgender women from playing women’s sports and giving parents greater control over how race and gender are taught in schools.
On those issues, consensus among the candidates was so fully realized that voters at events in Cleveland seemed widely split over whom to support, and many were still undecided.
In Port Clinton, where Ms. Timken, Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Dolan all worked the crowd at a Knights of Columbus chicken barbecue lunch, Lisa Slobodzian said she was still sifting through her direct mail and studying the candidates’ positions.
“I want power back to the people,” said Ms. Slobodzian, 57, a retired national parks ranger and law enforcement specialist, digging into her plate. “They should decide what their kids are taught in schools, and not some government agency.”
PHOTO: Voters casting early ballots for the primary election last month in Columbus, Ohio. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gaelen Morse/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 4, 2022


End of Document
Return of Islamic College Raises New Questions
The New York Times
May 29, 2011 Sunday
National Edition


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Chicago ; Pg. 27A; CHICAGO NEWS COOPERATIVE
Length: 1137 words
Byline: By DAVID LEPESKA
Body


The American Islamic College, closed since 2004 when the state revoked its operating authority, is expected early next month to win approval to reopen.
Supporters see the opening of the Chicago college, founded in 1981 in the Lakeview neighborhood, as an important step for Islamic instruction in the United States. But its detractors point to the college's ties to a secretive and far-reaching international movement that has been accused of Islamism in some countries and of an overuse of non-immigrant work visas to hire foreign teachers in its schools in the United States.
The movement, led by Fetullah Gulen, a Turkish religious leader living in self-imposed exile in rural Pennsylvania, supports scores of charter schools that have gained a reputation for academic achievement and a commitment to spreading Turkish language and culture.
Yet the Gulen schools have caused widespread concern about possible manipulation of immigration laws and misallocation of taxpayer dollars. Mr. Gulen, an extremely wealthy and well-connected Turkish spiritual and political leader, fled Turkey amid charges of plotting to overthrow the secular government. He was acquitted of all charges in 2006.
The college would become the second Islamic educational institution in the country to offer college-level credit. For Muslims in the area, it would be a rejoinder to those who depict followers of Islam as prone to extremism.
''It looks like a resurrection of the college, which is great,'' said Zaher Sahloul, head of the Council of Islamic Organizations of Greater Chicago. ''It's very important to have an institution of higher learning run by the Muslim community.''
Top officials at American Islamic College have been linked to Mr. Gulen's movement. In a cable obtained by Wikileaks, the United States' former ambassador to Turkey characterized the Gulen movement as a potentially destabilizing influence in Turkey that more secular Turks see as an effort to bring about an Islamic state.
The Gulen movement, called Hizmet (a Turkish word meaning ''service''), promotes public service and education and oversees research institutes, universities, media outlets and one of Turkey's largest banks. The movement seeks to spread Gulen's influence internationally through an informal network of 1,000 schools in 130 countries.
Hizmet operates more than 120 publicly financed charter schools in 25 states, in addition to a handful of private schools, like the Science Academy of Chicago, run by Niagara Educational Services, a Mount Prospect firm associated with the Gulen movement. Like many of the movement's American schools, the Science Academy focuses on math and science.
Administrators of the schools often deny any official connection to the movement, which has no formal organization or official membership but operates through a network of followers, according to Hakan Yavuz, a political science professor at the University of Utah and co-editor of a 2003 book on the organization.
''It's safe to assume that A.I.C. will be influenced by the Gulen movement,'' mainly through the selection of the college's instructors and administrative staff, Mr. Yavuz said.
''It makes sense for them to hire people from the Gulen community,'' he said, ''as they have much more knowledge and experience in the American education system.''
According to recent news reports, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Departments of Labor and Education are investigating accusations that as many as 100 of the movement's American schools have used taxpayer money to pay for the immigration of teachers' families from Turkey and provide other financial support for the Gulen movement.
Federal officials declined to comment.
Ali Yurtsever, head of the executive committee setting up the American Islamic College, denied any connection with Gulen. The school will have to generate its own income, unlike Gulen schools in the United States that are supported by the movement, he said.
Mr. Yurtsever has long been a follower of Mr. Gulen and serves as administrator of Niagara Educational Services. He previously was president of the Gulen-backed Rumi Forum, a Washington research institute whose honorary president is Mr. Gulen.
Attempts to contact Mr. Gulen through his Web site and through Mr. Yurtsever were unsuccessful.
School officials say the college will present what Mr. Gulen has long stood for: a more moderate form of Islam than the extremist version that has often dominated public debate in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001. The school plans to offer more than a dozen courses in the fall and hopes to attract up to 400 local and international students in the next few years.
The college was established 30 years ago by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, a Saudi Arabia-based association of more than 50 predominantly Muslim countries. In 2004, the Illinois Board of Higher Education revoked its operating authority, citing a failure to comply with state regulations.
Now, after spending $500,000 from the Islamic Conference to renovate its library, dorms, mosque, and 1,000-seat auditorium, the college is reopening under new management. It is led by Mr. Yurtsever, a mathematician with a Ph.D. from Ege University in Turkey who taught at Georgetown University.
College officials expect to receive authority to offer for-credit courses from the Illinois Board of Higher Education on June 7. The college has applied for full accreditation, which would allow it to confer four-year degrees.
Mr. Gulen, 70, has lived in the United States since 1999, when he left Turkey. In a widely circulated video from that time, he advised his followers to ''move within the arteries of the system, without anyone noticing your existence, until you reach all the power centers.''
In the United States, Gulen schools often import Turkish teachers using H-1B visas, which allow American employers to temporarily hire foreign workers in specialty jobs.
The federal government places a strict limit on the number of H1-B visas it issues, and corporations often complain the cap restrains their ability to transfer highly qualified workers from foreign countries. Yet Gulen-backed schools received 839 H-1B visas in 2010, a 65 percent increase from 2007, according to The Philadelphia Inquirer.
Teachers unions and education reform groups in several states have spoken out against the spike in foreign-born teachers at Gulen schools. ''There is no reason to bring teachers in from other countries under the guise of lack of staffing,'' said Jenni White, president of Restore Oklahoma Public Education.
Mr. Yavuz, the political scientist, said he did not see the movement as a danger, ''but I don't see it as productive. ''
''I think their main goal is to improve the image of Islam in the U.S.,'' he said, ''but even there, I don't know if they can be successful.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Mustafa Kaya, a Turk attending the University of Chicago, worked on calligraphy in a class at American Islamic College. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN KONSTANTARAS/CHICAGO NEWS COOPERATIVE) 

Load-Date: May 29, 2011


End of Document
For Indian Diaspora, Panic and Anger Over Trump’s Immigration Plans
The New York Times 
April 28, 2020 Tuesday 15:19 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1201 words
Byline: Kai Schultz and Sameer Yasir
Highlight: Indian citizens fill critical jobs in the United States in tech and business. Now, they fear for their futures — the “upending of life by a tweet.”
Body


Indian citizens fill critical jobs in the United States in tech and business. Now, they fear for their futures — the “upending of life by a tweet.”
NEW DELHI — When President Trump announced via a late-night tweet that he would “suspend immigration” to protect American jobs from an economic tailspin caused by the coronavirus, Priyanka Nagar prepared for the worst.
For more than a decade, Ms. Nagar, an Indian citizen, had steadily built a life in the United States but she was now back in India, awaiting a visa extension. She and her husband, who works for Microsoft, have applied for green cards. They hung an American flag from their balcony in their home in Washington State, where Ms. Nagar had given birth to the couple’s 5-year-old daughter.
But when Ms. Nagar read Mr. Trump’s tweet posted late Monday, while separated from her family in the United States, the thought of leaving her hard forged life behind without even a goodbye was devastating, she said.
“I beg the government not to think of us as enemies,” Ms. Nagar, 39, a software developer, said. “I want the U.S. to prosper. It has given us so much.”
By Tuesday, Mr. Trump had ordered a 60-day halt in issuing green cards to prevent people from immigrating to the United States, backing away from his harder-edged plans to suspend guest worker programs after business groups erupted in anger at the prospect of losing labor from countries like India.
But as millions of Americans file for unemployment, flooding food banks and hospitals, foreign workers worry that the pandemic will uproot them sooner rather than later.
Immigrant groups warn that driven by what they call the Trump administration’s protectionist impulses, the United States could purge some of its most talented workers, cutting into the vibrant multiculturalism that has made the United States such an attractive destination for decades.
“I cannot tell you the panic this has caused in the legal immigration community,” Nandini Nair, an immigration lawyer based in New Jersey, said of Mr. Trump’s “upending of life by a tweet.”
[Update: Unified in coronavirus lockdown, India splinters over reopening.]
Further immigration restrictions could have particularly acute consequences for India, which sends thousands of highly skilled workers to the United States every year and counts a four million strong diaspora in the country, representing one of the largest contingents of immigrants to the United States.
Visa programs like H-1B help fill specialty positions at companies like Google, Apple and Facebook. Indian-Americans are some of the country’s most successful and wealthiest immigrants, with a particular stronghold in Silicon Valley’s start-up scene.
These days, Harkamal Singh Khural, 34, a software developer living in an Atlanta suburb, said he was barely sleeping. Even if the government did not push him out, he said a volatile job market meant his immigration status was already tenuous.
The company that sponsors his H-1B visa has already let go of half of his team. His two daughters are United States citizens, meaning it was possible that his family could get separated.
“I am afraid of losing everything,” Mr. Khural said. “This is not really about a job. It is about dreams.”
For now, programs like H-1B are unlikely to be immediately affected by the new restrictions. But on Tuesday, Mr. Trump left open the possibility of extending the ban on new green cards “based on economic conditions at the time.”
He suggested that he may also introduce a second executive order that could further restrict immigration, brushing aside studies showing that a flow of foreign labor into the country has an overall positive effect on the American work force and wages.
“We must first take care of the American worker,” President Trump said, insisting that newly jobless citizens should not have to compete with foreigners when the economy reopens.
Rights groups say the immigration process has become increasingly complex and frustrating in recent years, with Mr. Trump fanning the flames of anti-immigrant sentiment by pushing for an extensive wall along the Mexican border and labeling a group of African nations “shithole countries.”
For Indian citizens, building a more permanent base in the country was never easy.
Most of the 800,000 immigrants currently waiting for a green card are Indian citizens. Because of quotas that limit the number of workers from each country, Indians can expect to wait up to 50 years for a green card since their representation among immigrants is so high in the United States.
Last summer, the Fairness for High-Skilled Immigrants Act, which sought to address the backlog by eliminating country quotas, sailed through the House. But it stalled in the Senate, where critics like Senator Dick Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, argued that the bill would not solve the problem because it does not increase the overall number of green cards.
Many Indian citizens said the back-and-forth was exhausting.
“I likely won’t receive a green card in this lifetime unless the laws change,” said Somak Goswami, an electrical engineer who applied for a green card in 2011. “I have colleagues who came to the U.S. in 2017 and have a green card already. My only fault was I was born in India.”
Analysts said immigration restrictions could strain the delicate but increasingly amicable relationship between India and the United States, the world’s most populous democracies.
In recent months, Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India have sought to build an even stronger alliance, trading compliments about each other onstage at glittering events in Houston and Ahmedabad, India.
Milan Vaishnav, the director of the South Asia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, said, “Any action that appears to infringe on the mobility of Indians or Indian-Americans will be strongly resisted.”
“Suffice it to say, this will not go over well in India,” he said of stricter immigration controls. “Prime Minister Modi has made outreach to the diaspora community in America and elsewhere a cornerstone of his foreign policy.”
In India, Ms. Nagar, who is staying with her parents in the state of Uttar Pradesh, said she was trying to remain hopeful, telling herself to “live today and wait for tomorrow.”
But with international airspace largely closed, embassies shut for visa processing and the added stress of immigration restrictions, Ms. Nagar worried that the extension of her H-1B visa might be delayed by many more months, prolonging the separation from her family and raising the possibility that they may have to leave the United States entirely.
Over a video call, Ms. Nagar’s daughter, a kindergarten student, told her: “Mommy, when the virus dies, you’ll come. I’ll wait for the virus to die.” When video conversations with her daughter end, Ms. Nagar said she sometimes lies in bed and cries.
“In the U.S., you have the whole world working together toward a common goal,” she said. “You cannot find that diversity anywhere else. I love this country.”
PHOTO: Families at a Hindu temple in New York City in 2016. Indians are one of the largest immigrant groups in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Protectionist Stance By Trump Strikes Fear In Workers From India
The New York Times
April 23, 2020 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1189 words
Byline: By Kai Schultz and Sameer Yasir
Body


Indian citizens fill critical jobs in the United States in tech and business. Now, they fear for their futures -- the ''upending of life by a tweet.''
NEW DELHI -- When President Trump announced via a late-night tweet that he would ''suspend immigration'' to protect American jobs from an economic tailspin caused by the coronavirus, Priyanka Nagar prepared for the worst. 
  For more than a decade, Ms. Nagar, an Indian citizen, had steadily built a life in the United States but she was now back in India, awaiting a visa extension. She and her husband, who works for Microsoft, have applied for green cards. They hung an American flag from their balcony in their home in Washington State, where Ms. Nagar had given birth to the couple's 5-year-old daughter.
  But when Ms. Nagar read Mr. Trump's tweet posted late Monday, while separated from her family in the United States, the thought of leaving her hard forged life behind without even a goodbye was devastating, she said.
  ''I beg the government not to think of us as enemies,'' Ms. Nagar, 39, a software developer, said. ''I want the U.S. to prosper. It has given us so much.''
  By Tuesday, Mr. Trump had ordered a 60-day halt in issuing green cards to prevent people from immigrating to the United States, backing away from his harder-edged plans to suspend guest worker programs after business groups erupted in anger at the prospect of losing labor from countries like India.
  But as millions of Americans file for unemployment, flooding food banks and hospitals, foreign workers worry that the pandemic will uproot them sooner rather than later.
  Immigrant groups warn that driven by what they call the Trump administration's protectionist impulses, the United States could purge some of its most talented workers, cutting into the vibrant multiculturalism that has made the United States such an attractive destination for decades.
  ''I cannot tell you the panic this has caused in the legal immigration community,'' Nandini Nair, an immigration lawyer based in New Jersey, said of Mr. Trump's ''upending of life by a tweet.''
  [Analysis: What will our post-virus normal feel like? Hints are beginning to emerge.]
  Further immigration restrictions could have particularly acute consequences for India, which sends thousands of highly skilled workers to the United States every year and counts a four million strong diaspora in the country, representing one of the largest contingents of immigrants to the United States.
  Visa programs like H-1B help fill specialty positions at companies like Google, Apple and Facebook. Indian-Americans are some of the country's most successful and wealthiest immigrants, with a particular stronghold in Silicon Valley's start-up scene.
  These days, Harkamal Singh Khural, 34, a software developer living in an Atlanta suburb, said he was barely sleeping. Even if the government did not push him out, he said a volatile job market meant his immigration status was already tenuous.
  The company that sponsors his H-1B visa has already let go of half of his team. His two daughters are United States citizens, meaning it was possible that his family could get separated.
  ''I am afraid of losing everything,'' Mr. Khural said. ''This is not really about a job. It is about dreams.''
  For now, programs like H-1B are unlikely to be immediately affected by the new restrictions. But on Tuesday, Mr. Trump left open the possibility of extending the ban on new green cards ''based on economic conditions at the time.''
  He suggested that he may also introduce a second executive order that could further restrict immigration, brushing aside studies showing that a flow of foreign labor into the country has an overall positive effect on the American work force and wages.
  ''We must first take care of the American worker,'' President Trump said, insisting that newly jobless citizens should not have to compete with foreigners when the economy reopens.
  Rights groups say the immigration process has become increasingly complex and frustrating in recent years, with Mr. Trump fanning the flames of anti-immigrant sentiment by pushing for an extensive wall along the Mexican border and labeling a group of African nations ''shithole countries.''
  For Indian citizens, building a more permanent base in the country was never easy.
  Most of the 800,000 immigrants currently waiting for a green card are Indian citizens. Because of quotas that limit the number of workers from each country, Indians can expect to wait up to 50 years for a green card since their representation among immigrants is so high in the United States.
  Last summer, the Fairness for High-Skilled Immigrants Act, which sought to address the backlog by eliminating country quotas, sailed through the House. But it stalled in the Senate, where critics like Senator Dick Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, argued that the bill would not solve the problem because it does not increase the overall number of green cards.
  Many Indian citizens said the back-and-forth was exhausting.
  ''I likely won't receive a green card in this lifetime unless the laws change,'' said Somak Goswami, an electrical engineer who applied for a green card in 2011. ''I have colleagues who came to the U.S. in 2017 and have a green card already. My only fault was I was born in India.''
  Analysts said immigration restrictions could strain the delicate but increasingly amicable relationship between India and the United States, the world's most populous democracies.
  In recent months, Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India have sought to build an even stronger alliance, trading compliments about each other onstage at glittering events in Houston and Ahmedabad, India.
  Milan Vaishnav, the director of the South Asia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, said, ''Any action that appears to infringe on the mobility of Indians or Indian-Americans will be strongly resisted.''
  ''Suffice it to say, this will not go over well in India,'' he said of stricter immigration controls. ''Prime Minister Modi has made outreach to the diaspora community in America and elsewhere a cornerstone of his foreign policy.''
  In India, Ms. Nagar, who is staying with her parents in the state of Uttar Pradesh, said she was trying to remain hopeful, telling herself to ''live today and wait for tomorrow.''
  But with international airspace largely closed, embassies shut for visa processing and the added stress of immigration restrictions, Ms. Nagar worried that the extension of her H-1B visa might be delayed by many more months, prolonging the separation from her family and raising the possibility that they may have to leave the United States entirely.
  Over a video call, Ms. Nagar's daughter, a kindergarten student, told her: ''Mommy, when the virus dies, you'll come. I'll wait for the virus to die.'' When video conversations with her daughter end, Ms. Nagar said she sometimes lies in bed and cries.
  ''In the U.S., you have the whole world working together toward a common goal,'' she said. ''You cannot find that diversity anywhere else. I love this country.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/22/world/asia/india-immigration-trump-coronavirus.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Families at a Hindu temple in New York City in 2016. Indians are one of the largest immigrant groups in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: April 23, 2020


End of Document
Transcript: Republican Presidential Debate
The New York Times
December 16, 2015 Wednesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 
Length: 22855 words
Byline: By THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


Following is a transcript of the main Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.
BLITZER: Welcome to the CNN-Facebook Republican presidential debate here at the Venetian Las Vegas. 
  We have a very enthusiastic audience. Everyone is here. They're looking forward to a serious and spirited discussion about the security of this nation.
  I'm Wolf Blitzer, your moderator tonight. This debate is airing on CNN networks here in the United States and around the world, and on the Salem Radio Network. The nine leading candidates, they are here. Let's welcome them right now.
  Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky.
  (APPLAUSE)
  New Jersey Governor Chris Christie.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Former Florida Governor Jeb Bush.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Senator Ted Cruz of Texas.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Businessman and real estate developer Donald Trump.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Retired neurosurgeon, Dr. Ben Carson.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Senator Marco Rubio of Florida.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Former Hewlett Packard CEO Carly Fiorina.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And Ohio Governor John Kasich.
  Ladies and gentlemen, welcome these Republican candidates for president of the United States.
  (APPLAUSE)
  This is the final Republican debate before the election year begins, and we're taking a moment for the photographs of the candidates together on the stage. Now, everyone, please rise for the national anthem sung by Ayla Brown.
  (NATIONAL ANTHEM)
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: I know everyone is eager to get started. So, candidates, please take your places while I explain the ground rules for tonight.
  As moderator, I'll guide the discussion, and I'll be joined in the questioning by Salem Radio Network talk show host Hugh Hewitt and CNN's chief political correspondent Dana Bash. We also asked Republicans and independents nationwide to share their questions for the candidates. We teamed up with Facebook to send a campaign camper across the country over the past several weeks.
  Thousands of people stepped inside and recorded their questions on video. Millions more have weighed in on Facebook. Candidates, I'll try to make sure each of you gets your fair share of questions. You'll have a minute and 15 seconds to answer and 30 seconds for follow-ups and rebuttals. I'll give you time to respond if you're singled out for criticism.
  Our viewers should know that we have timing lights that are visible to the candidates to warn them when their time is up. And as the candidates requested, a bell will sound like this. We know you are all eager to jump in and debate these important issues, so, please, wait until you're called on.
  These nine Republicans are positioned on stage based on their ranking in the recent polls, so let's begin right now. I'd like to invite each candidate to introduce himself or herself to our audience. You'll have one minute.
  First to you, Senator Paul.
  PAUL: The question is, how do we keep America safe from terrorism? Trump says we ought to close that Internet thing. The question really is, what does he mean by that? Like they do in North Korea? Like they do in China?
  Rubio says we should collect all Americans' records all of the time. The Constitution says otherwise. I think they're both wrong. I think we defeat terrorism by showing them that we do not fear them. I think if we ban certain religions, if we censor the Internet, I think that at that point the terrorists will have won. Regime change hasn't won. Toppling secular dictators in the Middle East has only led to chaos and the rise of radical Islam. I think if we want to defeat terrorism, I think if we truly are sincere about defeating terrorism, we need to quit arming the allies of ISIS. If we want to defeat terrorism, the boots on the ground -- the boots on the ground need to be Arab boots on the ground.
  As commander-in-chief, I will do whatever it takes to defend America. But in defending America, we cannot lose what America stands for. Today is the Bill of Rights' anniversary. I hope we will remember that and cherish that in the fight on terrorism.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Senator.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Governor Kasich?
  KASICH: Thank you, Wolf. Just last weekend, just last week, a friend asked one of my daughters, ''Do you like politics?'' And my daughter said, ''No, I don't. And the reason I don't like it is because there's too much fighting, too much yelling. It's so loud, I don't like it.'' You know, I turned to my friend and I said, ''You know, she's really on to something.''
  And when we think about our country and the big issues that we face in this country; creating jobs, making sure people can keep their jobs, the need for rising wages, whether our children when they graduate from college can find a job, protecting the homeland, destroying ISIS, rebuilding defense. These are all the things that we need to focus on but we'll never get there if we're divided. We'll never get there if republicans and democrats just fight with one another.
  Frankly, we are republicans and they're democrats but before all of that, we're Americans. And I believe we need to unify in so many ways to rebuild our country, to strengthen our country, to rebuild our defense, and for America to secure it's place it world; for us, for our children, and for the next generation.
  Thank you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Christie?
  CHRISTIE: Thank you Wolf.
  America has been betrayed. We've been betrayed by the leadership that Barack Obama and Hilary Clinton have provided to this country over the last number of years. Think about just what's happened today. The second largest school district in America in Los Angeles closed based on a threat. Think about the effect that, that's going to have on those children when they go back to school tomorrow wondering filled with anxiety to whether they're really going to be safe.
  Think about the mothers who will take those children tomorrow morning to the bus stop wondering whether their children will arrive back on that bus safe and sound. Think about the fathers of Los Angeles, who tomorrow will head off to work and wonder about the safety of their wives and their children.
  What is Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton done to this country? That the most basic responsibility of an administration is to protect the safety and security of the American people. I will tell you this, I'm a former federal prosecutor, I've fought terrorists and won and when we get back in the White House we will fight terrorists and win again and America will be safe.
  (APPLAUSE) BLITZER: Ms. Fiorina?
  FIORINA: Like all of you I'm angry. I'm angry at what's happening to our nation. Citizens, it's time to take our country back.
  Bombastic insults wont take it back. Political rhetoric that promises a lot and delivers little, won't take it back. All of our problems can be solved. All of our wounds can be healed by a tested leader who is willing to fight for the character of our nation.
  I have been tested. I have beaten breast cancer. I have buried a child. I started as a secretary. I fought my way to the top of corporate America while being called every B word in the book. I fought my way into this election and on to this debate stage while all the political insiders and the pundits told, ''it couldn't be done.''
  I've been told, ''no,: all my life. And all my life, I've refused to accept no as an answer. Citizens, it is time to take our country back from the political class, from the media, from the liberal elite. It can be done, it must be done, join me and we will get it done.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Bush?
  BUSH: Our freedom is under attack. Our economy is under water. The leading democrat is under investigation. And America is under the gun to lead the free world to protect our civilized way of life.
  Serious times require strong leadership, that's what at stake right now. Regarding national security, we need to restore the defense cuts of Barack Obama to rebuild our military, to destroy ISIS before it destroys us. Regarding economic security, we need to take power and money away from Washington D.C. and empower American families so that they can rise up again.
  Look, America still is an exceptional country. We love to lead and we love to win. And we do it, when we take on any challenge and when we take - we support our friends.
  As president, I will keep you and our country safe, secure, and free.
  Thank you.
  BLITZER: Senator Rubio?
  RUBIO: Thank you Wolf.
  It's really amazing to be back in Las Vegas. I spent six years as a child growing not far from where we stand tonight. I use to sit on the porch of our home and listen to my grandfather tell stories as he smoked one of three daily cigars.
  One of the things my grandfather instilled in me, was that I was really blessed because I was a citizen of the greatest country in the history of our mankind. But there have always been people in American politics that wanted America to be more like the rest of the world. And In 2008, one of them was elected president of this country and the result has been a disaster.
  Today you have millions of Americans that feel left out and out of place in their own country, struggling to live paycheck to paycheck, called bigots because they hold on to traditional values.
  And around the world, America's influence has declined while this president has destroyed our military, our allies no longer trust us, and our adversaries no longer respect us. And that is why this election is so important.
  That is why I'm running for president. And that's why I'm going to ask you for your vote tonight. If you elect me president, we will have a president that believes America is the greatest country in the world and we will have a president that acts like it.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Senator Cruz.
  CRUZ: Thank you, Wolf.
  America is at war. Our enemy is not violent extremism. It is not some unnamed malevolent force. It is radical Islamic terrorist. We have a president who is unwilling to utter its name. The men and women on this stage, every one of us, is better prepared to keep this nation safe than is Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton.
  We need a president who understands the first obligation of the commander-in-chief is to keep America safe. If I am elected president, we will hunt down and kill the terrorists. We will utterly destroy ISIS.
  We will stop the terrorist attacks before they occur because we will not be prisoners to political correctness. Rather, we will speak the truth. Border security is national security and we will not be admitting jihadists as refugees.
  We will keep America safe.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson.
  CARSON: Thank you, Wolf.
  Please join me for a moment of silence and remembrance of the San Bernardino victims. Thank you. You know, our country since its inception has been at war, every 15 or 20 years. But the war that we are fighting now against radical Islamist jihadists is one that we must win. Our very existence is dependent upon that.
  You know, as a pediatric neurosurgeon, I frequently faced life and death situations, and had to come up with the right diagnosis, the right plan, and execute that plan frequently with other colleagues.
  Right now, the United States of America is the patient. And the patient is in critical condition and will not be cured by political correctness and will not be cured by timidity.
  And I am asking the Congress, which represents the people, to declare a war on ISIS so that we can begin the process of excising that cancer and begin the healing process, and bring peace, prosperity, and safety back to America.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: Thank you.
  I began this journey six months ago. My total focus was on building up our military, building up our strength, building up our borders, making sure that China, Japan, Mexico, both at the border and in trade, no longer takes advantage of our country.
  Certainly would never have made that horrible, disgusting, absolutely incompetent deal with Iran where they get $150 billion. They're a terrorist nation. But I began it talking about other things.
  And those things are things that I'm very good at and maybe that's why I'm center stage. People saw it. People liked it. People respected it.
  A month ago things changed. Radical Islamic terrorism came into effect even more so than it has been in the past. People like what I say. People respect what I say. And we've opened up a very big discussion that needed to be opened up.
  Thank you very much.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Since you last debated, Americans have witnessed terror attacks in Paris and San Bernardino. The FBI director says the country now faces the greatest terror threat since 9/11. You all have different approaches to keeping the country safe. And that will be the focus of tonight's debate.
  BLITZER: Mr. Trump, as you mentioned in your opening statement, part of your strategy is to focus in on America's borders. To keep the country safe, you say you want to temporarily ban non-American Muslims from coming to the United States; ban refugees fleeing ISIS from coming here; deport 11 million people; and wall off America's southern border. Is the best way to make America great again to isolate it from much of the rest of the world?
  TRUMP: We are not talking about isolation. We're talking about security. We're not talking about religion. We're talking about security. Our country is out of control. People are pouring across the southern border. I will build a wall. It will be a great wall. People will not come in unless they come in legally. Drugs will not pour through that wall.
  As far as other people like in the migration, where they're going, tens of thousands of people having cell phones with ISIS flags on them? I don't think so, Wolf. They're not coming to this country. And if I'm president and if Obama has brought some to this country, they are leaving. They're going. They're gone.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Bush, you called Mr. Trump ''unhinged'' when he proposed banning non-American Muslims from the United States. Why is that unhinged?
  BUSH: Well, first of all, we need to destroy ISIS in the caliphate. That's -- that should be our objective. The refugee issue will be solved if we destroy ISIS there, which means we need to have a no-fly zone, safe zones there for refugees and to build a military force.
  We need to embed our forces -- our troops inside the Iraqi military. We need to arm directly the Kurds. And all of that has to be done in concert with the Arab nations. And if we're going to ban all Muslims, how are we going to get them to be part of a coalition to destroy ISIS?
  The Kurds are the greatest fighting force and our strongest allies. They're Muslim. Look, this is not a serious proposal. In fact, it will push the Muslim world, the Arab world away from us at a time when we need to reengage with them to be able to create a strategy to destroy ISIS.
  So Donald, you know, is great at -- at the one-liners, but he's a chaos candidate. And he'd be a chaos president. He would not be the commander in chief we need to keep our country safe.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Mr. Trump?
  TRUMP: Jeb doesn't really believe I'm unhinged. He said that very simply because he has failed in this campaign. It's been a total disaster. Nobody cares. And frankly, I'm the most solid person up here. I built a tremendous company and all I want to do is make America great again.
  I don't want our country to be taken away from us, and that's what's happening. The policies that we've suffered under other presidents have been a disaster for our country. We want to make America great again. And Jeb, in all fairness, he doesn't believe that.
  BUSH: Look, he mentioned me. I can bring -- I can talk. This is -- this is the problem. Banning all Muslims will make it harder for us to do exactly what we need to do, which is to destroy ISIS. We need a strategy. We need to get the lawyers off the back of the warfighters. Right now under President Obama, we've created this -- this standard that is so high that it's impossible to be successful in fighting ISIS.
  We need to engage with the Arab world to make this happen. It is not a serious proposal to say that -- to the people that you're asking for their support that they can't even come to the country to even engage in a dialogue with us. That's not a serious proposal. We need a serious leader to deal with this. And I believe I'm that guy.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Senator Rubio -- I'm going to go to Senator Rubio and get his thoughts.
  You have said banning Muslims is unconstitutional. But according to a recent ABC News-Washington Post poll, a majority of Republicans support Mr. Trump's idea. Why are they wrong?
  RUBIO: Well, I understand why they feel that way, because this president hasn't kept us safe. The problem is we had an attack in San Bernardino. And we were paying attention to the most important issue we have faced in a decade since 9/11, and then all the talk was about this proposal, which isn't going to happen.
  But this is what's important to do is we must deal frontally with this threat of radical Islamists, especially from ISIS. This is the most sophisticated terror group that has ever threatened the world or the United States of America. They are actively recruiting Americans. The attacker in San Bernardino was an American citizen, born and raised in this country. He was a health inspector; had a newborn child and left all that behind to kill 14 people.
  We also understand that this is a group that's growing in its governance of territory. It's not just Iraq and Syria. They are now a predominant group in Libya. They are beginning to pop up in Afghanistan. They are increasingly involved now in attacks in Yemen. They have Jordan in their sights.
  This group needs to be confronted with serious proposals. And this is a very significant threat we face. And the president has left us unsafe. He spoke the other night to the American people to reassure us. I wish he hadn't spoken at all. He made things worse. Because what he basically said was we are going to keep doing what we're doing now, and what we are doing now is not working.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Hugh Hewitt, you have a question.
  HEWITT: Senator Cruz, you've said you disagree with Mr. Trump's policy. I don't want a cage match; you've tweeted you don't want a cage match. But Republican primary voters deserve to know, with the kind of specificity and responsiveness you delivered in your nine Supreme Court arguments, how you disagree with Mr. Trump. Would you spell that out with us?
  CRUZ: Well, listen, Hugh, everyone understands why Donald has suggested what he has. We're looking at a president who's engaged in this double-speak where he doesn't call radical Islamic terrorism by its name. Indeed, he gives a speech after the San Bernardino attack where his approach is to try to go after the constitutional rights of law-abiding citizens rather than to keep us safe.
  And even worse, President Obama and Hillary Clinton are proposing bringing tens of thousands of Syrian refugees to this country when the head of the FBI has told Congress they cannot vet those refugees.
  I understand why Donald made that proposal. I introduced legislation in the Senate that I believe is more narrowly focused at the actual threat, which is radical Islamic terrorism, and what my legislation would do is suspend all refugees for three years from countries where ISIS or Al Qaida control substantial territory.
  HEWITT: So you're saying you disagree because he's too broad and you have a narrower focus? Why do you disagree with him?
  CRUZ: Well, you know, I'm reminded of what FDR's grandfather said. He said, ''All horse-thieves are Democrats, but not all Democrats are horse-thieves.''
  (LAUGHTER)
  In this instance, there are millions of peaceful Muslims across the world, in countries like India, where there is not the problems we are seeing in nations that are controlled -- have territory controlled by Al Qaida or ISIS, and we should direct at the problem, focus on the problem, and defeat radical Islamic terrorism. It's not a war on a faith; it's a war on a political and theocratic ideology that seeks to murder us.
  HEWITT: Carly Fiorina... (APPLAUSE)
  ... this is the Christmas dinner debate. This will be the debate that Americans talk about at Christmas. And thus far, in the first 10 minutes, we haven't heard a lot about Ronald Reagan's city on a hill. We've heard a lot about keeping Americans out or keeping Americans safe and everyone else out. Is this what you want the party to stand for?
  FIORINA: What I think we need to stand for are solutions. I offer myself as a leader to the people of this country because I think they're looking for solutions, not lawyers arguing over laws or entertainers throwing out sound bites that draw media attention. We need to solve the problem.
  To solve the problem, we need to do something here at home and something over there in their caliphate. We need to deny them territory.
  But here at home, we need to do two fundamental things. Number one, we need to recognize that technology has moved on. The Patriot Act was signed in 2001, roughly. The iPhone was invented in 2007. The iPad was invented in 2011. Snapchat and Twitter, all the rest of it, have been around just for several years. Technology has moved on, and the terrorists have moved on with it.
  Let me tell you a story. Soon after 9/11, I got a phone call from the NSA. They needed help. I gave them help. I stopped a truckload of equipment. I had it turned around. It was escorted by the NSA into headquarters. We need the private sector's help, because government is not innovating. Technology is running ahead by leaps and bound. The private sector will help, just as I helped after 9/11. But they must be engaged, and they must be asked. I will ask them. I know them.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Christie, Americans are clearly more afraid today than at any time since 9/11. As you mentioned in your opening statement, today in Los Angeles, 650 schoolchildren didn't go to -- 650,000 schoolchildren didn't go to school because of an e-mail threat, this two weeks after an attack killed 14 people in San Bernardino. Is this the new normal? And if so, what steps would you take as president of the United States to ensure that fear does not paralyze America?
  CHRISTIE: Wolf, unfortunately, it's the new normal under Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. The fact is that if you listen to Hillary Clinton the other day, what she said to the American people was, as regards to ISIS, my strategy would be just about the same as the president's.
  Just about the same as the president's? We have people across this country who are scared to death. Because I could tell you this, as a former federal prosecutor, if a center for the developmentally disabled in San Bernardino, California, is now a target for terrorists, that means everywhere in America is a target for these terrorists.
  Now, I spent seven years of my life in the immediate aftermath of September 11th doing this work, working with the Patriot Act, working with our law enforcement, working with the surveillance community to make sure that we keep America safe.
  What we need to do, Wolf, is restore those tools that have been taken away by the president and others, restore those tools to the NSA and to our entire surveillance and law enforcement community.
  We need a president who is going to understand what actionable intelligence looks like and act on it. And we need a president and a cabinet who understands that the first and most important priority of the president of the United States is to protect the safety and security of Americans.
  As someone who has done it, I will make sure it gets done again.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Governor Kasich, one of the killers in San Bernardino was an American who was not on anyone's watch list. How are you going to find that radicalized person and stop another such attack?
  KASICH: Well, first of all, Wolf, I said last February that we needed to have people on the ground, troops on the ground in a coalition similar to what we had in the first Gulf War.
  I remember when the Egyptian ambassador to the United States stood in the Rose Garden and pledged Arab commitment to removing Saddam Hussein from Kuwait. Before we came out here tonight, I am told that the Saudis have organized 34 countries who want to join in the battle against terrorism.
  First and foremost, we need to go and destroy ISIS. And we need to do this with our Arab friends and our friends in Europe.
  And when I see they have a climate conference over in Paris, they should have been talking about destroying ISIS because they are involved in virtually every country, you know, across this world.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Now, you destroy ISIS in a coalition. You get joint intelligence with our European friends. And then here at home, there are things called the Joint Terrorism Task Force, headed by the FBI, and made up of local law enforcement, including state police.
  They need the tools. And the tools involve encryption where we cannot hear what they're even planning. And when we see red flags, a father, a mother, a neighbor who says we have got a problem here, then we have to give law enforcement the ability to listen so they can disrupt these terrorist attacks before they occur.
  We can do this, but we've got to get moving. Pay me now or pay me a lot more later. This is the direction we need to go.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Dana Bash, you have the next question.
  BASH: A crucial question is how to balance surveillance with privacy and keeping Americans safe.
  Senator Cruz, you voted for a bill that President Obama signed into law just this past June that made it harder for the government to access Americans' phone records. In light of the San Bernardino attack, was your vote a mistake?
  CRUZ: Well, Dana, the premise of your question is not accurate. I'm very proud to have joined with conservatives in both the Senate and the House to reform how we target bad guys.
  And what the USA Freedom Act did is it did two things. Number one, it ended the federal government's bulk collection of phone metadata of millions of law-abiding citizens.
  But number two in the second half of it that is critical. It strengthened the tools of national security and law enforcement to go after terrorists. It gave us greater tools and we are seeing those tools work right now in San Bernardino.
  And in particular, what it did is the prior program only covered a relatively narrow slice of phone calls. When you had a terrorist, you could only search a relatively narrow slice of numbers, primarily land lines.
  The USA Freedom Act expands that so now we have cell phones, now we have Internet phones, now we have the phones that terrorists are likely to use and the focus of law enforcement is on targeting the bad guys.
  You know what the Obama administration keeps getting wrong is whenever anything bad happens they focus on law-abiding citizens instead of focusing on the bad guys.
  We need to focus on radical Islamic terrorists and we need to stop them before they carry out acts of terror.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Thank you.
  Senator Rubio, Senator Cruz is right there was bipartisan support for that. But you voted against it. So, is Senator Cruz wrong?
  RUBIO: He is and so are those that voted for it. There were some that voted for it because they wanted to keep it alive and they were afraid the whole program would expire.
  Here's the world we live in. This is a radical jihadist group that is increasingly sophisticated in its ability, for example, to radicalize American citizens, in its inability to exploit loopholes in our legal immigration system, in its ability to capture and hold territory in the Middle East, as I outlined earlier, in multiple countries.
  This is not just the most capable, it is the most sophisticated terror threat we have ever faced. We are now at a time when we need more tools, not less tools. And that took we lost, the metadata program, was a valuable tool that we no longer have at our disposal.
  BASH: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: Well, you know, I would note that Marco knows what he's saying isn't true. You know, Mark Levin wrote a column last week that says that the attack ads his Super PAC is running that are saying the same thing, that they are knowingly false and they are, in fact, Alinsky-like attacks like Barack Obama.
  And the reason is simple. What he knows is that the old program covered 20 percent to 30 percent of phone numbers to search for terrorists. The new program covers nearly 100 percent. That gives us greater ability to stop acts of terrorism, and he knows that that's the case.
  RUBIO: Dana, may I interject here?
  BASH: Senator -- Senator -- Senator Rubio, please respond.
  RUBIO: Let me be very careful when answering this, because I don't think national television in front of 15 million people is the place to discuss classified information. So let me just be very clear. There is nothing that we are allowed to do under this bill that we could not do before.
  This bill did, however, take away a valuable tool that allowed the National Security Agency and other law -- and other intelligence agencies to quickly and rapidly access phone records and match them up with other phone records to see who terrorists have been calling. Because I promise you, the next time there is attack on -- an attack on this country, the first thing people are going to want to know is, why didn't we know about it and why didn't we stop it? And the answer better not be because we didn't have access to records or information that would have allowed us to identify these killers before they attacked.
  (CROSSTALK)
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator Paul, Senator Paul, I know this is -- this has been a very big issue for you. You hear many of your colleagues are calling for increased surveillance by law enforcement. You call that hogwash. Why is that hogwash?
  PAUL: You know, I think Marco gets it completely wrong. We are not any safer through the bulk collection of all Americans' records. In fact, I think we're less safe. We get so distracted by all of the information, we're not spending enough time getting specific immigration -- specific information on terrorists.
  The other thing is, is the one thing that might have stopped San Bernardino, that might have stopped 9/11 would have been stricter controls on those who came here. And Marco has opposed at every point increased security -- border security for those who come to our country.
  On his Gang of Eight bill, he would have liberalized immigration, but he did not -- and he steadfastly opposed any new border security requirements for refugees or students.
  Last week, I introduced another bill saying we need more security, we need more scrutiny. Once again, Marco opposed this. So Marco can't have it both ways. He thinks he wants to be this, ''Oh, I'm great and strong on national defense.'' But he's the weakest of all the candidates on immigration. He is the one for an open border that is leaving us defenseless. If we want to defend the country, we have to defend against who's coming in, and Marco is -- has more of an allegiance to Chuck Schumer and to the liberals than he does to conservative policy.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator Rubio?
  RUBIO: I want to thank Rand for another 30 seconds, because, number one, what he's pointing to is a bill last week that -- amendment that he voted for that only 10 people voted for. You know why? Because it's not focused on terrorists. It would have banned anyone from coming here. Someone from Taiwan would not have been able to come here as a tourist.
  Number two, this program, this metadata program is actually more strict than what a regular law enforcement agency has now. If a regular law enforcement agency wants your phone records, all they have to do is issue a subpoena. But now the intelligence agency is not able to quickly gather records and look at them to see who these terrorists are calling. And the terrorists that attacked us in San Bernardino was an American citizen, born and raised in this country. And I bet you we wish we would have had access to five years of his records so we could see who he was working with...
  (CROSSTALK)
  BASH: Governor Christie, Governor Christie...
  (CROSSTALK)
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Governor Christie, I'll come to you in a minute. Go ahead, Senator Paul.
  PAUL: If I was mentioned in the question, can I respond? BASH: Go ahead, please.
  PAUL: Marco still misunderstands the immigration issue. What I put forward was an amendment that would have temporarily halted immigration from high-risk terrorist countries, but would have started it up, but I wanted them to go through Global Entry, which is a program where we do background checks.
  The thing is, is that every terrorist attack we've had since 9/11 has been legal immigration. Marco wants to expand that. I want more rules, more scrutiny, and to defend the country, you have to defend the border.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator, we're going to talk about immigration in a while. But, Governor Christie, just listening to this...
  RUBIO: Do I get another 30 seconds? He mentioned me.
  BASH: Listening to this, you talked -- you heard Senator Paul, Senator Cruz talk about how important it is to protect Americans' privacy, even in a time of grave danger. Why -- what's wrong with that?
  CHRISTIE: Listen, I want to talk to the audience at home for a second. If your eyes are glazing over like mine, this is what it's like to be on the floor of the United States Senate. I mean, endless debates about how many angels on the head of a pin from people who've never had to make a consequential decision in an executive position.
  The fact is, for seven years, I had to make these decisions after 9/11, make a decision about how to proceed forward with an investigation or how to pull back, whether you use certain actionable intelligence or whether not to. And yet they continue to debate about this bill and in the subcommittee and what -- nobody in America cares about that.
  CHRISTIE: What they care about is, are we going to have a president who actually knows what they're doing to make these decisions? And for the seven years afterwards, New Jersey was threatened like no other region in this country and what we did was we took action within the constitution to make sure that law enforcement had all the information they needed.
  We prosecuted two of the biggest terrorism cases in the world and stopped Fort Dix from being attacked by six American radicalized Muslims from a Mosque in New Jersey because we worked with the Muslim American community to get intelligence and we used the Patriot Act to get other intelligence to make sure we did those cases. This is the difference between actually been a federal prosecutor, actually doing something, and not just spending your life as one of hundred debating it.
  Let's talk about how we do this, not about which bill, which one these guys like more. The American people don't care about that.
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Dr. Carson, you're in favor of monitoring mosques and schools where there is anti-America sentiment, what do you consider anti- America?
  CARSON: First of all, let me just complain a little bit. This is the first time I've spoken and several people have had multiple questions so please try to pay attention to that. Now, as far as monitoring is concerned, what my point is, we need to make sure that any place - I don't care whether it's a mosque, a school, a supermarket, a theater, you know it doesn't matter. If there are a lot of people getting there and engaging in radicalizing activities then we need to be suspicious of it.
  We have to get rid of all this PC stuff. And people are worried about if somebody's going to say that I'm Islamophobic or what have you. This is craziness because we are at war. That's why I asked congress, go ahead and declare the war .
  We need to be on a war footing. We need to understand that our nation is in grave danger. You know, what the Muslim Brotherhood said in the explanatory memorandum that was discovered during the Holy Land Foundation Trial was that, ''they will take advantage of our PC attitude to get us. :''
  We have to be better than this. We have to be smarter than they are.
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson, who was right in that little debate that we just heard between Senator Rubio and Senator Paul?
  CARSON: I think you have to ask them about that. I don't want to get in between them. Let them fight.
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: Hold on a sec, we have a lot more to come and everybody's going to have their full opportunity.
  Governor Bush, six days after 9/11 your brother visited a mosque and said quote, ''Islam is peace.'' The conversation tonight is about banning Muslims and surveillance of mosques, are President Bush's words still relevant in today's Republican party?
  BUSH: They are reverent if we want to destroy ISIS. If we want to destroy radical Islamic terrors, we can't disassociate ourselves from peace loving Muslims. If we expect to do this on our own, we will fail but if we do it in unison with people who are also are at risk and threatened by Islamic Radical terrorism, we'll be far more successful.
  Look, the FBI has the tools necessary un-American activities in our country. It goes on, we shouldn't even be talking about it, to be honest with you out in the public. Of course they have those capabilities and we should make sure that we give the FBI, the NSA, our intelligence communities, all the resources they need to keep us safe.
  But the main thing we should be focused on is the strategy to destroy ISIS. And I laid out a plan that the Reagan Library before the tragedy of Paris, and before San Bernardino to do just that. It requires leadership, it's not filing an amendment and call it a success.
  It is developing a strategy, leading the world, funding it to make sure that we have a military that's second to none, and doing the job and making sure that we destroy ISIS there. That's how you keep America safe.
  BLITZER: Ms. Fiorina, as you pointed out you were a CEO in Silicon Valley on 9/11. Companies there, they say they won't help the FBI now crack encrypted communication from ISIS, should they be forced to.
  FIORINA: You know, listening to this conversation, let me just say, we have a lot of argument about laws but none of it solves the problem. Let's examine what happened, why did we miss the Tsarnaev brothers, why did we miss the San Bernardino couple? It wasn't because we had stopped collected metadata it was because, I think, as someone who comes from the technology world, we were using the wrong algorithms.
  This is a place where the private sector could be helpful because the government is woefully behind the technology curve. But secondly, the bureaucratic processes that have been in place since 9/11 are woefully inadequate as well. What do we now know? That DHS vets people by going into databases of known or suspected terrorists.
  FIORINA: And yet, we also know that ISIS is recruiting who are not in those databases. So of course, we're going to miss them. And then we now learn that DHS says, ''No, we can't check their social media.''
  For heaven's sakes, every parent in America is checking social media and every employer is as well, but our government can't do it. The bureaucratic procedures are so far behind. Our government has become incompetent, unresponsive, corrupt. And that incompetence, ineptitude, lack of accountability is now dangerous.
  It is why we need a different kind of leadership in the White House that understands how to get bureaucracies competent again.
  BLITZER: But my question was: Should these Silicon Valley companies be forced to cooperate with the FBI?
  FIORINA: They do not need to be forced. They need to be asked to bring the best and brightest, the most recent technology to the table. I was asked as a CEO. I complied happily. And they will as well. But they have not been asked. That's why it cost billions of dollars to build an Obama website that failed because the private sector wasn't asked.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Mr. Trump, you recently suggested closing that Internet up, those were your words, as a way to stop ISIS from recruiting online. Are you referring to closing down actual portions of the Internet? Some say that would put the U.S. in line with China and North Korea.
  TRUMP: Well, look, this is so easy to answer. ISIS is recruiting through the Internet. ISIS is using the Internet better than we are using the Internet, and it was our idea. What I wanted to do is I wanted to get our brilliant people from Silicon Valley and other places and figure out a way that ISIS cannot do what they're doing.
  You talk freedom of speech. You talk freedom of anything you want. I don't want them using our Internet to take our young, impressionable youth and watching the media talking about how they're masterminds -- these are masterminds. They shouldn't be using the word ''mastermind.'' These are thugs. These are terrible people in ISIS, not masterminds. And we have to change it from every standpoint. But we should be using our brilliant people, our most brilliant minds to figure a way that ISIS cannot use the Internet. And then on second, we should be able to penetrate the Internet and find out exactly where ISIS is and everything about ISIS. And we can do that if we use our good people.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Let me follow up, Mr. Trump.
  So, are you open to closing parts of the Internet?
  TRUMP: I would certainly be open to closing areas where we are at war with somebody. I sure as hell don't want to let people that want to kill us and kill our nation use our Internet. Yes, sir, I am.
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Governor Kasich, is shutting down any part of the Internet a good idea?
  KASICH: No, I don't think it is. And I want to go back to two other issues. One is the metadata. We know we have to hold this data for a longer period of time. And, you know, in a lot of ways, Chris is right. Look, what a president has to do is take a position. We don't want to err on the side of having less. We want to err on the side of having more. That's good for our families.
  In addition to that, Wolf, there is a big problem. It's called encryption. And the people in San Bernardino were communicating with people who the FBI had been watching. But because their phone was encrypted, because the intelligence officials could not see who they were talking to, it was lost.
  We have to solve the encryption problem. It is not easy. A president of the United States, again, has to bring people together, have a position. We need to be able to penetrate these people when they are involved in these plots and these plans. And we have to give the local authorities the ability to penetrate to disrupt. That's what we need to do. Encryption is a major problem, and Congress has got to deal with this and so does the president to keep us safe.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you, Governor.
  The fight against radical Islamic terrorists and ISIS has been called the war of our time. So let's talk about how each of you, as commander in chief, would fight this war and win it.
  Senator Cruz, you have said you would, quote, ''carpet bomb ISIS into oblivion,'' testing whether, quote, ''sand can glow in the dark.'' Does that mean leveling the ISIS capital of Raqqa in Syria where there are hundreds of thousands of civilians?
  CRUZ: What it means is using overwhelming air power to utterly and completely destroy ISIS. To put things in perspective, in the first Persian Gulf War, we launched roughly 1,100 air attacks a day. We carpet bombed them for 36 days, saturation bombing, after which our troops went in and in a day and a half mopped up what was left of the Iraqi army.
  Right now, Obama is launching between 15 and 30 air attacks a day. It is photo op foreign policy. We need to use overwhelming air power. We need to be arming the Kurds. We need to be fighting and killing ISIS where they are.
  And let me go back to the earlier discussion a minute ago. It's not a lack of competence that is preventing the Obama administration from stopping these attacks. It is political correctness. We didn't monitor the Facebook posting of the female San Bernardino terrorist because the Obama DHS thought it would be inappropriate. She made a public call to jihad, and they didn't target it.
  The Tsarnaev brothers, the elder brother made a public call to jihad and the Obama administration didn't target it. Nidal Hasan communicated with Anwar al-Awlaki, a known radical cleric, asked about waging jihad against his fellow soldiers. The problem is because of political correctness, the Obama administration, like a lot of folks here, want to search everyone's cell phones and e-mails and not focus on the bad guys. And political correctness is killing people.
  BLITZER: Thank you. To be clear, Senator Cruz, would you carpet bomb Raqqa, the ISIS capital, where there are a lot of civilians, yes or no?
  CRUZ: You would carpet bomb where ISIS is, not a city, but the location of the troops. You use air power directed -- and you have embedded special forces to direction the air power. But the object isn't to level a city. The object is to kill the ISIS terrorists.
  To make it -- listen, ISIS is gaining strength because the perception is that they're winning. And President Obama fuels that perception. That will change when militants across the globe see that when you join ISIS that you are giving up your life, you are signing your death warrant, and we need a president who is focused on defeating every single ISIS terrorist and protecting the homeland, which should be the first priority.
  BLITZER: Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
  Senator Rubio, you've been critical of Senator Cruz's strategy. You say his voting record doesn't match his rhetoric. Why?
  RUBIO: Well, let me begin by saying that we have to understand who ISIS is. ISIS is a radical Sunni group. They cannot just be defeated through air strikes. Air strikes are a key component of defeating them, but they must be defeated on the ground by a ground force. And that ground force must be primarily made up of Sunni Arabs themselves, Sunni Arabs that reject them ideologically and confront them militarily.
  We will have to embed additional American special operators alongside them to help them with training, to help them conduct special missions, and to help improve the air strikes. The air strikes are important, but we need to have an air force capable of it. And because of the budget cuts we are facing in this country, we are going to be left with the oldest and the smallest Air Force we have ever had. We have to reverse those cuts, in addition to the cuts to our Navy and in addition to the cuts to our Army, as well.
  And beyond that, I would say we must win the information war against ISIS. Every war we have ever been involved in has had a propaganda informational aspect to it. ISIS is winning the propaganda war. They are recruiting people, including Americans, to join them, with the promise that they are joining this great apocalyptic movement that is going to defeat the West. We have to show what life is really like in ISIS territory, and we have to show them why ISIS is not invincible, by going out and conducting these attacks and publicizing them to those who they recruit.
  BLITZER: Because I asked the question, Senator, because you said this. You said he, referring to Senator Cruz, voted against the Defense Authorization Act every year that it came up, and I assume that if he voted against it, he would veto it as president. That's the bill that funds our troops.
  RUBIO: That is accurate. Three times he voted against the Defense Authorization Act, which is a bill that funds the troops. It also, by the way, funds the Iron Dome and other important programs. And I have to assume that if you vote against it in the Senate, you would also veto it as president.
  He has also supported, by the way, a budget that is called the containment budget. And it is a budget that would radically reduce the amount of money we spend on our military. You can't carpet bomb ISIS if you don't have planes and bombs to attack them with. And if we continue those cuts that we're doing now, not to mention additional cuts, we are going to be left with the oldest and the smallest Air Force this country has ever had, and that leaves us less safe.
  BLITZER: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: Well, you know, Marco has continued these attacks, and he knows they're not true. Yes, it is true that I voted against the National Defense Authorization Act, because when I campaigned in Texas I told voters in Texas that I would oppose the federal government having the authority to detain U.S. citizens permanently with no due process. I have repeatedly supported an effort to take that out of that bill, and I honored that campaign commitment.
  CRUZ: But more broadly, you know, the notion Marco is suggesting, that somehow -- he also has tossed more than a few insults this direction -- let's be absolutely clear. ISIS and radical Islamic terrorism will face no more determined foe than I will be.
  We will utterly destroy them by targeting the bad guys. And one of the problems with Marco's foreign policy is he has far too often supported Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama undermining governments in the Middle East that have helped radical Islamic terrorists.
  We need to focus on killing the bad guys, not getting stuck in Middle Eastern civil wars that don't keep America safe.
  BLITZER: Senator Rubio.
  RUBIO: Yes, let me -- three points of distinction. The first is, if you're an American citizen and you decide to join up with ISIS, we're not going to read you your Miranda rights. You're going to be treated as an enemy combatant, a member of an army attacking this country.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Number two, we do need our defense capabilities. It is a fact that the cuts we are facing today and the cuts that Senator Cruz would have supported would leave us with an even smaller Air Force and a smaller Navy than the one we are going to be left with.
  And the final point that I would make is Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama's strategy is to lead from behind. It sounds like what he is outlining is not to lead at all. We cannot continue to outsource foreign policy. We must lead. We are the most powerful nation in the world. We need to begin to act like it, again.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: We are going to have much more on this...
  PAUL: Wolf...
  BLITZER: We're going to have much more on this. But I want to move now back to Mr. Trump.
  PAUL: Wolf, this legislation...
  BLITZER: Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. PAUL: This legislation on indefinite detention...
  BLITZER: We have a lot...
  PAUL: ... I think deserves a little more attention.
  BLITZER: We have a lot to discuss. I want to move to Mr. Trump right now. We have a question on this war against ISIS and how you would fight and win this war. Here's the question from Facebook. Listen to this.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  JOSH JACOB, COLLEGE STUDENT: I'm Josh Jacob from Georgia Tech. Recently Donald Trump mentioned we must kill the families of ISIS members. However, this violates the principle of distinction between civilians and combatants in international law.
  So my question is, how would intentionally killing innocent civilians set us apart from ISIS?
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  BLITZER: Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: We have to be much tougher. We have to be much stronger than we've been. We have people that know what is going on. You take a look at just the attack in California the other day. There were numerous people, including the mother, that knew what was going on.
  They saw a pipe bomb sitting all over the floor. They saw ammunition all over the place. They knew exactly what was going on.
  When you had the World Trade Center go, people were put into planes that were friends, family, girlfriends, and they were put into planes and they were sent back, for the most part, to Saudi Arabia.
  They knew what was going on. They went home and they wanted to watch their boyfriends on television. I would be very, very firm with families. Frankly, that will make people think because they may not care much about their lives, but they do care, believe it or not, about their families' lives.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BUSH: Donald, this has got...
  BLITZER: Governor Bush. Governor Bush.
  BUSH: This is another example of the lack of seriousness. Look, this is -- this is troubling because we're at war. They've declared war on us and we need to have a serious strategy to destroy ISIS.
  But the idea that that is a solution to this is just -- is just crazy. It makes no sense to suggest this. Look, two months ago Donald Trump said that ISIS was not our fight. Just two months ago he said that Hillary Clinton would be a great negotiator with Iran. And he gets his foreign policy experience from the shows.
  That is not a serious kind of candidate. We need someone that thinks this through. That can lead our country to safety and security.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: Look, the problem is we need toughness. Honestly, I think Jeb is a very nice person. He's a very nice person. But we need tough people. We need toughness. We need intelligence and we need tough.
  Jeb said when they come across the southern border they come as an act of love.
  BUSH: You said on September 30th that ISIS was not a factor.
  TRUMP: Am I talking or are you talking, Jeb?
  BUSH: I'm talking right now. I'm talking.
  TRUMP: You can go back. You're not talking. You interrupted me.
  BUSH: September 30th you said...
  TRUMP: Are you going to apologize, Jeb? No. Am I allowed to finish?
  BLITZER: Just one at a time, go ahead...
  TRUMP: Excuse me, am I allowed to finish?
  BLITZER: Go ahead, Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: So...
  BUSH: A little of your own medicine there, Donald.
  TRUMP: ... again...
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: Governor Bush, please.
  TRUMP: I know you're trying to build up your energy, Jeb, but it's not working very well.
  (LAUGHTER)
  BLITZER: One at a time.
  TRUMP: Look, look, look. We need a toughness. We need strength. We're not respected, you know, as a nation anymore. We don't have that level of respect that we need. And if we don't get it back fast, we're just going to go weaker, weaker and just disintegrate.
  We can't allow that to happen. We need strength. We don't have it. When Jeb comes out and he talks about the border, and I saw it and I was witness to it, and so was everyone else, and I was standing there, ''they come across as an act of love,'' he's saying the same thing right now with radical Islam.
  And we can't have that in our country. It just won't work. We need strength.
  BLITZER: Governor Bush.
  BUSH: Donald, you're not going to be able to insult your way to the presidency. That's not going to happen.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And I do have the strength. Leadership, leadership is not about attacking people and disparaging people. Leadership is about creating a serious strategy to deal with the threat of our time.
  BUSH: And I laid out that strategy before the attacks in Paris and before the attacks in San Bernardino. And it is the way forward. We need to increase our military spending. We need to deal with a no- fly zone in Syria, a safe zone. We need to focus on building a military that is second-to-none...
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  BUSH: ... so that we can destroy Islamic terrorism.
  TRUMP: With Jeb's attitude, we will never be great again, that I can tell you. We will never be great again.
  BLITZER: All right. Hugh Hewitt and Dana Bash, Hugh, go ahead with the next question.
  HEWITT: Dr. Carson...
  (APPLAUSE)
  ... you mentioned in your opening remarks that you're a pediatric neurologist surgeon...
  CARSON: Neurosurgeon.
  HEWITT: Neurosurgeon. And people admire and respect and are inspired by your life story, your kindness, your evangelical core support. We're talking about ruthless things tonight -- carpet bombing, toughness, war. And people wonder, could you do that? Could you order air strikes that would kill innocent children by not the scores, but the hundreds and the thousands? Could you wage war as a commander-in-chief?
  CARSON: Well, interestingly enough, you should see the eyes of some of those children when I say to them we're going to have to open your head up and take out this tumor. They're not happy about it, believe me. And they don't like me very much at that point. But later on, they love me.
  Sometimes you -- I sound like him.
  (APPLAUSE)
  You know, later on, you know, they really realize what's going on. And by the same token, you have to be able to look at the big picture and understand that it's actually merciful if you go ahead and finish the job, rather than death by 1,000 pricks.
  HEWITT: So you are OK with the deaths of thousands of innocent children and civilian? It's like...
  CARSON: You got it. You got it.
  HEWITT: That is what war -- can you be as ruthless as Churchill was in prosecuting the war against the Nazis?
  CARSON: Ruthless is not necessarily the word I would use, but tough, resolute, understanding what the problems are, and understanding that the job of the president of the United States is to protect the people of this country and to do what is necessary in order to get it done.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator Paul, you said ISIS grew stronger because of the hawks in your party. Do you really think that Republicans have fueled the rise of ISIS?
  PAUL: I think that by arming the allies of ISIS, the Islamic rebels against Assad, that we created a safe space or made that space bigger for ISIS to grow. I think those who have wanted regime change have made a mistake. When we toppled Gadhafi in Libya, I think that was a mistake. I think ISIS grew stronger, we had a failed state, and we were more at risk.
  I'd like to also go back to, though, another question, which is, is Donald Trump a serious candidate? The reason I ask this is, if you're going to close the Internet, realize, America, what that entails. That entails getting rid of the First amendment, OK? It's no small feat.
  If you are going to kill the families of terrorists, realize that there's something called the Geneva Convention we're going to have to pull out of. It would defy every norm that is America. So when you ask yourself, whoever you are, that think you're going to support Donald Trump, think, do you believe in the Constitution? Are you going to change the Constitution?
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: So, they can kill us, but we can't kill them? That's what you're saying. And as far as the Internet is concerned, we're not talking about closing the Internet. I'm talking about parts of Syria, parts of Iraq, where ISIS is, spotting it.
  Now, you could close it. What I like even better than that is getting our smartest and getting our best to infiltrate their Internet, so that we know exactly where they're going, exactly where they're going to be. I like that better.
  (APPLAUSE)
  But we have to -- who would be -- I just can't imagine somebody booing. These are people that want to kill us, folks, and you're -- you're objecting to us infiltrating their conversations? I don't think so. I don't think so.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator Paul, Senator Paul, I want to go back to my initial question, which is you saying that ISIS grew stronger because of hawks in your party. And do you think your own party, the people who you're describing, are responsible for the rise of ISIS?
  PAUL: I think that if you believe in regime change, you're mistaken. In 2013, we put 600 tons of weapons -- us, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar -- into the war against Assad. By pushing Assad back, we did create a safe space.
  We had people coming to our Foreign Relations Committee and saying, ''Oh, we need to arm the allies of Al Qaida.'' They are still saying this. It is a crazy notion. This is the biggest debate we should be having tonight is is regime change a good idea; has it been a good idea.
  There are still people -- the majority on the stage, they want to topple Assad. And then there will be chaos, and I think ISIS will then be in charge of Syria.
  BASH: Senator, we're going to talk about regime change in a bit.
  But Governor Kasich, would you like to respond to Senator Paul?
  KASICH: Yeah, let me -- let me just suggest to everybody, and I hear -- last February, I said we needed to have people on the ground in a coalition with Europe and our allies. This is not going to get done just by working with the Sunnis. And it is not going to get done if we just embed a few people.
  We have to go massively, like we did in the first Gulf War where we destroyed Saddam's ability to take Kuwait. We need to have a coalition that will stand for nothing less than the total destruction of ISIS and we have to be the leader. We can't wait for anybody else. I served on the Armed Services Committee for 18 years and we must lead, or the job won't get done, unfortunately, for our country.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you, Governor.
  Senator Rubio? Let's continue this conversation. This is a critically important issue.
  FIORINA: I hope at some point you're going to ask me my strategy.
  BLITZER: We will get to -- we have a lot of time, Ms. Fiorina.
  I want to get to Senator Rubio right now. Let's talk about, one of the aspects of your strategy, you say the only way to defeat ISIS is with ground forces made up primarily of Sunni-Arab forces. Those Arab nations, though, as you well know, they've conducted less than five percent of the airstrikes and actually none since August. What makes you think they are willing to fight on the ground if they're not even willing to fight from the air?
  RUBIO: Well, they most certainly will have to be worked on to provide more than what they are doing now. There's no doubt about it. And there's one -- one major reason why they have not been willing to be a broader part of the coalition, and that is they have lost complete trust and confidence in this president. This president cut a deal with their moral enemy, the Shia, in Iran. And this is the reason why they no longer trust this president and are willing to work alongside them.
  But they have as much invested in this as we do. In fact, more so, for it is the king of Saudi Arabia they want to behead first. It's the king of Jordan that they want to dethrone. It's the -- they want to go into Egypt the way they've already gone into Libya.
  And on another point that we need to talk about, Assad is one of the main reasons why ISIS even exists to begin with. Assad is a puppet of Iran. And he has been so brutal toward the Sunni within Syria that he created the space that led to the people of Syria themselves to stand up and try to overthrow him. That led to the chaos which allowed ISIS to come in and take advantage of that situation and grow more powerful.
  And the fact that this president led from behind meant there were no alternative groups on the ground to be empowered, leaving ISIS with the prime operating space they needed to become the force they have now become.
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: Thank you, Senator. Stand by.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Ms. Fiorina, the former defense secretary, Bob Gates, says the chances of getting Sunni-Arab forces on the ground to get the job done, his words, ''chances very remote.'' What's your strategy?
  FIORINA: Well, first I'll just point out that talking tough is not the same as being strong. And to wage war, we need a commander in chief who has made tough calls in tough times and stood up to be held accountable over and over, not first-term senators who've never made an executive decision in their life.
  One of the things I would immediately do, in addition to defeating them here at home, is bring back the warrior class -- Petraeus, McChrystal, Mattis, Keane, Flynn. Every single one of these generals I know. Every one was retired early because they told President Obama things that he didn't want to hear.
  We must have Sunni-Arabs involved in this coalition. We must commit leadership, strength, support and resolve. I'll just add that Margaret Thatcher once said, ''If you want something talked about, ask a man; if you want something done, ask a woman.''
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Governor Christie, what's your strategy?
  CHRISTIE: Wolf, you sit up here and you listen to this stuff, and you think that so many of these people have had so much to do in this national debate, they talk like they were bystanders. You know, we talk about our military being degraded over time, and yet we've had folks on this stage who've been a part of Congress who have participated in sequester; who participated in the degrading of this military over time.
  And that's why I think people get so frustrated with Washington, D.C. now. That's why they're so angry with the -- the electorate is so angry with everybody who is involved in government in Washington, D.C. Because if you listen to the folks up here, you think that they weren't even there; they had nothing to do with this.
  CHRISTIE: This is a difference between being a governor and being in a legislature. See, because when something doesn't work in New Jersey, they look at me, say: ''Why didn't it get done? Why didn't you do it?'' You have to be responsible and accountable.
  And so on ISIS, let's be clear, the president needs to be a force that is trusted in the world. On this I agree with Marco. You know, this president is not trusted.
  If you're the King of Jordan, if you're a part of the royal family in Saudi Arabia and he's made this deal with Iran which gives them $150 billion to wage a war and try to extend their empire across the Middle East, why would you want to do it now?
  But I will tell you this, when I stand across from King Hussein of Jordan and I say to him, ''You have a friend again sir, who will stand with you to fight this fight,'' he'll change his mind.
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson, what is your strategy?
  CARSON: First of all, I've been talking about this for over a year. We have to destroy their caliphate because that gives them legitimacy to go ahead with the global Jihad. We have to take their energy because they are -- ISIS is the richest terrorist organization there is. We have to take their oil, shut down all of the mechanisms whereby they can disperse money because they go after disaffected individuals from all over the place, and they're able to pay them. That makes a difference.
  As far as the command centers are concerned in Raqqa and to a lesser degree Mosul, cut those off. Do the same kind of thing that we did with Sinjar a few weeks ago, working with our embedded special forces with the Kurds, shut off the supply route, soften them up, then we go in with specials ops followed by our air force to take them over. Those are things that work.
  But also, you know, this whole concept of boots on the ground, you know, we've got a phobia about boots on the ground. If our military experts say, we need boots on the ground, we should put boots on the ground and recognize that there will be boots on the ground and they'll be over here, and they'll be their boots if we don't get out of there now.
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Everyone stand by. We're only just beginning. Coming up, which candidates on this stage tonight want to move foreign policy in a dramatically new direction?
  We'll be right back.
  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  BLITZER: Welcome back to the CNN-Facebook Republican Presidential Debate here at the Venetian, Las Vegas.
  The war against ISIS will pose many new challenges for the next commander-in-chief. The last two presidents pursued a Middle East policy that supported toppling dictators to try to promote democracy.
  Senator Cruz, you have said the world would be safer today if Saddam Hussein were still in power in Iraq, Moammar Gadhafi ruled Libya, and Hosni Mubarak ruled Egypt. So would it be your policy to preserve dictatorships, rather than promoting democracy in the Middle East?
  CRUZ: Wolf, I believe in a America first foreign policy, that far too often President Obama and Hillary Clinton -- and, unfortunately, more than a few Republicans -- have gotten distracted from the central focus of keeping this country safe.
  So let's go back to the beginning of the Obama administration, when Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama led NATO in toppling the government in Libya. They did it because they wanted to promote democracy. A number of Republicans supported them. The result of that -- and we were told then that there were these moderate rebels that would take over. Well, the result is, Libya is now a terrorist war zone run by jihadists.
  Move over to Egypt. Once again, the Obama administration, encouraged by Republicans, toppled Mubarak who had been a reliable ally of the United States, of Israel, and in its place, Morsi and the Muslim Brotherhood came in, a terrorist organization.
  And we need to learn from history. These same leaders -- Obama, Clinton, and far too many Republicans -- want to topple Assad. Assad is a bad man. Gadhafi was a bad man. Mubarak had a terrible human rights record. But they were assisting us -- at least Gadhafi and Mubarak -- in fighting radical Islamic terrorists.
  And if we topple Assad, the result will be ISIS will take over Syria, and it will worsen U.S. national security interests. And the approach, instead of being a Woodrow Wilson democracy promoter...
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  CRUZ: ... we ought to hunt down our enemies and kill ISIS rather than creating opportunities for ISIS to take control of new countries.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Senator.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Senator Rubio, you supported the removal of Moammar Gadhafi in Libya. Now that country is in turmoil, as ISIS is clearly growing there. Senator Cruz says you haven't learned your lesson. Do you have any regrets for supporting President Obama's intervention in Libya?
  RUBIO: To begin with, Moammar Gadhafi and the revolt against Gadhafi was not started by the United States. It was started by the Libyan people. And the reason why I argued we needed to get involved is because he was going to go one way or the other. And my argument then was proven true, and that is, the longer that civil war took, the more militias would be formed and the more unstable the country would be after the fact.
  As far as Moammar Gadhafi is concerned, by the way, Moammar Gadhafi is the man that killed those Americans over Lockerbie, Scotland. Moammar Gadhafi is also the man that bombed that cafe in Berlin and killed those Marines. And you want to know why Moammar Gadhafi started cooperating on his nuclear program? Because we got rid of Saddam Hussein. And so he got scared that he would be next, and that's why he started cooperating.
  Look, we will have to work around the world with less than ideal governments. The government in Saudi Arabia is not a democracy, but we will have to work with them. The government in Jordan is not perfect, but we will have to work with them. But anti-American dictators like Assad, who help Hezbollah, who helped get those IEDs into Iraq, if they go, I will not shed a tear.
  BLITZER: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: Well, it's more than not shedding a tear. It's actively getting involved to topple a government. And we keep hearing from President Obama and Hillary Clinton and Washington Republicans that they're searching for these mythical moderate rebels. It's like a purple unicorn. They never exist. These moderate rebels end up being jihadists.
  And I'll tell you whose view on Assad is the same as mine. It's Prime Minister Netanyahu. Prime Minister Netanyahu has said Israel doesn't have a dog in that fight because Assad is a puppet of Iran, a Shia radical Islamic terrorist, but at the same time, Prime Minister Netanyahu doesn't want to see Syria governed by ISIS. And we need to focus on American interests, not on global aspirations...
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: Standby. Everybody standby for a moment. Governor Kasich, go ahead.
  KASICH: I don't understand this thing about Assad. He has to go. Assad is aligned with Iran and Russia. The one thing we want to prevent is we want to prevent Iran being able to extend a Shia crescent all across the Middle East. Assad has got to go.
  KASICH: And there are moderates there. There are moderates in Syria who we should be supporting. I do not support a civil war. I don't want to be policeman of the world. But we can't back off of this. And let me tell you, at the end, the Saudis have agreed to put together a coalition inside of Syria to stabilize that country.
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  KASICH: He must go. It will be a blow to Iran and Russia.
  BLITZER: We're going to talk about Assad in a moment.
  Mr. Trump, are Americans safer with dictators running the world in the Middle East?
  TRUMP: In my opinion, we've spent $4 trillion trying to topple various people that frankly, if they were there and if we could've spent that $4 trillion in the United States to fix our roads, our bridges, and all of the other problems; our airports and all of the other problems we've had, we would've been a lot better off. I can tell you that right now.
  We have done a tremendous disservice, not only to Middle East, we've done a tremendous disservice to humanity. The people that have been killed, the people that have wiped away, and for what? It's not like we had victory.
  It's a mess. The Middle East is totally destabilized. A total and complete mess. I wish we had the $4 trillion or $5 trillion. I wish it were spent right here in the United States, on our schools, hospitals, roads, airports, and everything else that are all falling apart.
  (APPLAUSE)
  FIORINA: That is exactly what President Obama said. I'm amazed to hear that from a republican presidential candidate. But let's just start with, who got it wrong? Who really got it wrong?
  Hillary Clinton has gotten every foreign policy challenge wrong. Hitting the reset button with Vladimir Putin - recall that she called Bashar Al-Assad a positive reformer and then she opened an embassy and then later she said, over, and over, and over again, ''Bashar Al-Assad must go.'' Although she wasn't prepared to do anything about it. Recall that Hillary Clinton was all for toppling Gadhafi then didn't listen to her own people on the ground. And then of course, when she lied about the terrorist attack in Benghazi, she invited more terrorist attacks.
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  Mr. Trump?
  TRUMP: Well, there's nothing to respond to. Well, people feel differently. I mean, the fact is Benghazi was a disaster because of Libya, everything just fell into place. It could not have been worse.
  What do we have now? We have nothing. We've spent $3 trillion and probably much more - I have no idea what we've spent. Thousands and thousands of lives, we have nothing. Wounded warriors all over the place who I love, we have nothing for it.
  And by the way - and Ben said incorrectly - and I'm not saying this as a knock - he's one of finest men. You're not going to find a finer men.
  But I've been talking about oil for three years. I've been saying,, ''take the oil, take the oil.'' I didn't say, ''just bomb it,'' I said,'' take it and use it and distribute it so that the wounded warriors -'' People, I've been saying this now for many years.
  BLITZER: All right.
  TRUMP: Now, all of a sudden everybody's saying, ''take the oil.'' It wasn't so fashionable to take the oil six months ago. I've been saying it for years.
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  FIORINA: We've mismanaged going into Iraq.
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson, is the Middle East...
  FIORINA: We've mismanaged going out of Iraq.
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson, is the Middle East better off with dictators?
  CARSON: No one is ever better off with dictators but there comes a time you know, when you're on an airplane, they always say, ''in case of an emergency oxygen masks will drop down. Put yours on first and then administer help to your neighbor.'' We need oxygen right now.
  And we need to start thinking about the needs of the American people before we go and solve everybody else's problems. The fact of the matter is, is that the Middle East has been in turmoil for thousands of years. For us to think that we're going to in there and fix that with a couple of little bombs and a few little decorations is relatively foolish.
  FIORINA: We actually...
  BLITZER: Governor Bush.
  BUSH: I think we're focusing a whole...
  BLITZER: Hold on Governor Bush., here's the question. You said, ''getting rid of Saddam Hussein in your words was a pretty good deal.'' In light of what has happened in Iraq, do you still feel that way?
  BUSH: I do. I think the lesson's learned are that we have to have to have a strategy to get and a strategy to get out. Which means, that you create a stable situation.
  This president and this is what the focus ought to be, it's not the differences between us, it's Barack Obama does not believe America's leadership in the world is a force for good. He does not believe that our strength is a place where security can take place. He leads from behind. He creates an environment that now we're creating the most unstable situation we've had since the World War II era.
  The focus ought to be on the single fact that Hillary Clinton wants to double down on a failed foreign policy and we need to be united to defeat that because we're going to be in a place that is far less secure than it is today. Don't you all agree?
  BLITZER: Senator Paul, was getting rid of Saddam Hussein a pretty good deal?
  PAUL: These are the fundamental questions of our time, these foreign policy questions, whether or not regime change is a good idea or a bad idea. I don't think because I think the regime change was a bad idea it means that Hussein was necessarily a good idea.
  There is often variations of evil on both sides of the war. What we have to decide is whether or not regime change is a good idea. It's what the neoconservatives have wanted. It's what the vast majority of those on the stage want.
  They still want regime change. They want it in Syria. They wanted it in Iraq. They want it in Libya. It has not worked.
  Out of regime change you get chaos. From the chaos you have seen repeatedly the rise of radical Islam. So we get this profession of, oh, my goodness, they want to do something about terrorism and yet they're the problem because they allow terrorism to arise out of that chaos.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you.
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: Hugh Hewitt, go ahead.
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hugh.
  CRUZ: The question of whether we should toppling dictatorships is asking the wrong question. We should be defeating our enemies. So the problem with defeating...
  BLITZER: Senator, Senator, we're going to get to you. Wait your turn. We have two hours of debate. We'll have plenty of time. Let Hugh ask his question.
  CRUZ: Well, but let me explain, the focus should be...
  BLITZER: Senator, please.
  CRUZ: ... on defeating our enemies. So, for example...
  BLITZER: Senator... CRUZ: ... a regime we should change is Iran...
  BLITZER: You'll have plenty of opportunity.
  Hugh, go ahead.
  CRUZ: ... because Iran has declared war on us. But we shouldn't be toppling regimes...
  (CROSSTALK)
  CRUZ: ... that are fighting radical Islamic terrorists that are helping...
  BLITZER: These are the rules all of you agreed to.
  Hugh, go ahead with your question.
  HEWITT: Mr. Trump, we are talking about the most important thing, that's why it's heated. And it's, you are OK with Mr. Assad staying in power, but you are also in favor of winning.
  If he stays in power, Iran is winning, Hezbollah is winning. Iran is winning in Yemen. They are winning everywhere. If they are winning how can we be winning?
  TRUMP: I think Assad is a bad guy, a very bad guy, all right? Lots of people killed. I think we are backing people we have no idea who they are. The rebels, we call them the rebels, the patriotic rebels. We have no idea. A lot of people think, Hugh, that they are ISIS.
  We have to do one thing at a time. We can't be fighting ISIS and fighting Assad. Assad is fighting ISIS. He is fighting ISIS. Russia is fighting now ISIS. And Iran is fighting ISIS.
  We have to do one thing at a time. We can't go -- and I watched Lindsey Graham, he said, I have been here for 10 years fighting. Well, he will be there with that thinking for another 50 years. He won't be able to solve the problem.
  We have to get rid of ISIS first. After we get rid of ISIS, we'll start thinking about it. But we can't be fighting Assad. And when you're fighting Assad, you are fighting Russia, you're fighting -- you're fighting a lot of different groups.
  But we can't be fighting everybody at one time.
  HEWITT: Governor Christie, is he right? Because if we step back, Iran goes nuclear. Is Donald Trump right?
  CHRISTIE: Well, I think we have to focus, Hugh, on exactly what the priorities are. And to me, what I've always said is that the president has set up an awful situation through his deal with Iran, because what his deal with Iran has done is empower them and enrich them. And that's the way ISIS has been created and formed here. ISIS is created and formed because of the abuse that Assad and his Iranian sponsors have rained down on the Sunnis in Syria.
  And so when we empower Iran, this is why this president -- and when Hillary Clinton says her theory against ISIS will be just about the same as the president, then get ready for more unrest and more murder and more violence in the Middle East.
  We need to focus our attention on Iran, because if you miss Iran, you are not going to get ISIS. The two are inextricably connected because one causes the other.
  HEWITT: Senator Paul, let me ask you, you heard Governor Kasich say Assad must go. Do you agree?
  PAUL: No, I think it's a huge mistake. I think regime change in Syria, and this is what -- I've been saying this for several years now. In 2013 when we first went in, I said, you are going to give arms to the allies of al Qaida, to radical jihadists? That's crazy.
  But the other thing I said is the great irony is you will be back fighting against your own weapons. Had Assad been bombed when he used chemical weapons two years ago, ISIS would be in charge of all of Syria now.
  We have to have a more realistic foreign policy and not a utopian one where we say, oh, we're going to spread freedom and democracy, and everybody in the Middle East is going to love us. They are not going to love us.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (CROSSTALK)
  KASICH: The foreign policy, you have to know how to pick and choose. There's no way, if Saddam had not had weapons of mass destruction, I would have gone, because I don't believe that the U.S. should be involved directly in civil wars.
  I opposed the U.S. involvement in Lebanon. We ended up having to withdraw our marines after our barracks were blown up.
  There is a difference between Iraq, where you have Sunni, Shia, and Kurds put together after the First World War by the Western powers. It doesn't work. It needs to break up into three parts.
  KASICH: And for the Russians, frankly, it's time that we punched the Russians in the nose. They've gotten away with too much in this world and we need to stand up against them, not just there, but also in Eastern Europe where they threaten some of our most precious allies.
  BLITZER: Let's continue with Russia right now. We have another question from Facebook. Listen and watch.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  QUESTION: My name is Ashley Tofil. Ms. Fiorina, in November, you said that you would not talk to Vladimir Putin after you were elected because you would be communicating from a position of weakness. Do you believe that it is feasible to not communicate with another world leader? And do you think that that also is a sign of weakness?
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  BLITZER: Ms. Fiorina, as you know, U.S. and Russian warplanes are flying all over Syria right now. With so many lives on the line, is this a good time for the United States not to talk to Putin?
  FIORINA: I didn't say I would cut off all communication with Putin. What I said was as president of the United States, now is not the time to talk with him. Reagan walked away at Reykjavik. There is a time and a place for everything. There is a time and a place for talk. And there is a time and a place for action.
  I know Vladimir Putin. He respects strength. He lied to our president's face; didn't both to tell him about warplanes and troops going into Syria. We need to speak to him from a position of strength. So as commander in chief, I will not speak to him until we've set up that no-fly zone; until we've gathered our Sunni-Arab allies and begun to deny ISIS territory; until I've called the supreme leader of Iran and told him new deal -- new deal. We the United States of America are going to cut off the money flow, which we can do; which we don't need anyone's permission or collaboration to do.
  And I will not speak to him personally until we've rebuilt the 6th Fleet a little bit right under his nose; rebuilt the missile defense program in Poland right under his nose; and conducted a few military exercises in the Baltic states.
  And let us remember one other thing. Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama are responsible for the growth of ISIS because they precipitously withdrew from Iraq in 2011 against the advice of every single general and for political expediency. It's not these people up here. It's Hillary Clinton.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you, Ms. Fiorina.
  Governor Christie, if the U.S. imposed a no-fly zone over Syria and a Russian plane encroached, invaded that no-fly zone, would you be prepared to shoot down that Russian plane and risk war with Russia?
  CHRISTIE: Not only would I be prepared to do it, I would do it. A no-fly zone means a no-fly zone, Wolf. That's what it means.
  (APPLAUSE)
  See, maybe -- maybe because I'm from New Jersey, I just have this kind of plain language hangup. But I would make very clear -- I would not talk to Vladimir Putin. In fact, I would talk to Vladimir Putin a lot. But I'd say to him, ''Listen, Mr. President, there's a no-fly zone in Syria; you fly in, it applies to you.'' And yes, we would shoot down the planes of Russian pilots if in fact they were stupid enough to think that this president was the same feckless weakling that the president we have in the Oval Office is right now.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Senator Paul -- Senator Paul, I want you to respond to what we just heard from Governor Christie. If there was a no-fly zone, you say that potentially could lead to World War III. Why?
  PAUL: Well, I think if you're in favor of World War III, you have your candidate. You know, here's...
  (APPLAUSE)
  ... the thing. My goodness, what we want in a leader is someone with judgment, not someone who is so reckless as to stand on the stage and say, ''Yes, I'm jumping up and down; I'm going to shoot down Russian planes.'' Russia already flies in that airspace. It may not be something we're in love with the fact that they're there, but they were invited by Iraq and by Syria to fly in that airspace.
  And so if we announce we're going to have a no-fly zone, and others have said this. Hillary Clinton is also for it. It is a recipe for disaster. It's a recipe for World War III. We need to confront Russia from a position of strength, but we don't need to confront Russia from a point of recklessness that would lead to war.
  This is something -- this type of judgment, you know, it's having that kind of judgment; who you would appoint and how you're going to conduct affairs, that is incredibly important.
  I mean, I think when we think about the judgment of someone who might want World War III, we might think about someone who might shut down a bridge because they don't like their friends; they don't want to -- you know, they want to (inaudible) a Democrat.
  So I think we need to be very careful.
  BLITZER: Governor Christie?
  CHRISTIE: Well, Wolf, I'll tell you what reckless is. What reckless is is calling Assad a reformer. What reckless is allowing Russia to come into Crimea and Ukraine. What reckless is is inviting Russia into Syria to team with Iran. That is reckless. And the reckless people are the folks in the White House right now. Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton are the reckless people.
  CHRISTIE: And if you think that a no-fly zone is a reckless policy, you're welcome to your opinion. But how is it working so far? As we have 250,000 Syrians murdered, slaughtered; millions running around the world, running for their lives. It's not working. We need to try something else. And that is not reckless.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: All right, let's go back -- Hugh and Dana?
  HEWITT: Governor Bush, a commander-in-chief question. You've said that Mr. Trump is not qualified to be president because he's not qualified to deal with Vladimir Putin. Why are you better qualified to deal with Vladimir Putin than Mr. Trump?
  BUSH: Because I -- first of all, I know what I don't know. I know what I don't know. I would seek out, as I have, the best advice that exists. I won't get my information from the shows. I don't know if that's Saturday morning or Sunday morning. I don't know which one.
  (LAUGHTER)
  I will seek out the best advice, and I will create a strategy and I will persuade the American people what the role of America should be. I've laid out a policy of rebuilding our military.
  All of the talk that we're seeing here -- most of which I agree on, frankly -- requires a much stronger military. We now have a lack of readiness that is quite scary. We have planes that were -- that Harry Truman inaugurated, the B-52. We have -- the Navy has been gutted and decimated. The readiness of the Marines is way down.
  If we're serious about America's leadership in the world, then we need to make sure that we have the back of the armed forces. The Armed Forces Radio is here listening to this today. I hope they know that if I'm president, I'll be a commander-in-chief, not an agitator- in-chief or a divider-in-chief, that I will lead this country in a way that will create greater security and greater safety.
  HEWITT: Mr. Trump?
  TRUMP: I think it's very sad that CNN leads Jeb Bush, Governor Bush, down a road by starting off virtually all the questions, ''Mr. Trump this, Mister'' -- I think it's very sad. And, frankly, I watched -- I think it's very sad. And, frankly, I watched the first debate, and the first long number of questions were, ''Mr. Trump said this, Mr. Trump said that. Mr. Trump'' -- these poor guys -- although, I must tell you, Santorum, good guy. Governor Huckabee, good guy. They were very nice, and I respect them greatly. But I thought it was very unfair that virtually the entire early portion of the debate was Trump this, Trump that, in order to get ratings, I guess. In order to get ratings, I guess.
  HEWITT: But, Mr. Trump, it's not CNN -- I was on CNN last night...
  TRUMP: I just think it's very -- excuse me.
  HEWITT: ... watching...
  TRUMP: Excuse me. I think it's very unprofessional.
  HEWITT: But it wasn't -- it wasn't CNN. It was me. I watched you last night for 16 minutes. It's not CNN.
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: Well, I think it's very unprofessional.
  HEWITT: It's not CNN. It's America's watching you.
  TRUMP: OK, fine.
  HEWITT: It's America's watching.
  (CROSSTALK)
  BUSH: So I was -- I was -- I was mentioned, so I can bring up something, I think, right? Look, the simple fact is, if you think this is tough you're not being treated fairly...
  TRUMP: This isn't tough and easy. I wish it...
  BUSH: ... imagine what it's going to be like dealing with Putin or dealing with President Xi.
  TRUMP: I wish it was always this easy as you, Jeb.
  BUSH: Or dealing with the Islamic terrorism that exists.
  TRUMP: Oh, yeah.
  BUSH: This is a tough business to run for president.
  TRUMP: Oh, I know. You're a tough guy, Jeb. I know.
  BUSH: And it's -- and we need...
  (LAUGHTER)
  ... to have a leader that is...
  (CROSSTALK) TRUMP: You're tough.
  BUSH: You're never going to be president of the United States by insulting your way to the presidency.
  TRUMP: Well, let's see. I'm at 42, and you're at 3. So, so far, I'm doing better.
  BUSH: Doesn't matter. Doesn't matter.
  TRUMP: So far, I'm doing better. You know, you started off over here, Jeb. You're moving over further and further. Pretty soon you're going to be off the end...
  (CROSSTALK)
  FIORINA: This doesn't do a thing to solve the problems.
  (CROSSTALK)
  FIORINA: It doesn't do a thing to solve the problems.
  (CROSSTALK)
  BLITZER: One at a time. Hugh, go ahead.
  KASICH: It sounds more and more what my daughter said that I said in the beginning, all the fighting and arguing is not advancing us.
  FIORINA: It will not solve the problem.
  KASICH: It is not the way we're going to strengthen our country. We will strengthen our country when we come together.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And, look, you've got Rand Paul, you've got Ted Cruz, you've got Marco, you've got a lot of people on this stage that have studied these issues. You know what a leader does? A leader has a sound program, has a good policy, and then brings people together to solve problems.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Guess what? Both in Congress in balancing the budget and in Ohio fixing the economy -- and, by the way, we talk about the fence. The first thing we better get going is strengthening our economy, because if we don't have a strong economy, we can't pay for all of this. And the world wants us to be able to function from strength, believe it or not. Get our economy going, get these people together in a room. We can fix this, ladies and gentlemen.
  (CROSSTALK)
  KASICH: We don't have to fight all the time. It can be done, and we will be great...
  HEWITT: Governor -- thank you, Governor.
  KASICH: ... when we join together. Thank you, Hugh.
  HEWITT: Dr. Carson, commander-in-chief question again. You've been the head of neurosurgery for a big hospital. You're on a lot of boards of a lot of companies. You've traveled the world. You're going traveling again next week. But does that prepare you to command troops from Djibouti to Japan, troops from Afghanistan to Iraq to be in charge of the men and women watching on Armed Services Network tonight?
  CARSON: Well, you know, there's a false narrative that only the political class has the wisdom and the ability to be commander-in- chief. But if you go back and you study the design of our country, it was really designed for the citizen statesman.
  And we need to be talking about where does your experience come from? You know, and I've had a lot of experience building things, organizing things, you know, a national scholarship program.
  One of the things that you'll notice if you look through my life is that I don't do a lot of talking. I do a lot of doing. And really, it says more about a person than how much they talk. And then some people say you're weak because, you know, you're not loud and you're not boisterous and you're not rude. But the fact of the matter is, look and see what I've done. And that speaks volumes about strength.
  BASH: Thank you, Dr. Carson. We've been talking tonight about programs and policy proposals that you all have to keep Americans safe and it's a big discussion on the campaign trail. Also about border security and immigration. So let's talk about immigration.
  Senator Rubio. You co-authored a bill with Democrats two years ago that allowed a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. Do you still support that path to citizenship, which means giving those immigrants rights, like the right to vote?
  RUBIO: Yeah. Immigration is not an issue that I read about in the newspaper or watch a documentary on PBS or CNN. It's an issues I've lived around my whole life. My family are immigrants. My wife's family are immigrants. All of my neighbors are immigrants.
  I see every aspect of this problem. The good, the bad, and the ugly. And here's what we learned in 2013. The American people don't trust the Federal Government to enforce our immigration laws, and we will not be able to do anything on immigration until we first prove to the American people that illegal immigration is under control. And we can do that. We know what it takes to do that.
  It takes at least 20,000 more additional border agents. It takes completing those 700 miles of fencing. It takes a mandatory e-verify system and a mandatory entry/exit tracking system to prevent overstays. After we have done that, the second thing we have to do is reform and modernize the legal immigration system. And after we have done those two things, I think the American people are gonna be reasonable with what do you do with someone who has been in this country for 10 or 12 years who hasn't otherwise violated our laws -- because if they're a criminal they can't stay. They'll have to undergo a background check, pay a fine, start paying taxes. And ultimately, they'll given a work permit and that's all they're gonna be allowed to have for at least 10 years. But you can't get to that third step until you have done the other two things, and that was the lesson we learned in 2013. There is no trust that the Federal Government will enforce the law. They will not support you until you see it done first.
  BASH: Senator, you haven't answered the question. You described a very long path but does that path end at citizenship?
  RUBIO: But I've answered that question repeatedly. I am personally open -- after all that has happened and after ten years in that probationary status where all they have is a permit, I personally am open to allowing people to apply for a green card.
  That may not be a majority position in my party, but that's down the road. You can't even begin that process until you prove to people -- not just pass a law that says you're gonna bring illegal immigration under control. You're gonna have to do it and prove to people that it's working.
  And that was the lesson of 2013. And it's more true today, than it was then. After a migratory crisis on the border with minors coming over that you're seeing start up again now, after all these executive orders the President has issued. More than ever we need to...
  BASH: Thank you, senator.
  RUBIO: ... prove to people that illegal immigration is under control.
  BASH: Thank you, senator. Senator Cruz.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator Cruz, on the campaign trail, Senator Rubio has said that his immigration plan is not that different from yours. Is that true?
  CRUZ: Well, he -- he has attempted to muddy the waters, but I think that anyone who watched the battle that we had. You know, there was a time for choosing as Reagan put it. Where there was a battle over amnesty and some chose, like Senator Rubio to stand with Barack Obama and Chuck Schumer and support a massive amnesty plan.
  Others chose to stand with Jeff Sessions and Steve King and the American people and secure the border.
  And let me mention, this issue is actually directly connected to what we've been talking about. Because the front line with ISIS isn't just in Iraq and Syria, it's in Kennedy Airport and the Rio Grande. Border security is national security. And, you know, one of the most troubling aspects of the Rubio-Schumer Gang of Eight Bill was that it gave President Obama blanket authority to admit refugees, including Syrian refugees without mandating any background checks whatsoever. Now we've seen what happened in San Bernardino. When you are letting people in, when the FBI can't vet them, it puts American citizens at risk. And I tell you, if I'm elected president, we will secure the border. We will triple the border patrol. We will build a wall that works and I'll get Donald Trump to pay for it.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Senator Rubio, please.
  RUBIO: Yeah, a couple points. In 2013 we had never faced a crisis like the Syrian refugee crisis now. Up until that point, a refugee meant someone fleeing oppression, fleeing Communism like it is in my community.
  As far as Ted's record, I'm always puzzled by his attack on this issue. Ted, you support legalizing people who are in this country illegally. Ted Cruz supported a 500-percent increase in the number of H-1 visas, the guest workers that are allowed into this country, and Ted supports doubling the number of green cards.
  So I think what's important for us to understand and there is a way forward on this issue that we an bring our country together on. And while I'm president I will do it. And it will begin by bringing illegal immigration under control and proving to the American people.
  BASH: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: Look, I understand Marco wants to raise confusion, it is not accurate what he just said that I supported legalization. Indeed, I led the fight against his legalization and amnesty. And you know, there was one commentator that put it this way that, for Marco to suggest our record's the same is like suggesting ''the fireman and the arsonist because they are both at the scene of the fire.''
  He was fighting to grant amnesty and not to secure the border, I was fighting to secure the border. And this also goes to trust, listening on to campaign trails. Candidates all the time make promises. You know, Marco said,'' he learned that the American people didn't trust the federal government.''
  BASH: Senator Cruz?
  RUBIO: No, no, give him time.
  CRUZ: In Florida promising to...
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: Ted, do you...
  CRUZ: go in the fight against amnesty...
  RUBIO: Did Ted Cruz fight to support legalizing people that are in this country illegally?
  CRUZ: He campaigned promising to lead the fight against amnesty.
  FIORINA: Ladies and gentleman, this is why the American people are standing up.
  BASH: Senator Cruz, can you answer that question please?
  RUBIO: Does Ted Cruz rule out ever legalizing people that are in this country now?
  BASH: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ; I have never supported a legalization...
  RUBIO: Would you rule it out?
  CRUZ : I have never supported legalization, and I do not intend to support legalization. Let me tell you how you do this, what you do is you enforce the law...
  (CROSSTALK)
  FIORINA: This is why the nation is fed up...
  BASH: One at a time please.
  CRUZ: Watt you do is enforcement the law...
  FIORINA: We have been talking about this...
  BASH: Ms. Fiorina, please wait your turn, we're going to get to you.
  FIORINA: Sorry, but you haven't gotten to me. This is why...
  CRUZ: What you do...
  BASH: Senator Cruz go ahead.
  FIORINA: the people are fed up with the political class.
  CRUZ: What you do is you enforce the law. I've laid out a very, very detailed immigration plan on my website, tedcruz.org. It's 11 pages of existing federal law and in particular the question of what to do with people who are here now? You enforce the law.
  That means you stop the Obama administration's policy of releasing criminal illegal aliens. Do you know how many aliens Bill Clinton deported? 12 million. Do you know how many illegal aliens, George W. Bush deported? 10 million.
  We can enforce the laws and if we secure the border, that solves the problem. And as president I will solve this problem and secure the border.
  BASH: Mr. Trump, you like to say that you restarted this conversation in the campaign. TRUMP: I believe I did.
  BASH: So who do you side with? Who do you side with in this, Senator Rubio or Senator Cruz?
  TRUMP: I have a very hardline position, we have a country or we don't have a country. People that have come into our country illegally, they have to go. They have to come back into through a legal process.
  I want a strong border. I do want a wall. Walls do work, you just have to speak to the folks in Israel. Walls work if they're properly constructed. I know how to build, believe me, I know how to build.
  I feel a very, very strong bind, and really I'm bound to this country, we either have a border or we don't. People can come into the country, we welcome people to come but they have to come in legally.
  BASH: Thank you.
  Governor Bush?
  BUSH: Yes.
  BASH: Listening to this, do you think this is the tone -- this immigration debate that republicans need to take to win back Hispanics into our party especially states like where we are in Nevada that has a pretty Hispanic community?
  BUSH: No it isn't but it is an important subject to talk about for sure. And I think people have good ideas on this. Clearly, we need to secure the border. Coming here legally needs to be a lot easier than coming here illegally.
  If you don't have that, you don't have the rule of law. We now have a national security consideration, public health issues, we have an epidemic of heroine overdoses in all places in this country because of the ease of bringing heroine in. We have to secure the border.
  It is a serious undertaking and yes, we do need more fencing and we do need to use technology, and we do need more border control. And we need to have better cooperation by the way with local law enforcement. There are 800,000 cops on the beat, they ought to be trained to be the eyes and ears for law enforcement for the threat against terror as well as for immigration.
  This is a serious challenge and if we can get it right, yes, we'll start winning votes again. The real problem isn't anybody on this stage, the real problem is Barack Obama has had six years to advocate a position to fix this and he's done nothing. The congress has funded these programs of building more fencing and doing all this and he hasn't done it.
  He wants to maintain it as a wedge issue and so does Hillary Clinton. Republicans need to fix it and when we do, we'll be better off.
  BLITZER: Governor, thank you very much.
  BLITZER: So, Dr. Carson, you recently visited a refugee camp in Jordan and you deemed it your words, ''really quite nice.'' Saying the people there didn't want to come to the United States. Do you think these camps are a long-term solution of the problem of Syrian refugees?
  CARSON: Well, it was very interesting having an opportunity to talk to the Syrians themselves. And I asked them: What do you want? What is your supreme desire? Their supreme desire was to be settled back in their own country. I said, ''What can Americans and other countries do?'' They said, ''Support the efforts of those who are trying to provide safety for us, including the Jordanians.''
  Of course, they had a brand new hospital, for instance, that was unstaffed because there wasn't enough money to do it. But here's what's really neat. If you go into Hasakah province in northeast Syria, that's an area that's as big as Lebanon. It's controlled by the Kurds, the Christians and the moderate Sunnis. And there are airstrips and hotels. You could settle a lot of people there.
  All we would have to do is be willing to provide them with some weaponry, some defensive weaponry. And we seem to be afraid to give the Kurds weaponry. We like to send it for some strange reason through Baghdad, and then they only get a tenth of it.
  And if we would support them, we'd have a perfect ideal there. We don't need to set this up as we either take a bunch of refugees who will be infiltrated with terrorists, I guarantee you. For them not to be would be terrorist malpractice. And we need to -- to choose the right choice, not these false choices.
  BLITZER: Senator Paul, you oppose letting in Syrian refugees at this time into the United States. The U.S. has already accepted 2,000 Syrian refugees, including 13 living here in Las Vegas right now. Would you send them back? What would you do with these people?
  PAUL: You know, I think we need to set the record straight on this, because I think Marco misspoke about the bill. On the Gang of Eight bill, there was no provisions really for extra scrutiny or safety for refugees. At the time the bill came up, two Iraqi refugees came to my home town, Bowling Green, Kentucky. Their fingerprints were on a bomb from Iraq. They were in the database, but we didn't pick them up.
  We relocated them here, put them in government housing, got them on food stamps. And we began providing for them, but we didn't have adequate security. On the Gang of Eight bill, on Marco's bill, we had an opportunity. There was a conservative consensus for an amendment I put forward called Trust, But Verify that would have strengthened border security on both refugees, students and those coming here. And Marco sided and I guess was more sympathetic to Chuck Schumer and to the president than he was to conservative principles.
  But this goes directly to national defense. And if he wants to run as a national -- national defense conservative, he's got to explain why he hasn't stepped up to support border security.
  BLITZER: Senator Rubio?
  (APPLAUSE)
  RUBIO: Well, he's just admitted -- as he's just admitted, the reason why those refugees were allowed in was because they messed up in how they used the actual database. They should have know. They didn't because they didn't run the actual law as it exists now. It didn't work well.
  As far as the refugees are concerned, it's not that America doesn't want to accept refugees, Wolf. It's that we may not be able to, because this is an issue we have to be 100 percent right on. If we allow 9,999 Syrian refugees into the United States, and all of them are good people, but we allow one person in who's an ISIS killer -- we just get one person wrong, we've got a serious problem.
  And there is not a single person in the national defense apparatus of this country that can guarantee you are going to be 100 percent right. And that's why as president, I'll take this very seriously.
  BLITZER: Senator Paul, you didn't answer the question about the 2,000 Syrian refugees who are already here in the United States. Will you send them back or let them stay?
  PAUL: What my bill would do would be only for refugees going forward. So I haven't taken a position on sending anyone home. But I have taken the position that we have a lot of problems here in our country. And that one of the things that we do -- charity is about giving your own money. Charity isn't giving someone else's money. To put everyone in government housing and food stamps and bring them in from around the world I think is a mistake. To give of your own money, I've given to my church. My church has helped people that came from Bosnia. That's a good thing.
  But we shouldn't have a program where we just say that we're going to take care of the world's refugees. Nobody in the Middle East is doing anything. Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait -- all the Gulf nations are doing nothing. They need to step up and take...
  (CROSSTALK)
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: We have another -- we have another question. We have another question from Facebook. Let's listen.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  QUESTION: My name is Carla Hernandez. I'm from the University of Texas at Austin. And my question is directed to all the candidates.
  If the Bible clearly states that we need to embrace those in need and not fear, how can we justify not accepting refugees?
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  BLITZER: Governor Christie, you say there should be a pause in allowing new refugees to come into the United States, including orphans under the age of five. What do you say to Carla?
  CHRISTIE: What I say to Carla is that the first job of the president of the United States is to protect your safety and your security and the security and safety of your family. And this debate stops with me in the discussions with the FBI director.
  CHRISTIE: Now, listen, I'm a former federal prosecutor, I know Jim Comey. We've worked together. He was the U.S. attorney in Manhattan when I was a U.S. attorney in New Jersey.
  And when Jim Comey gets up before Congress and says, we cannot effectively vet these people, for me as president, that's the end of the conversation. We have to put America's security first.
  (APPLAUSE)
  The American people -- we on this stage need to open our ears. We need to open our ears. The American people are not whispering to us. They are screaming to us. And they're screaming to us that it's our job to actually make this government work.
  It's so dysfunctional under Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. It's so ineffective. It's so ineffectual that the American people say, we don't trust them to do anything anymore. So I'm not going to let Syrian refugees, any Syrian refugees in this country.
  And it was widows and orphans, by the way, and we now know from watching the San Bernardino attack that women can commit heinous, heinous acts against humanity just the same as men can do it.
  And so I don't back away from that position for a minute. When the FBI director tells me that he can vet those people, then we'll consider it and not a moment before because your safety and security is what's most important to me.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Kasich.
  KASICH: You know, obviously, as president of the United States, we've got to keep the people safe. That's first and foremost.
  But as governor of Ohio, I have an obligation to keep the 11.5 million people in Ohio safe. And we have been very effective with our Joint Terrorism Task Force, being able to make busts.
  In fact, we just made one three-four weeks ago against a person who was favorable to ISIS living in Akron.
  But let me tell you what is interesting about the administration. We had Central American miners that were placed in Ohio, and we never knew a thing about it. We didn't know where they were. And, in fact, we know now that some of them, there is a case going on where some of them may have been human-trafficked.
  So when the administration tells me we have a great vetting process, the proof is in the pudding. They sent these miners to us. Our schools were disrupted. We didn't know where they were. And bad things happened to them. And now they tell me that we ought to be able to admit these Syrian refugees.
  So, Wolf, look, people have accused me at times of having too big of a heart. You know, that's OK. But I have to also to say I must keep the people of my state safe. So we take a pause.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Governor.
  There is much more coming up. We are only just beginning. Coming up, what other global hot spots await the next president of the United States.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  BLITZER: Welcome back to the CNN-Facebook Republican Presidential Debate. We're here at the Venetian Las Vegas. Tonight we have been focusing on the Middle East, but let's turn to some other world threats that you will potentially face as Commander in Chief.
  Ms. Fiorina, candidates here have called the North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un a maniac who is mentally unstable. Last week he said he now has a hydrogen bomb. If you were elected president, what would you do about Kim Jong-Un?
  FIORINA: Well, first, Kim Jong-Un is a dangerous leader, without a doubt. And both Republican and Democrat administrations have been completely ineffective in dealing with him. So we must continue to isolate him. We will need China as part of that strategy.
  China is a rising adversary. So one of the things we have to do if we want China's support is to push back on China. They, too, recognize one thing -- strength and their own economic interest.
  I have done business in China for 25 years, so I know that in order to get China to cooperate with us, we must first actually retaliate against their cyber-attacks so they know we're serious. We have to push back on their desire to control the trade route through the South China Sea through which flows $5 trillion worth of goods and services every year.
  We cannot let them control the disputed islands, and we must work with the Australians, the South Koreans, the Japanese and the Filipinos to contain China. And then we must ask for their support and their help with North Korea. Because believe it or not, China is as concerned about Kim Jong-Un as we are.
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson, what would you do about Kim Jong-Un?
  CARSON: Well, I definitely believe that he is unstable, and I do, in fact, believe that China has a lot more influence with him than we do. But we also recognize that North Korea is in severe financial straits, and they have decided to use their resources to build their military, rather than to feed their people and to take care of the various humanitarian responsibilities that they have.
  We can capitalize upon that. You know, we should use our economic power in lots of different ways. I think we can use that in order to keep Putin contained, because he is a one-horse show. Energy. And we have an abundance of energy, but we have archaic energy exportation rules. We need to get rid of those, allow ourselves to really make Europe dependent on us and other parts of the world dependent on us for energy. Put him back in his little box where he belongs.
  And, you know, we need to be doing lots of other things with the resources that we have. So economic power works just as well as military power, perhaps even better. And speaking of that, our Military needs to be upgraded. You know, you look at things like our Ohio Class submarines, they're 25 years old. Our minuteman 3 missiles -- they are 34 years old. Our B-52 bombers -- 50 years old. You know, if we don't get the military right nothing else matters.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Dr. Carson. Dana and Hugh you have questions as well.
  BASH: Governor Christie, you've said if China launches a cyber- attack against the U.S. on your watch, ''they're going to see cyber- warfare like they have never seen before.'' What exactly would that response look like?
  CHRISTIE: Well, what it would like is, we have one of the great advantages of America being the open society that we are. It is, we are not hiding things from the American people, but China everyday is conducting business in a way that hides things from their people.
  CHRISTIE: So if they want to come in and attack all the personnel records in the federal government, which they've done, and which -- they now have my Social Security number and my fingerprints, as well as maybe some other folks' who are on this stage.
  The fact is, they need to be fought back on. And what we need to do is go at the things that they are most sensitive and most embarrassing to them; that they're hiding; get that information and put it out in public. Let the Chinese people start to digest how corrupt the Chinese government is; how they steal from the Chinese people; and how they're enriching oligarchs all throughout China.
  They need to understand that. And we need to take those type of steps. This president has seen personnel records of people who have sacrificed for the American people and for the federal government stolen by the Chinese and he's done nothing in return. This is why -- this is what I said at the beginning that this administration, Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton through their foreign policy, have betrayed the American people, because the weakness they've displayed has led to Putin's incursions in the Middle East and in eastern Europe, and has led -- has led to significant problems in the Middle East as well, and the death and murder of lots of folks.
  BASH: Governor Bush, what you just heard from Governor Christie, are you concerned that that could really escalate with China, that they would retaliate? And, for example, as the NSA has said, attack the U.S. and maybe it's power grid, which the Chinese have the capability to do?
  BUSH: I completely agree with Chris. And this administration has been so lax. Think about it. Hillary Clinton is using a private server for -- where classified information go by. This is a -- this is a serious administration?
  The president receives an inspector general's report that the Office of Personnel Management could be hacked into; they had antiquated firewalls; 23 million files have been -- are in the hands of the Chinese allegedly, including, by the way, members of the press, it turns out, last week. Maybe that's the only part that's good news, so that you guys can get a feel for what it's like now to see this type of attack.
  This is something -- we have to have the best defensive capabilities. We need to coordinate all of our efforts with the private sector. We need to give them liability relief so that we can do that. And offensively, we need to have capabilities second to none. We need to create a situation where they know that there will be adverse impacts if they continue to do what they're doing.
  They'll respect that. They'll respect a United States that is serious about protecting our -- our infrastructure. If we don't do it, we'll continue to see what's -- exactly what's happening, not just from the Chinese, by the way. The Russians and rogue actors, including ISIS -- this is a serious part of the 21st century security challenge that we face.
  HEWITT: Mr. Trump...
  (APPLAUSE)
  ... Dr. Carson just referenced the single most important job of the president, the command, the control and the care of our nuclear forces. And he mentioned the triad. The B-52s are older than I am. The missiles are old. The submarines are aging out. It's an executive order. It's a commander-in-chief decision.
  What's your priority among our nuclear triad?
  TRUMP: Well, first of all, I think we need somebody absolutely that we can trust, who is totally responsible; who really knows what he or she is doing. That is so powerful and so important. And one of the things that I'm frankly most proud of is that in 2003, 2004, I was totally against going into Iraq because you're going to destabilize the Middle East. I called it. I called it very strongly. And it was very important.
  But we have to be extremely vigilant and extremely careful when it comes to nuclear. Nuclear changes the whole ball game. Frankly, I would have said get out of Syria; get out -- if we didn't have the power of weaponry today. The power is so massive that we can't just leave areas that 50 years ago or 75 years ago we wouldn't care. It was hand-to-hand combat.
  The biggest problem this world has today is not President Obama with global warming, which is inconceivable, this is what he's saying. The biggest problem we have is nuclear -- nuclear proliferation and having some maniac, having some madman go out and get a nuclear weapon. That's in my opinion, that is the single biggest problem that our country faces right now.
  HEWITT: Of the three legs of the triad, though, do you have a priority? I want to go to Senator Rubio after that and ask him.
  TRUMP: I think -- I think, for me, nuclear is just the power, the devastation is very important to me.
  HEWITT: Senator Rubio, do you have a response?
  RUBIO: I do. First, let's explain to people at home who the triad -- what the triad is. Maybe a lot of people haven't heard that terminology before. The triad is our ability of the United States to conduct nuclear attacks using airplanes, using missiles launched from silos or from the ground, and also from our nuclear subs' ability to attack. And it's important -- all three of them are critical. It gives us the ability at deterrence.
  Now, some have become more critical than others; for example, the submarines. And that's the Ohio Class submarine that needs to be modernized. The air component also needs to be modernized. The B-52, as someone earlier pointed out, is an outdated model that was flown by the grandparents of people that are flying it now. And we need a serious modernization program as well on our silo-launched missiles. All three are critical for the defense of the country.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Senator Rubio.
  Some of you on this stage have questioned whether your opponents have temperament, the right temperament, to be in control of the nuclear codes.
  Dana, you have a question on this?
  BASH: Mr. Trump, just this weekend you said Senator Cruz is not qualified to be president because he doesn't have the right temperament and acted like a maniac when he arrived in the Senate. But last month you said you were open to naming Senator Cruz as your running mate.
  TRUMP: I did.
  BASH: So why would you be willing to put somebody who's a maniac one heartbeat away from the presidency?
  TRUMP: Let me just say that I have gotten to know him over the last three or four days. He has a wonderful temperament.
  (LAUGHTER)
  TRUMP: He's just fine. Don't worry about it.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BASH: Okay.
  Senator Cruz. Senator Cruz, you have not been willing to attack Mr. Trump in public.
  TRUMP: You better not attack...
  (LAUGHTER)
  BASH: But you did question his judgment in having control of American's nuclear arsenal during a private meeting with supporters. Why are you willing to say things about him in private and not in public?
  CRUZ: Dana, what I said in private is exactly what I'll say here, which is that the judgment that every voter is making of every one of us up here is who has the experience, who has the vision, who has the judgment to be commander in chief. That is the most important decision for the voters to make. That's a standard I'm held to. And it's a standard everyone else is held to.
  And I will note, you know, in the whole course of this discussion about our foreign policy threats, it actually illustrates the need for clarity of focus.
  You know, my daughters, Caroline and Catherine, came tonight. They're 7 and 5. And you think about the Los Angeles schools canceling their schools today.
  And every parent is wondering, how do we keep our kids safe? We need a commander in chief who does what Ronald Reagan did with communism, which is he set out a global strategy to defeat Soviet communism. And he directed all of his...
  (CROSSTALK)
  CRUZ: I'm answering the question, Dana.
  He directed all of his forces to defeating communism.
  One of the things we've seen here is how easy it is for Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton to get distracted from dealing with radical Islamic terrorism. They won't even call it by its name.
  We need a president who stands up, number one, and says, we will defeat ISIS. And number two, says the greatest national security threat facing America is a nuclear Iran.
  BASH: Senator, senator, I just...
  CRUZ: And we need to be focused on defeating...
  BASH: Senator, a lot of people have seen...
  CRUZ: ... defeating radical Islamic terrorists.
  BASH: ... a lot of people have seen these comments you made in private. I just want to clarify what you're saying right now is you do believe Mr. Trump has the judgment to be commander in chief?
  CRUZ: What I'm saying, Dana, is that is a judgment for every voter to make. What I can tell you is all nine of the people here would make an infinitely better commander in chief than Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thank you, senator. Thank you.
  CRUZ: And there is a real danger, Dana, when people get distracted.
  I'm answering the question, Wolf.
  CRUZ: There's a real danger when people get distracted by peripheral issues. They get distracted by democracy building. They get distracted about military conflicts. We need to focus on defeating jihadism. ISIS and Iran have declared war on America, and we need a commander in chief who will do everything necessary to keep our children safe.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Senator.
  CRUZ: And I will do everything necessary to keep our children safe.
  BLITZER: Thank you, Senator.
  We're a month and a half away now from the first real test who will be the Republican presidential nominee.
  Hugh, you have a question?
  HEWITT: My listeners tell me again and again they are worried that Hillary Clinton will win the White House because you'll run as an independent. Are you ready to assure Republicans tonight that you will run as a Republican and abide by the decision of the Republicans?
  TRUMP: I really am. I'll be honest, I really am.
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: I mean, the people have been putting me...
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: I really am.
  (APPLAUSE)
  HEWITT: Dr. Carson, last week...
  TRUMP: Let me just. Can I just finish my...
  HEWITT: Please.
  TRUMP: I've gained great respect for the Republican leadership. I've gained great respect for many -- and I'm going to even say -- I mean, in different forms for the people on the dais, in different forms.
  (LAUGHTER)
  TRUMP: In different forms.
  But I have great respect for the people I have met through this process. I've never done this process before. I've never been a politician. I mean, for the last six months I've been a politician.
  But I will tell you, I am totally committed to the Republican Party. I feel very honored to be the front runner.
  (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: And I think I'll do very well if I'm chosen. If I'm so fortunate to be chosen, I think I'll do very well.
  Polls have come out recently saying I would beat Hillary. I will do everything in my power to beat Hillary Clinton, I promise you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  HEWITT: Dr. Carson, Mr. Trump just committed to stay the distance regardless of the result. How about you?
  CARSON: Well, you know, the statement that I made last week, that I would leave the party was contingent upon whether in fact the party acts like they have in the past with a lot of subterfuge and dishonesty, or like they're going act now because I spike to Reince Priebus, and he assured me that the Washington Post writer had it all wrong, and that they're not be engaging in anything to thwart the will of the people.
  That's why I got into this race, as a member of we the people, to try bring some honesty and integrity back to the process.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: All right. Candidates, we have more coming up. When we come back, everyone will have an opportunity to explain why this particular candidate, each of you on the stage, believes he or she should be the Republican presidential nominee.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  BLITZER: Now it's time for the closing statements from the candidates. Each one has 30 seconds.
  Senator Paul.
  PAUL: The greatest threat to our national security is our debt. We borrow a million dollars a minute. And whose fault is it? Well, frankly, it's both parties' fault. You have those on the right who clamor and say, oh, we will spend anything on the military, and those on the left who say the same for domestic welfare.
  But what most Americans don't realize is there is an unholy alliance. They come together. There's a secret handshake. We spend more money on everything. And we are not stronger nation if we go further into debt. We are not projecting power from bankruptcy court.
  To me, there is no greater threat than our debt. I'm the only fiscal conservative on the stage because I'm willing to hold the line on all spending. I hope you will consider me in the election. Thank you very much.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Kasich. KASICH: No Republican has ever been elected president of the United States without winning Ohio. Let me give you a little tip on how you win Ohio, it's reform, it's hope, it's growth, it's opportunity, and it's security.
  The people of Ohio are the people of America. The people of America are reflected in Ohio. Our message has to be big, and bold, and positive, and connect, not just with people's heads but also connect with their hearts.
  If we do it, we will beat Hillary Clinton, and we will run the White House, and we will strengthen and fix America, I promise you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Governor Christie.
  CHRISTIE: On September 10th, 2001, I was named chief federal prosecutor in New Jersey and on September 11th, 2001, my wife and my brother who are in the audience tonight went through the World Trade Center and to their offices just blocks away from the Trade Center.
  I lost touch with them for six hours that day and prayed that they were alive. Luckily, they were sent home. But many of our friends and others in our neighborhood lost their lives that day.
  Terrorism -- radical jihadist terrorism is not theoretical to me. It's real. And for seven years, I spent my life protecting our country against another one of those attacks. You won't have to worry when I'm President of the Untied States whether that can be done because I've already done it. I want the chance to do it again to protect you, your children and your families.
  If you give me the chance and give me your vote I will protect America from the wars that are being brought to our door step.
  BLITZER: Ms. Fiorina.
  FIORINA: I too remember September 11th. I remember immediately putting into place security procedures all throughout our company that did business in 170 countries where we thought corporate interests would be attacked next. To take our country back, to keep our nation safe, we have to begin by beating Hillary Clinton.
  We need to unify our party. We need to better than our government, which 75 percent of the American people now think is corrupt and incompetent. They're right. We need to better than our politics. 80 percent think we have a professional/political class of both parties that cares more about its power, position and privilege than actually on getting anything done.
  We need to unify our party, we need a real Conservative in the White House, and we need to beat Hillary Clinton to take our country back and keep our nation safe.
  I can. I am. And together, if you join me, we will take our country back.
  BLITZER: Governor Bush. BUSH: Ask yourself, which candidate will keep you and our country safer, stronger and freer?
  Hillary Clinton has aligned herself with Barack Obama on ISIS, Iran and the economy. It's an alliance doomed to fail. My proven record suggests that -- my detailed plans will fortify our national and economic security. And my proven record as governor makes -- will give you a sense that I don't make false promises. I deliver real results.
  For America to be safe and sound, I ask for you support. Thank you all very much.
  BLITZER: Senator Rubio.
  RUBIO: Thank you. As we near the end of this year, we enter one of the most important elections in a generation. For what's at stake in this election is not simply what party's going to be in charge. But our very identity as a people and as a nation. For over 200 years this has been a special country. A unique place where anyone from anywhere can achieve anything. But now millions of Americans feel like they're being left behind. Insecure in their future and unsafe in the face of terrorism. This election is about electing a president that will restore our economic vibrancy so that the American dream can expand to reach more people and change more lives than ever before. And rebuild our Military and our intelligence programs so that we can remain the strongest nation on earth. Tonight I ask you for your vote.
  If you do this, we will rebuild this country, and together we will usher in a new American century -- the greatest era in the history of this great land.
  BLITZER: Senator Cruz.
  CRUZ: Judgment, strength, clarity and trust. Barack Obama has said he doesn't believe in American leadership or America winning -- he is wrong. America can win again and we will win again. Ronald Reagan reignited the American economy, rebuilt the Military, bankrupted the Soviet Union and defeated Soviet Communism. I will do the same thing.
  Cutting taxes, cutting regulation, unleashing small businesses and rebuilding the Military to defeat radical Islamic terrorism -- our strategy is simple. We win, they lose. We've done it before and we can do it again.
  BLITZER: Dr. Carson.
  CARSON: I've been fortunate enough to travel to 58 different countries and I thank God everyday that I was born in this country. The most exceptional country that the world has ever known. And I want to make sure that we preserve that exceptionalism for the next generation. My mother told me if I work hard and I really believed in American principles and I believed in God, anything is possible. I believe that is true, and that's why I'm not anxious to give away American values and principles for the sake of political correctness.
  XXX of political correctness.
  TRUMP: Our country doesn't win anymore. We don't win on trade. We don't win on the military. We can't defeat ISIS. We're not taking care of our great people, the veterans. We're not taking care of them.
  We have to change our whole way, our health care system is a disaster. It's going to implode in 2017, just like you're sitting there. It doesn't work. Nothing works in our country. If I'm elected president, we will win again. We will win a lot. And we're going to have a great, great country, greater than ever before.
  Thank you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BLITZER: Thanks to all the Republican presidential candidates. That does it for this Republican presidential debate.
  On behalf of everyone at CNN, we want to thank the candidates, Facebook, the Republican National Committee, and the Venetian Las Vegas. My thanks also to Hugh Hewitt and Dana Bash.
  We especially want to wish everyone a very merry Christmas, happy holidays, especially to the soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines protecting us around the world.
  Anderson Cooper picks up our coverage of tonight's debate right now -- Anderson.
  END
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/16/us/politics/transcript-main-republican-presidential-debate.html

Load-Date: December 16, 2015


End of Document
Judge Blocks Trump’s Ban on Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
October 1, 2020 Thursday 13:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1055 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The court overruled limits on visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers during the coronavirus pandemic.
Body


The court overruled limits on visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers during the coronavirus pandemic.
LOS ANGELES — A federal judge ruled on Thursday that President Trump overstepped his authority in suspending new visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers amid the coronavirus pandemic, enabling major companies like Microsoft, Goodyear Tire and Exxon Mobil to resume bringing employees from abroad.
Judge Jeffrey S. White of U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California temporarily blocked further implementation of the sweeping order, issued in June, as it applied to thousands of companies seeking to bring workers to the United States on a wide array of visas, including the H-1B for high-skilled workers, seasonal employees on guest-worker visas and others, such as au pairs, who enter the country on cultural exchange visas.
“Congress’ delegation of authority in the immigration context does not afford the President unbridled authority to set domestic policy regarding employment of nonimmigrant foreigners,” the judge wrote in his 25-page decision.
“Indeed, there must be some measure of constraint on Presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power in the immigration context, an area within clear legislative prerogative,” said Judge White, who was appointed by President George W. Bush.
The president had said that his proclamation, initially effective until Dec. 31, would protect Americans from foreign competition for jobs amid soaring unemployment caused by the coronavirus pandemic. In his proclamation, he described the entry of additional workers under work visas as an “unusual threat to the employment of American workers.”
The proclamation also restricted the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for extended stints. And it blocked visas for the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
In a scathing opinion, Judge White said the proclamation did not address the problem it purported to tackle, namely to lift the economy by providing job opportunities for Americans.
“The proclamation completely disregards both economic reality and the pre-existing statutory framework,” he wrote. “Furthermore, without any consideration of the impact on American firms and their business planning, the proclamation changes the scope of immigration policy in the United States.”
The judge’s order is at odds with an earlier decision reached by a federal judge in Washington, D.C., which ensures that the ultimate determination will be made by an appeals court.
Still, it immediately sets aside the visa ban for the plaintiffs who brought the case. They include the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Retail Federation and groups representing tech giants like Microsoft and Amazon; their members include hundreds of thousands of American businesses of all sizes from a cross-section of sectors.
“We are competing with the rest of the world to find and develop top talent to support innovation in our industry,” said Linda Kelly, a senior vice president and general counsel at the manufacturers’ association. “Today’s decision is a temporary win for manufacturers committed to building that innovation in the United States.”
“The restrictions both undermined our industry at a critical time and conflicted with the law,” she said.
The judge’s ruling was a lifeline, said Marcie Schneider, the president of Intrax, a cultural-exchange company that brings au pairs to the United States.
“This decision means that our staff can continue to do the important work that they do to bring cultural exchange participants on our programs and to remain employed in this vital field,” she said.
The administration did not immediately comment on the ruling.
Stephen Miller, the White House aide who is the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate many foreign worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. In recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
While the president’s pledge to build a “big, beautiful wall” to prevent illegal immigrants from swarming the border has garnered the most attention, his moves to slow legal immigration have been ongoing and even more effective.
And as the election nears, Mr. Trump has doubled down on his commitment to curb immigration of all kinds.
This week, the federal government said it would admit 15,000 refugees, an all-time low, during the coming fiscal year. That number is even fewer than the 18,000 refugees authorized for resettlement last year and a sliver of the 110,000 slots approved by President Barack Obama in 2016.
In April, Mr. Trump signed an executive order that suspended new permanent residence authorization, or green cards, to most foreigners looking to live in the United States.
Under another policy that took effect early this year, known as the public-charge rule, immigrants applying for green cards can be disqualified based on their likelihood of using public benefits and their English proficiency.
This week, Judge White issued a preliminary injunction blocking a series of fee hikes for visas and other immigration benefits that were to go into effect on Friday, saying they would irreparably harm poor immigrants.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services had planned to increase the cost of naturalization applications to $1,170 from $725 for most applicants; it would have also charged asylum seekers, who have never paid for refuge, a $50 application fee. The cost of applying for a deportation suspension or expulsion cancellation would have jumped to $1,810 from $285.
Most fee waivers for immigrants who are unable to afford paying the full cost would have been eliminated.
PHOTO: Stephen Miller, the White House aide who is the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate many foreign worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Anna Moneymaker for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 2, 2020


End of Document
NEWS SUMMARY 
 The New York Times
November 5, 2001 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 1240 words
Body


     INTERNATIONAL   A3-7

Israel Begins Pullout Despite Gunman's Attack
Israeli forces began pulling out from a Palestinian-controlled city in the West Bank, despite an attack by a Palestinian gunman, who emptied a semiautomatic rifle into a city bus in Jerusalem, killing two teenagers and injuring dozens of other people. An Israeli Army official said that the withdrawal had begun from Qalqilya, one of four Palestinian-controlled cities in which Israeli troops remained.   A1

Nicaragua Awaits Vote Results
Nicaraguans voted on whether to return the Sandinista leader, Daniel Ortega, pictured, to the presidency he lost in 1990, or to elect a Liberal Party stalwart and businessman, Enrique Bolanos. The two candidates were statistically tied in opinion polls. Results were not expected until today.   A3
Debate Over AIDS Drug Patents
A study published in The Journal of the American Medical Association has generated a new debate over the epidemic of AIDS in Africa, about whether it is patents or poverty that is primarily responsible for the widespread lack of treatment. The issue has become a major point of contention as the World Trade Organization prepares to discuss new patent rules at its meeting in Qatar next week.   A6

U.S. Makes Amends With Japan
The United States Navy has been trying to make amends with Japan for the tragedy that left nine Japanese people dead, most of them teenagers, after a fishing vessel was sunk by an American nuclear submarine in February.   A6

Baby Trafficking in Cambodia
The United States Embassy, for the first time, says that it has concrete evidence of baby trafficking in Cambodia, which brings huge profits to a chain of corrupt officials and middlemen. Officials at the embassy have refused to issue visas for Cambodian children adopted by American families, leaving several families stranded in their babies' home country.   A7

Comoros Island Coup Halted
The ruler of the breakaway Comoran island of Anjouan, Muhammad Bacar, said that he had crushed the latest coup attempt against his three-month-old government, and that there would be harsh measures to prevent future unrest. Troops loyal to the Anjouan leader routed mutineers opposed to his efforts to reunite Anjouan with the Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros after clashes on Saturday in which one civilian was killed.   A7

Portugal Shifts Drug Approach
A new Portuguese law eliminates jail time for possession or use of small amounts of any illegal drug and instead sends drug users to a panel of experts, who provide assistance. The new approach is drawing fierce criticism, especially from conservative politicians who argue that a wave of foreign "drug tourists" will head for Portugal.   A7

NATIONAL   A8-15

Energy Companies Seeking Protection Against Terror
Energy companies are seeking government help to make themselves less vulnerable to terror. A report on the state of energy security in America is expected to go to Tom Ridge, director of homeland security, today.   A15

Preparing for a Hurricane
As the Florida Keys were ordered evacuated, residents of the chain of islands and South Florida braced for Hurricane Michelle, which landed on Cuba yesterday and could threaten Florida today.   A8

Drug Plan in Limbo
This was supposed to be the year when a prescription drug benefit was delivered to America's elderly. Now, those benefits seem likely to be deferred again, like so much else on the domestic policy agenda.   A15

33 Hurt in Bus Accident
A Greyhound bus rolled onto its side as the driver struggled with a passenger who got angry when told he could not smoke. The wreck injured 33 people, one critically.   A8

Revival Through Basketball
Little Tokyo in Los Angeles has been in decline since World War II. Now, community leaders intent on reviving the community are banking on a pastime that is far more American than Japanese: basketball.   A15

Arrest in Georgia Killing
A man sought by Georgia authorities in connection with the killing of a sheriff-elect in December was arrested in Brooklyn, the police said.   A9

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Genetics and Intelligence
Brain scientists say they have found that the size of certain regions of the brain is under tight genetic control, and that the larger these regions are, the higher is intelligence.   A15

NEW YORK/REGION   F1-6

A Brutal Final Weekend In the Race for City Hall
It was a day of sharp exchanges for New York's mayoral candidates as the close race wrapped up its final weekend.   A1

Mark Green, the Democratic mayoral candidate, offered fierce criticism of his Republican rival, Michael R. Bloomberg, during campaign stops in Brooklyn, accusing him of insensitivity to women and blacks.   F4

On a frenzied day of campaigning, Mr. Bloomberg again asserted that he was not a professional politician, and said that Mr. Green was resorting to last-minute "smearing."   F4

Stores Brace for Slow Season
Smarting from the economic downturn, a decline in tourism, the city's dour mood and the fear of more terrorism, area retailers are bringing new tactics to the task of selling as they brace for a tough holiday season.   F1

Candidate's Campaign on Hold
James E. McGreevey, the Democratic candidate for New Jersey governor, canceled campaign events for the second day in a row to be with his wife, Dina, who remained hospitalized with pregnancy complications.   F1

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-16

Diamondbacks End Yanks' Run
The Arizona Diamondbacks rallied in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7, beating the Yankees, 3-2, and winning their first World Series.   A1

New Records in Marathon
Tesfaye Jifar, a 25-year-old Ethiopian, had never won a marathon. Margaret Okayo, a 25-year-old Kenyan, has won only two. But on a day when security concerns nearly overshadowed the race itself, both of the runners set new course records in the 32nd annual New York City Marathon.   H1

ARTS   E1-6

Emmy Awards, at Last
A tone of patriotism marked the twice-delayed 53rd Emmy Awards as the NBC series "West Wing" won the best drama award, defeating its HBO rival, "The Sopranos," for the second year in a row. HBO's "Sex and the City" was named best comedy series.   A9

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Debate Over Microsoft Deal
As they neared a Tuesday deadline to accept or reject the proposed antitrust agreement between Microsoft and the Bush administration, a group of state prosecutors were fielding growing complaints about the deal from executives, technology experts and consumer groups.   C1

Outlook for Online Shopping
The Internet, which has inspired a frenzy of activity in past holiday seasons, isn't expected to do so this year. Some experts believe that it will fare only about as well -- or as poorly -- as the overall retail economy.   C1

Software in Public Domain
I.B.M. is planning to place various software tools in the public domain. It is part of the company's embrace of the open-source software model, in which programmers worldwide share software codes for development and debugging.   C2

Networks Fear New Threat
At first, television executives watched as new technology allowed programs to be paused and replayed during broadcast. But now, a company may have crossed the networks' line in the sand -- making it easier to skip commercials.   C4

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   F7

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: Half a commander in chief; settling the Microsoft case; harnessing the spirit of Sept. 11.

Columns: William Safire and Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E6
TV Listings   E7
Crossword   E6
Weather   D15
Metro Diary   F2

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos 

Load-Date: November 5, 2001


End of Document
How to Reverse the Demographic Decline
The New York Times
November 7, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section TW; Column 0; SpecialSections; Pg. 12; GUEST ESSAY
Length: 1526 words
Byline: By Shikha Dalmia
Body


Over the past century, two moments that transformed America and positioned it as the global economic leader were the post-World War II economic boom and the I.T. revolution of the 1990s. In both cases, America tore down many forms of discrimination and other barriers to harness the talents of marginalized groups in the country and to welcome new ones, injecting demographic vitality into the economy. 
  To continue America's upward trajectory in the 21st century, the country must reverse its current demographic decline. As the Census Bureau reported last week, in the past decade, the U.S. population grew at the second-slowest rate since the government started counting in 1790 -- and the slowest since the 1930s.
  The most expeditious way out might be if the federal government gave up its monopoly on immigration and allowed states to bring in workers from anywhere in the world, based on their own labor needs, without being held to federal quotas. The growing concern is that the United States is facing a population bust. The U.S. fertility rate, which had bucked Europe's low-fertility trend during the past century, is now around 1.73 children per woman -- roughly on par with that of Denmark and Britain.
  Declining population growth because of lower fertility rates by definition means that the ratio of young to old declines -- which is not a formula for a dynamic economy or a competitive country. The risk-taking and experimentation of young workers make them the engine of capitalism. They are also more mobile: They can move to places where they will be most productive.
  That is what America had in abundance after World War II. The Nobel prize-winning economist Vernon Smith notes that the prewar American labor force was quite immobile. But the returning 16 million World War II veterans, having traveled to foreign lands, weren't daunted by moving within their own country for jobs.
  The domestic shortage of men during the war also broke down barriers that had kept teenagers, women and Black Americans out of the labor force.
  Young men like Mr. Smith (who worked at a Boeing factory in Wichita, Kan., from age 16 to 18) entered the work force and gained valuable skills and experience in the postwar economy. At the same time, weakening social norms against working women, even married ones, increased female labor participation by 50 percent between 1940 and 1945. The shortage of men also opened opportunities for Black workers, helping to trigger the second Great Migration from the South.
  Some of these barriers shot up again after the war to accommodate the returning veterans. Still, there were gains: After the World War II generation, the baby boom generation, together with its progeny, kept the American work force humming until the 1980s.
  The seeds of the 1990s I.T. revolution were planted in the 1960s. That era of civil rights activism dismantled at least many formal barriers preventing robust Black participation in the economy. And it eliminated the 1924 Johnson-Reed Act, which had blocked foreign talent. This law had not only cut immigration rates overall but imposed national-origin quotas expressly designed to maintain America's Western European ethnic makeup by discouraging immigration from Eastern Europe and Asia. Its end in 1965 resulted in 58.5 million new immigrants over the next 50 years, about 25 percent Asian. Many were high-tech professionals from China and India.
  Their innovations and entrepreneurship helped power the I.T. revolution that transformed the world. According to a study by the nonpartisan National Foundation for American Policy, more than half of the 91 start-ups that became $1 billion companies had one or more immigrant founders. Likewise, the Partnership for a New American Economy found that immigrants or their children had founded more than 40 percent of the 2010 Fortune 500 companies.
  So what's the cure for America's dwindling demographic vitality?
  A new baby boom generation would be enormously difficult to produce in a world with easy birth control. On average, women say they want 2.5 children. But returning America to just a 2.1 replacement level through cash incentives would be ''prohibitively costly,'' as Lyman Stone of the American Enterprise Institute concluded after examining how these policies fared in European and other countries.
  Instead, America might borrow a page from Canada. Its immigration policy is expressly meant to offset its aging population and low birthrates. Canada's immigration intake is 0.9 percent of its population -- or three times America's per capita rate.
  It has admitted immigrants in an ingenious way. In 1998, Canada initiated its Provincial Nominee Program, which gives most provinces a quota, based on their population, of immigrants to sponsor as they see fit (in addition to the immigrants the federal government in Ottawa admits). A province sets criteria based on its needs for workers, and it can sponsor immigrants from anywhere in the world for permanent residency, provided they pass a basic background and health check. (The federal government has the final say.)
  The average processing time for this program is about 18 months. In the United States, by contrast, many low-skilled immigrants on work visas have no pathway to green cards, and highly skilled immigrants on H-1B visas wait years -- and in the case of Indian and Chinese nationals, up to half a century.
  Although, in principle immigrants, sponsored by a Canadian province are free to relocate to another province anytime, in practice the five-year retention rate for many provinces is upwards of 80 percent, according to a 2017 assessment by the Canadian government. That's because the granular matching between skills and the local labor market ensures employment, which removes the main reason that immigrants leave. The program started small, but from 2021 to 2023, about 30 percent of Canada's total immigrant admissions are expected to be through it.
  America should begin its own version of this program but take it one step further and let states set their own limits on foreign workers. This would get federal bureaucrats out of the business of centrally planning the labor market for the whole country. States that understand their own labor markets would do a much better job of finding suitable workers for their businesses.
  The states wouldn't have to hew to the federal high-skilled and low-skilled distinction for visas. Right now, both high-tech and low-tech states are suffering from a tight labor market. States that don't want or need immigrant workers could opt out of the program. Foreign workers would be free to travel anywhere in the country, but they would be limited to jobs in participating states until they are naturalized. This would be an improvement over the existing system for them, since work visas currently tether them to a single employer, unless they find a new employer to undertake the onerous process of sponsoring them. It would also reassure states that they would have a measure of control over the level of in-migration from other states, at least for some time.
  States wouldn't be required to participate, but they would face an inherent incentive to do so because businesses are far more likely to prefer locations where there are suitably skilled, motivated workers. Such a program would render the current broken and dysfunctional federal immigration system beside the point. (Constitutionally, immigration is a federal function, but nothing prevents Washington from voluntarily giving states more latitude to make their own decisions about foreign workers. Other aspects of immigration policy can remain in federal hands.)
  Fiscally costly schemes won't be necessary to attract immigrants. These workers are highly motivated to build their lives in America and will happily pay fees for state sponsorship. They often come to America during their peak productive years after another society has usually borne the cost of raising them, which bestows a one-time fiscal windfall on America. Also, given that immigrant fertility rates may not typically drop to native levels for a generation or two, foreign workers would stabilize the population for longer than would a short-term family-policy approach.
  Another benefit of federalizing immigration would be that the restored demographic health and improved economic performance of participating states would make it easier for U.S. citizens to see immigrants as assets and saviors rather than liabilities and threats. America would then have a material -- not just an idealistic -- interest in redoubling its commitment to its core value of pluralism and tolerance.
  Shikha Dalmia (@shikhadalmia) is a visiting fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University studying the rise of populist authoritarianism and a columnist at The Week.
  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/18/opinion/us-canada-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY O.O.P.S. FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: November 7, 2021


End of Document
What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
The New York Times
April 7, 2018 Saturday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 1283 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


It is H-1B visa season, and American companies seeking high-skilled foreign workers have been rushing to submit applications for visas since the government started accepting them on Monday. For the sixth consecutive year, the federal government was flooded with so many petitions that it announced Friday that it had already reached its annual cap of 85,000 of these visas in just five days.
Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized for displacing United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. 
  [Read how a planned change by the Trump administration puts the jobs of thousands on Indian women in jeopardy.]
  Critics also want to end special work permits issued to some spouses of workers on H-1B visas.
  What is the H-1B visa?
  It is a temporary visa that employers use to hire foreigners in ''specialty occupations'' for which there are not enough skilled American workers to fill available jobs. The workers must have at least a bachelor's degree. It enables those employed to legally work in the United States for three years, with the possibility of extensions.
  How does a worker get a visa?
  Companies identify a worker they wish to hire and submit a petition on the candidate's behalf. The typical petition is a collection of forms and documents describing the job and the unique qualifications of the person chosen to fill it.
  Are all H-1B recipients in the technology sector?
  Many are software engineers, computer programmers and other workers in the technology sector. However, H-1B recipients work in a variety of jobs. They can be architects, scientists, models and tattoo artists. Some are math and science teachers in rural school districts that have trouble recruiting American instructors.
  How many visas are issued each year?
  Congress established that 65,000 H-1B visas are available each year for workers with bachelor's degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master's degrees or higher. Universities and research organizations are exempt from the cap.
  Why is there a lottery to choose petitions?
  In the past several years, the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services has received more petitions than there are visas. If the maximum number of applications is reached during the first five business days of April, the agency holds a lottery to randomly select which petitions it will process.
  Can the visas lead to permanent residence?
  Very often they do. Companies can choose to sponsor an H-1B worker for permanent residence. The green card applications are often approved, though they can take years to be issued.
  Where are most foreign workers from?
  India is the country of origin for more than 80 percent of H-1B recipients, with China a distant second. Next in line during the 2016 fiscal year were the Philippines, South Korea and Canada.
  Do H-1B workers compete with Americans?
  Supporters of the visa program say they fill a critical need for talent that is not available in the United States, especially when the economy is strong and the labor market is tight. Employers must attest that an H-1B worker will not adversely impact the wages and working conditions of American workers.
  Critics say that employers often hire H-1B workers for lower salaries than they would pay Americans to do the same job. They point to Americans who have been displaced when companies have outsourced areas like technology maintenance to a company that brings in H-1B workers.
  Who's right?
  As usual with immigration policy, it's complicated. More than 40,500 companies sponsored workers for H-1B visas in the 2017 fiscal year. Many employers specifically target a worker with hard-to-find expertise whom they wish to hire to do specialized work -- obviously because they could not find someone in the United States to do the job. In many cases, H-1B workers have gone on to create start-ups and develop cutting-edge technology that keeps America competitive.
  But there are questions about who's benefiting, collectively. About 20 companies accounted for 32 percent of approved H-1B petitions, according to an analysis by the Migration Policy Institute. Many of the employers are global outsourcing companies from India that supply entry-level workers to retailers, insurance companies and banks. Not all. Among them are also American firms who appear to be using the program to create a pool of cheap labor.
  ''Big household-name American companies are just as culpable as the outsourcing companies of abusing the program,'' said Norman Matloff, a professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies the H-1B program.
  So there has been some misuse?
  Almost everybody agrees that there has, though it is probably not as widespread as critics claim. Abuses rarely result in penalties for the companies, experts say. In one highly publicized case in 2015, some Disney employees said they were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments. Workers filed suit, but the judge dismissed the case; new litigation is pending in state court. Workers at other companies, including Toys ''R'' Us and New York Life Insurance Company, also said they lost their jobs to imported workers.
  Last May, the former acting director of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the agency had started ''multiple investigations'' into ''possible misuse'' of the H-1B visa program and would turn the findings over for enforcement as warranted.
  Ultimately, though, it is up to Congress to change laws that govern the program, since in most cases, practices that workers may claim as abusive are not necessarily illegal as the law is written.
  What changes did the Trump administration start?
  At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors, saying, ''We won't let this happen anymore.''
  Once in office, he ordered a review of the H-1B and other visa programs. In April 2017, he signed a ''Buy American, Hire American'' executive order, which has served to justify several recent changes.
  For one thing, United States Citizen and Immigration Services, the federal agency that reviews the petitions, has tightened its oversight. Between January and August of last year, it issued 45 percent more challenges or requests for more evidence. That has delayed the issuance of visas, and some immigration lawyers report an increase in denials.
  The agency has also stepped up the number of surprise visits by fraud teams to sites where large numbers of H-1B workers are employed. And in a policy memo earlier this year, it expanded its review of H1-B workers who are employed at third-party work sites. Now, it is requiring more details about what work will be performed, why a foreigner is needed to do it, and what wages are being paid.
  What more does the administration plan to do?
  The administration says it will end an Obama-era program that has allowed spouses of H-1B visa holders to work, as long as they had been approved and were waiting for a green card. Those work permits have been issued under a program known as H-4EAD.
  Federal authorities have also suggested they may change the selection process for H-1B visas to ensure that they are granted to the ''most skilled or highest-paid'' job candidates.
  Finally, Trump says he would like to scrap the lottery.
  What about the role of Congress?
  More sweeping changes can occur only if Congress passes new laws or overhauls the immigration system. The Trump administration's call to end the lottery and raise wages for H-1B visa candidates as a means of recruiting qualified American workers has support among some Democrats and Republicans.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/06/us/what-are-h1b-visas.html

Load-Date: April 7, 2018


End of Document
Immigration Agency That Issues Visas, Green Cards Struggles to Stay Afloat
The New York Times 
May 17, 2020 Sunday 21:27 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1251 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has asked Congress for a lifeline amid the coronavirus pandemic, which has caused applications to plummet and brought it to the brink of insolvency.
Body


U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has asked Congress for a lifeline amid the coronavirus pandemic, which has caused applications to plummet and brought it to the brink of insolvency.
LOS ANGELES — A precipitous drop in applications for green cards, citizenship and other programs has threatened the solvency of the federal agency that administers the country’s lawful immigration system, prompting it to seek a $1.2 billion cash infusion from Congress as well as fee hikes to stay afloat.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which relies on the fees that it charges applicants to fund its operations, said that it could run out of money by the summer because the coronavirus pandemic had resulted in far fewer people applying for visas and other benefits.
“Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, U.S.C.I.S. has seen a dramatic decrease in revenue,” said a spokesman for the agency, noting that its receipts could plummet by more than 60 percent by the close of the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30.
Without the $1.2 billion injection from Congress, the agency, he said, would be unable to fund its operations in a matter of months. The agency plans to impose a 10 percent “surcharge” on applications, on top of previously proposed increases, that it is expecting to implement in the coming months.
Critics blamed the Trump administration’s stringent policies, which have caused backlogs, red tape and application denials to skyrocket, for dissuading an untold number of people from applying for visas and other immigration benefits.
“This administration is asking taxpayers to bail out an agency as a result of the very policies it put in place which have caused revenue loss,” said Melissa Rodgers, the director of programs at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco.
“With extreme vetting, they are making every single application take longer to review, and processing fewer,” said Ms. Rodgers, who oversees a program to promote citizenship among legal immigrants. “Word gets out that it’s not worth applying.”
Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, an immigration hard-liner who is acting deputy secretary for the Department of Homeland Security and at the helm of the agency, has stressed upholding immigration laws over granting visas and citizenship as the agency’s mission. “We are not a benefit agency, we are a vetting agency,” he has said.
Last summer, Mr. Cuccinelli announced a “public charge” rule that denied immigrants green cards if they were deemed likely to use government benefit programs like food stamps and subsidized housing, a move that is believed to have deterred many people from applying. The reason: Applying for legal permanent residency in itself could be considered a negative factor by immigration officers when determining whether a person could become a public charge.
Some critics said that the agency was ill-prepared for the economic shock from the coronavirus pandemic because of policies that had rendered its adjudication process less efficient while bloating its payroll.
Since President Trump took office, the agency, for example, has bolstered resources devoted to fraud detection as well as added new requirements for in-person interviews for hundreds of thousands of employment- and marriage-based green card applicants.
It also has been returning large numbers of visa applications with “requests for further evidence” of eligibility, which adjudicators must then review again. Extensions for H-1B visas, issued to skilled workers already in the United States, are now reviewed from scratch, as if the person were a first-time applicant.
“This administration has made every single application much more expensive and time-consuming to adjudicate,” said Doug Rand, who worked on immigration policy in the Obama administration.
In fiscal year 2016, the agency had 15,828 positions, including full-time and contract workers. Three years later, that number had climbed to almost 18,866, a 19 percent increase.
“If they had kept the same staff levels and not put in place these policies, would they still have run out of cash? Maybe not,” said Mr. Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps people apply for green cards and citizenship.
As in previous years, Citizenship and Immigration Services in fiscal 2020 had counted on fees paid by applicants to cover the lion’s share of its expenditures: 97 percent of its $4.8 billion budget.
But after applications took a nosedive, the agency, the spokesman said, was seeking “a one-time emergency request for funding to ensure we can carry out our mission of administering our nation’s lawful immigration system, safeguarding its integrity and protecting the American people.”
The agency already had been trying to limit spending to paying salaries and critical expenses to avert a financial crisis, he said, and would have to take further “drastic actions,” which he did not specify, to keep operating. Those could include staff reductions that would affect the adjudication of citizenship, green cards, asylum and work visas.
The agency has not released data that attests to the decrease in applications. But an officer at the agency, speaking on condition of anonymity because the person was not authorized to talk to the news media, said that the staff had been notified recently that the agency was “severely strapped for cash due to the low number of new applications being filed,” adding that overtime, travel and purchases had been scrapped.
Ana Maria Schwartz, an immigration lawyer in Houston, said that half as many clients had retained her to apply for green cards, citizenship and other immigration benefits between March 15 and May 15 compared with the same period in 2019. “That’s a seismic shift, even for my tiny firm,” she said.
In November last year, the agency’s leadership proposed steep increases in fees to file for legal immigration and naturalization. For the first time, the agency would also charge those fleeing persecution and seeking protection in the United States.
Mr. Cuccinelli, the agency’s chief, said that the fee hikes would help cover the agency’s deficits.
Immigrant advocates balked at the justification, saying that the goal was to reduce the number of immigrants who become citizens before the 2020 presidential election and, more broadly, cut legal immigration by making fees prohibitive for low-income people.
The fee assessed on petitions for naturalization would jump more than 60 percent, to $1,170 from $725, for most applicants. The government would also begin charging asylum seekers $50 for applications and $490 for work permits, which would make the United States one of just four countries to charge people for asylum.
The government also announced its intention to increase the cost of renewals for hundreds of thousands of participants of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, also known as DACA. They would be required to pay $765, rather than $495.
Thus far, the fees have remained unchanged. The government has issued three public notices about them in the Federal Register, attracting more than 40,000 public comments that it is mandated to review and consider before announcing a final rule.
“The administration turned the fee changes into a hyper ideological policy vehicle that slowed them down,” Mr. Rand said.
PHOTO: A 2019 naturalization ceremony in Los Angeles. The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services is facing a 60 percent revenue drop. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ETIENNE LAURENT/EPA-EFE/SHUTTERSTOCK)

Load-Date: October 29, 2021


End of Document
Trump Signs Visa Order, and Tech Giants Exhale
The New York Times
April 19, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1189 words
Byline: By GLENN THRUSH, NICK WINGFIELD and VINDU GOEL; Glen Thrush reported from Kenosha, Nick Wingfield from Seattle and Vindu Goel from San Francisco. Miriam Jordan contributed reporting from Los Angeles.
Body


KENOSHA, Wis. -- President Trump, hammering his ''America First'' campaign theme, signed an order on Tuesday that he said would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the visa program for foreign technical workers.
After recent policy reversals that have angered his populist base, Mr. Trump described the visa program as an initiative gone awry that has driven down wages for Americans. The order was a means to end the ''theft of American prosperity,'' which he said had been brought on by low-wage immigrant labor. 
  Yet the order calls for a series of relatively modest steps, like a multiagency report on changes needed for the H-1B program, under which the government admits 85,000 foreign workers annually, many of them in the high-tech, industrial, medical and science fields. Collectively, the efforts outlined in the order could take years to carry out.
  The H1-B program has become a focus in the debate over the impact of foreign workers. Mr. Trump has criticized employers for abusing the program and using it to avoid hiring higher-paid American counterparts. He vowed to revamp its lottery-based selection process.
  The order, signed at the sprawling Snap-on tool factory here, represents a small win for bigger tech companies, which have been in pitched battles for those visas. Companies like Google and Microsoft, which rely heavily on high-skilled foreign workers, had worried that President Trump would make drastic curbs to worker programs that could cripple them.
  ''I think people are cautiously optimistic that this will be O.K., and maybe even better,'' said Tom Alberg, a venture capitalist at Madrona Venture Group, a Seattle firm that invests in high-tech start-ups.
  But the order would likely hurt the biggest users of the visa program, technology outsourcing firms that bring foreign workers to the United States to perform technical jobs, typically from India.
  On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump stoked outrage from his supporters with accounts of companies like Walt Disney forcing laid-off technical workers to train their overseas replacements.
  On Tuesday, Mr. Trump spoke in terms of an apple-pie populism that helped him pull off upset victories in November in Midwestern states like Wisconsin.
  H-1B visas ''should include only the most skilled and highest-paid applicants and should never, ever be used to replace American workers,'' Mr. Trump told a gathering of about 500 workers and local luminaries, including the White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus, who hails from Kenosha.
  On this point, many executives at American technology companies agree with Mr. Trump. They argue that they mostly apply for H-1Bs for workers when they can't find qualified American workers, usually those with advanced degrees like a masters or Ph.D.
  In recent years, there has been so much demand for H-1B visas that the whole fiscal year's allocation has run out in a few days in April, when applications are accepted. The visas are then awarded by lottery to qualified applicants. Some 600,000 to 900,000 immigrants are currently in the United States on H-1B visas, researchers estimate.
  Outsourcing firms -- the top 13 of which accounted for a third of all granted visas in 2014, the last year for which information is publicly available -- typically flood the system with visa applications. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all from India.
  India's leading tech trade group, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, said Indian companies were being treated unfairly. ''We believe that the current campaign to discredit our sector is driven by persistent myths, such as the ideas that H-1B visa holders are 'cheap labor' and 'train their replacements,' neither of which is accurate,'' the group said in a statement.
  Companies like Microsoft, Intel and Amazon are also big recipients. At least 15 percent of the American workforces of Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm hold H-1Bs, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department.
  The announcement came at a jittery time for the White House, as Mr. Trump faces the 100th day of his presidency without much to show for it in the way of legislative accomplishment, after the defeat of his health care overhaul. And his two high-profile executive orders cracking down on immigration from predominantly Muslim nations have been stymied by the courts.
  ''This does nothing,'' said Senator Charles Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader. ''Like all the other executive orders, it's just words -- he's calling for new studies. It's not going to fix the problem. It's not going to create a single job.''
  Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat whose district includes Silicon Valley, said the issue of foreign workers was real, but dismissed the president's order as poorly targeted and unlikely to achieve its desired result.
  ''Half of the start-ups in Silicon Valley were created by highly skilled people from other countries,'' she said. ''I don't think the president and his staff fully appreciates that fact.''
  In a briefing with reporters on Monday, White House officials said the ''Buy American and Hire American'' order would also overhaul federal procurement practices to increase the selection of products from American companies, especially in the domestic steel industry, which has faced stiff competition from China.
  One reform advocated by the Trump administration, which has drawn bipartisan support from Congress, would change the lottery system for awarding H-1B visas, giving extra preference to the highest-paying jobs -- a proposal favored by many in the American technology industry.
  Representatives from Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Google either declined to comment or didn't respond to requests for comment.
  Blake Irving, the chief executive of domain name and web hosting firm GoDaddy, said he supported the idea of changing the system for issuing H-1Bs to give priority to higher-skilled workers. He said GoDaddy typically receives only about 20 percent of the H-1B visas it applies for.
  ''If anything, it moves the policy towards something that's preferential to the expert work force,'' said Mr. Irving. ''Anything that gets us closer to that is goodness.''
  But some smaller technology companies said they were concerned about the changes proposed by the Trump administration.
  Punit Soni, the chief executive of Learning Motors, a six-person company in Silicon Valley that is trying to apply artificial intelligence to health care, said the visa changes proposed by the Trump administration would hurt start-ups.
  Small companies cannot afford to pay high salaries and are already struggling to attract talent in a tight market, he said. A visa system that favors the highest-paid workers will steer immigrants only to already successful big companies like Google, his former employer.
  ''We're a small start-up. Everyone is getting way below-market average salary,'' he said.
  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/18/us/politics/executive-order-hire-buy-american-h1b-visa-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Facebook is heavily dependent on H-1B visas. Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)       

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
The Reality Behind Biden’s Plan to Legalize 11 Million Immigrants
The New York Times 
January 27, 2021 Wednesday 07:17 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1989 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The proposal for a path to citizenship for undocumented residents has been called “the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations.” But is it possible?
Body


The proposal for a path to citizenship for undocumented residents has been called “the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations.” But is it possible?
LOS ANGELES — Maria Elena Hernandez recently retrieved a flowery box tucked in her closet and dusted it off. For more than a decade, she has used it to store tax returns, lease agreements and other documents that she has collected to prove her family’s long years of residence in the United States.
“We have been waiting for the day when we can apply for legal status. In this box is, hopefully, all the evidence we’ll need,” said Ms. Hernandez, 55, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who arrived in this country with three small children in 2000.
She had just learned of President Biden’s plan to offer a pathway to U.S. citizenship for nearly 11 million undocumented people, announced as part of a sweeping proposal to overhaul the nation’s immigration system.
The bill would allow undocumented immigrants who were in the United States before Jan. 1 to apply for temporary legal status after passing background checks and paying taxes. As newly minted “lawful prospective immigrants,” they would be authorized to work, join the military and travel without fear of deportation. After five years, they could apply for green cards.
The president’s proposal would be perhaps the most ambitious immigration redesign passed since 1986, when President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which legalized three million people.
Converting more than three times that many people into full citizens could open the door to one of the most significant demographic shifts in modern U.S. history, lifting millions out of the shadows and potentially into higher-paying jobs, providing them with welfare benefits, health coverage and Social Security eligibility while eventually creating many new voters.
“This is the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations,” said Muzaffar Chishti, senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. “But given that the Democrats have razor-thin majorities in Congress, the administration needs to have its expectations tempered.” Legalizing just one group at first — say, farmworkers — might be “more realistic,” he said.
In a sign of the hurdles ahead, another one of Mr. Biden’s early immigration initiatives, a 100-day freeze on deportations, was temporarily blocked by a federal judge on Tuesday after a lawsuit by the Texas attorney general, who argued that his state faced enormous costs for services to undocumented immigrants who are not removed.
Immigration reform has stalled in Congress time and again, over border security, guest workers and whether to tackle legislation one piece at a time. But the big stumbling block remains whether providing amnesty to those who have broken the law will encourage more people to try their luck.
Even with beefed-up border enforcement and some employer sanctions, Mr. Reagan’s overhaul failed to curb the arrival of unauthorized immigrants.
Meanwhile, those immigrants have continued to live, work and raise families. More than 60 percent have resided in the country for more than a decade, and they have more than four million U.S.-born children. They account for 5 percent of the work force, representing the backbone of the agriculture, construction and hospitality sectors.
About four in 10 did not enter the United States through the southwestern border. Rather they are visa overstays — tourists, students or temporary skilled workers who never left.
The family of Denise Panaligan, 27, came to the United States from the Philippines in 2002 after her father, a financial analyst, obtained an H-1B visa. They remained after their temporary legal status ran out.
“When people look at us, they don’t think undocumented because we are Asians,” said Ms. Panaligan, a middle school teacher in Los Angeles. “We’re invisible to enforcement.”
But their decision led to other indignities, she said. Her mother had to work as a housekeeper despite having a college education. Denise’s father, Art, died two years ago of brain cancer without ever returning to see his own parents because he would not have been allowed back into the United States.
“The Biden plan would fulfill our hope of keeping the family together,” Ms. Panaligan said.
The largest share of unauthorized immigrants is from Mexico. Having survived treacherous river and desert crossings to reach the United States, they found a nation willing to look past laws that prohibit hiring them, to employ them in fields and factories, and in homes as nannies and housekeepers.
Maribel Ramirez and Eusebio Gomez of Mexico have toiled in California’s vineyards since crossing the border 19 years ago. They have managed to buy a home and raise two sons. Their oldest plans to enlist in the Marines. But Ms. Ramirez said she asked herself, “Why should my son give his life to a country that doesn’t value his parents?”
Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama both championed comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to legalization for undocumented people. But the immigration packages that were debated in Congress — in 2006, 2007 and 2013 — all stalled.
Among the concerns raised by opponents are that new citizens will vote as a solid Democratic bloc, displace American workers and become a burden on public services. Some predict that any legalization program would encourage more people to make the trek north.
“Legalizing countless millions of illegal aliens — even discussing it — rings the bell for millions more to illegally enter the U.S. to await their green card,” said Lora Ries, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation.
Others argue there are benefits to legalization. Opening a pathway to citizenship for nearly 11 million people, seven to eight million of whom participate in the labor force, is tantamount to “an economic stimulus,” according to Giovanni Peri, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis.
Between 2005 and 2015, new immigrants accounted for nearly half of the growth in the working-age population, and in the next two decades, immigrants will be key to replacing retirees. Demographers say a shortage of blue-collar workers highlights the need for immigrants, in ever larger numbers, to perform low-skilled jobs. About five million of them work in jobs designated as “essential” by the government.
Among the biggest backers of the Biden initiative are employers who rely on immigrants. Through the years, dairies, packing plants and other worksites have been caught up in immigration raids targeting unauthorized workers.
The Reagan-era amnesty in 1986 caused only a temporary drop in the number of undocumented immigrants because it was not accompanied by a robust system for legally bringing in low-skilled workers. Employers faced fines for knowingly hiring undocumented immigrants but were not responsible for vetting documents presented by job applicants, spawning a huge industry of fake Social Security numbers.
“The principle is simple: If you carry out a broad legalization, it doesn’t freeze undocumented migration flows as long as labor demand persists,” said Wayne Cornelius, director emeritus of the Center for Comparative Immigration Studies at the University of California, San Diego.
The illegal influx began to swell again in the early 1990s.
Economic imperatives prevailed, driving illegal immigration up year after year. A building boom in Sun Belt states drew hundreds of thousands of undocumented construction workers. And as farm workers who had benefited from the amnesty aged and exited the fields, young undocumented labor arrived to replace them.
From 1986 to 2008 the country’s undocumented population swelled to 12 million from three million despite an exponential increase in funding for border security, including boots on the ground. The militarization did not reduce illegal entries. Instead, it turned a seasonal migration of mainly men who returned home each year to Mexico into a settled population of families.
The 2007 recession ultimately reduced the flow of immigrants. Despite successive waves of Central American migration, illegal entries remain substantially lower than in the early 2000s.
It has been about two decades since Ms. Hernandez stuffed a change of clothes in a bag, grabbed her three young children and slipped across the border.
“We didn’t have papers, but I was determined to head north for a better life,” she said. “I had relatives who had benefited from a 1986 amnesty and I figured our day would come.”
Ms. Hernandez got a job in Los Angeles packing CDs. Her husband, Pedro Hernandez, joined them shortly after and found work at a nursery. Their children, Luis, then 7, and Elitania and Juan, then 4-year-old twins, thrived in school. They lived modestly, in apartments where the children slept in the bedrooms and the couple in the living room.
Their hopes were lifted, dashed and revived as Congress took up various immigration bills.
“Every president gave us hope that something good was coming, and then nothing. Again maybe. Then nothing,” Ms. Hernandez recalled.
“We tried to do everything right, according to the law, in a country that had not opened its doors to us, but that we had entered anyway,” she said.
Things got more challenging when Mr. Hernandez lost his job in 2006. His employer, concerned about government audits, had asked him to prove he was in the country legally.
When Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents began showing up in their neighborhood, the family avoided going out for days at a time. Mr. Hernandez rode his bike to a new job, figuring he would be less likely to encounter law enforcement than while driving his old Mazda. Ms. Hernandez signed up for adult English classes. As the children got older, she advised them to always be on their best behavior.
“I grew up hearing that you have to be an extra good citizen,” said Luis Hernandez, her oldest child, now 28. “Mom always said that: ‘People who have papers can make mistakes, but you can’t,’” he said.
Because of their undocumented status, Luis, who played club soccer, and Juan, a varsity football player, skipped games that required travel.
When Mr. Obama created a program known as DACA in 2012 to temporarily shield undocumented immigrants who had been brought into the country as children, Luis Hernandez and his siblings, then teenagers, applied immediately. It enabled them to work legally. They got their driver’s licenses.
But President Donald J. Trump’s incendiary anti-immigrant rhetoric and his administration’s attempt to rescind DACA generated deep anxiety in the Hernandez household. When Mr. Biden took office, the family rejoiced.
After the inauguration, Ms. Hernandez was at her dining room table thinking about the imminent birth of her second grandchild, who will be an American citizen. She and her husband planned to drive to Utah to meet the baby, and she worried about making a trip across state lines without legal status, lest law enforcement stop them.
When she learned that the president had unveiled a blueprint for legalization, she said, she was stunned at first. Then she went to retrieve the box of documents.
PHOTOS: Maribel Ramirez and her sons, Eusebio and Jesus Gomez. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNA SCHOENEFELD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); A New York rally for immigration reform in November, after President Biden was elected. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Luis Alfonso Hernandez with his parents, Maria and Pedro, who are undocumented. Luis and his two siblings are DACA recipients, and the family rejoiced when President Biden took office.; Maria Hernandez has stored documents, above, attesting to her family’s U.S. residence for decades. Her husband, Pedro, left, rides a bicycle to work instead of driving his car to decrease his chances of running into the police. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JESSICA PONS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21)

Load-Date: February 18, 2021


End of Document
New Immigration Limits Cause Anxiety in Families and Businesses
The New York Times 
April 21, 2020 Tuesday 13:28 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1545 words
Byline: Caitlin Dickerson and Miriam Jordan
Highlight: President Trump’s move to suspend some green cards could make it harder for many immigrants to reunite with loved ones or work in the United States.
Body


President Trump’s move to suspend some green cards could make it harder for many immigrants to reunite with loved ones or work in the United States.
Families that have waited years to be reunited, businesses that rely on foreign workers, universities that recruit international students with the promise of high-paying American jobs — all of their plans faced new uncertainty on Tuesday as the Trump administration announced new temporary restrictions on permanent residency in the United States.
President Trump signaled that a 60-day ban on most green cards, which could be imposed as early as Wednesday, was intended to protect work opportunities for the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs in the coronavirus pandemic. But, if it is extended, its impact on businesses and families could be much broader.
The new policy would close the doors to thousands of people hoping to enter the United States or lay down permanent roots in the country through long-term work or family connections — at least temporarily.
“It’s really worrying news,” said Elsa Ramos, whose 22-year-old son, Eder, is in Honduras, waiting for a green card that would allow him to join his parents and sister in the United States. They are among many families and employers who have spent thousands of dollars on years of legal work and are now on hold.
“Imagine the excitement that you have that your son is on his way into the country and then Trump destroys that. It’s really hard,” Ms. Ramos said.
Mr. Ramos applied for residency through his father, a legal permanent resident who lives in Philadelphia. His application had already been mired in months of unexpected delays because of the extra reviews applied to green card applications since Mr. Trump took office.
Living alone in the small house the family left behind, which is in a dangerous neighborhood, her son is vulnerable to exploitation by gangs because of his connections to the United States, Ms. Ramos said. But because his father is not a United States citizen, he would most likely be ineligible to enter the country under the planned new order.
“He’s desperate and sad. He told me, ‘I never thought I would be stuck here for so long,’” Ms. Ramos said.
Newly tightened policies have already imposed drastic limits on immigration in recent months, all but ending prospects of asylum for most people fleeing troubled situations in their home countries, and imposing higher fees, added scrutiny and longer wait times onto those pursuing visas.
The announcement that, amid a pandemic, Mr. Trump planned to impose a temporary block on most permanent residency applications opened the door to a situation with few parallels, in which almost no level of family connection, education or resources guarantees the right to immigrate to the United States — though it was not clear for how long.
Administration officials said the pause would be re-evaluated after 60 days, and Mr. Trump said he could extend the ban “based on economic conditions at the time.”
Of the roughly one million green cards that were issued in 2019, nearly two-thirds of applicants, like Mr. Ramos, were granted on family-based petitions for permanent residency in the United States. The spouses and children of American citizens would still be eligible for green cards under the new policy, but their parents would not, nor would the family members of current legal permanent residents who do not hold citizenship.
About 50,000 permanent resident slots a year, issued in a lottery aimed at diversifying the immigrant population, would also be blocked under the new policy.
A smaller, yet economically important group of immigrants who also could be severely affected are those who apply for green cards through employers. The science, technology and engineering industries rely heavily on those petitions.
Such employers would still be able to hire foreign workers on a temporary basis, for instance through H1-B visas, but the ability to offer permanent resident status is often seen as crucial to recruiting highly sought-after workers with specialized skills who demand stability for themselves and their families.
Brad Smith, the president of Microsoft, a major employer of foreign workers, spoke out on Twitter on Tuesday, saying immigrants were “vital to our company &amp; the nation’s economy” and an important source of workers in health care, research, information technology, infrastructure and food supply.
Because the new restrictions would not curtail guest worker programs that bring high-tech employees in on temporary visas, it is unlikely that the new policy would open up many of those jobs to Americans, who often command higher salaries than immigrants.
“If the order only applies to foreign workers coming in on green cards, then it is words with no teeth because the foreigners competing with most Americans are on H-1Bs and other nonimmigrant visas,” said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer who represents displaced tech workers.
She added, “If this temporary moratorium does not include those visas, then I am without understanding of its purpose.”
About 140,000 employment-based green cards were granted in 2018, often to people who were educated in the United States or who first arrived on temporary work visas. Even if the new policy allows workers to continue renewing their temporary status, as it appeared it would, the announcement caused widespread concern among foreign professionals who have long sought the stability of being able to settle in the United States.
Among them are Twinkle Anand Pullat, a dentist, and Sushita Surendran, a pediatric cardiologist. The couple work in Olive Branch, Miss., where they have built a life, bought a home and had a son, Vivaan, 3.
The uncertainty “has thrown all our plans asunder and we are extremely anxious about our future,” said Dr. Pullat, adding, “We want to be focusing on our patients instead of visa status.”
Groups advocating restrictions on immigration, which have long argued that importing foreign workers diminishes the earning potential of Americans, celebrated the planned new limits and expressed hope that they would become permanent.
“There’s nothing more useful for improving the opportunities of working Americans than an acute labor shortage,” said Dan Stein, president of the Federation for American Immigration Reform.
But Mr. Stein expressed concern that, much like many of the president’s previous attempts to curtail immigration, the latest policy could be blocked by the courts.
“Hopefully the president will draft a rationale which is tight enough to satisfy even the most intrusive activist judges,” Mr. Stein said.
After Mr. Trump’s surprise announcement of the coming new policy on Twitter on Monday night, a variety of immigration lawyers said, clients began contacting them with questions for which answers at the time did not exist.
For Sandra Feist, who practices immigration law in Minneapolis, said the emails began to pour in seconds after the president’s tweet. “It’s an absolute barrage of email from people who saw this tweet, with no details, and assumed it was going to be devastating for their case,” she said.
She said she heard from a South Korean energy analyst, an Iranian engineer, a Brazilian scientist and a French researcher — all in the process of securing employment-based green cards. A Minneapolis church contacted Ms. Feist to ask whether a Colombian pastor whom the congregation was expecting would still be able to come on a religious worker visa.
But it became apparent after the policy was clarified Tuesday evening that many of the worries clients expressed to their lawyers may have been unwarranted, given that the ban would last for 60 days and many people would be exempt from it.
For green card applicants of all kinds, navigating the legal immigration system has become significantly more arduous under Mr. Trump: All are now required to attend in-person interviews at government offices before being approved, and many more than under previous administrations are asked to provide additional evidence of their work, health histories and education, which can cause months of delays.
Even before the ban, the added hurdles had already affected immigration to the United States. Green cards that were issued to new arrivals in the country, as opposed to people who were already living in the United States, declined by 13 percent from 2018 to 2019.
Some of those who have been waiting years to settle in the United States said both the substance of the ban and the way that it was announced made them wonder whether they should keep pursuing a process that seems to keep getting longer all the time.
“The combination of restrictions we have put in place since January of 2020 have effectively barred a large section of immigrants from entering the United States already,” said Muzaffar A. Chishti, a senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute. “This is just one more.”
PHOTOS: A Nicaraguan family waited at the port of entry in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, this month to change their asylum court dates, an already trying process that will virtually shutter under President Trump’s plan to suspend immigration for at least 60 days. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PAUL RATJE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE — GETTY IMAGES; JASON REDMOND/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE — GETTY IMAGES)

Load-Date: July 30, 2020


End of Document
Immigration Plan Raises Hope, But Reality Cools Expectations
The New York Times
January 28, 2021 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1889 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


The proposal for a path to citizenship for undocumented residents has been called ''the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations.'' But is it possible?
LOS ANGELES -- Maria Elena Hernandez recently retrieved a flowery box tucked in her closet and dusted it off. For more than a decade, she has used it to store tax returns, lease agreements and other documents that she has collected to prove her family's long years of residence in the United States. 
  ''We have been waiting for the day when we can apply for legal status. In this box is, hopefully, all the evidence we'll need,'' said Ms. Hernandez, 55, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who arrived in this country with three small children in 2000.
  She had just learned of President Biden's plan to offer a pathway to U.S. citizenship for nearly 11 million undocumented people, announced as part of a sweeping proposal to overhaul the nation's immigration system.
  The bill would allow undocumented immigrants who were in the United States before Jan. 1 to apply for temporary legal status after passing background checks and paying taxes. As newly minted ''lawful prospective immigrants,'' they would be authorized to work, join the military and travel without fear of deportation. After five years, they could apply for green cards.
  The president's proposal would be perhaps the most ambitious immigration redesign passed since 1986, when President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which legalized three million people.
  Converting more than three times that many people into full citizens could open the door to one of the most significant demographic shifts in modern U.S. history, lifting millions out of the shadows and potentially into higher-paying jobs, providing them with welfare benefits, health coverage and Social Security eligibility while eventually creating many new voters.
  ''This is the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations,'' said Muzaffar Chishti, senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. ''But given that the Democrats have razor-thin majorities in Congress, the administration needs to have its expectations tempered.'' Legalizing just one group at first -- say, farmworkers -- might be ''more realistic,'' he said.
  In a sign of the hurdles ahead, another one of Mr. Biden's early immigration initiatives, a 100-day freeze on deportations, was temporarily blocked by a federal judge on Tuesday after a lawsuit by the Texas attorney general, who argued that his state faced enormous costs for services to undocumented immigrants who are not removed.
  Immigration reform has stalled in Congress time and again, over border security, guest workers and whether to tackle legislation one piece at a time. But the big stumbling block remains whether providing amnesty to those who have broken the law will encourage more people to try their luck.
  Even with beefed-up border enforcement and some employer sanctions, Mr. Reagan's overhaul failed to curb the arrival of unauthorized immigrants.
  Meanwhile, those immigrants have continued to live, work and raise families. More than 60 percent have resided in the country for more than a decade, and they have more than four million U.S.-born children. They account for 5 percent of the work force, representing the backbone of the agriculture, construction and hospitality sectors.
  About four in 10 did not enter the United States through the southwestern border. Rather they are visa overstays -- tourists, students or temporary skilled workers who never left.
  The family of Denise Panaligan, 27, came to the United States from the Philippines in 2002 after her father, a financial analyst, obtained an H-1B visa. They remained after their temporary legal status ran out.
  ''When people look at us, they don't think undocumented because we are Asians,'' said Ms. Panaligan, a middle school teacher in Los Angeles. ''We're invisible to enforcement.''
  But their decision led to other indignities, she said. Her mother had to work as a housekeeper despite having a college education. Denise's father, Art, died two years ago of brain cancer without ever returning to see his own parents because he would not have been allowed back into the United States.
  ''The Biden plan would fulfill our hope of keeping the family together,'' Ms. Panaligan said.
  The largest share of unauthorized immigrants is from Mexico. Having survived treacherous river and desert crossings to reach the United States, they found a nation willing to look past laws that prohibit hiring them, to employ them in fields and factories, and in homes as nannies and housekeepers.
  Maribel Ramirez and Eusebio Gomez of Mexico have toiled in California's vineyards since crossing the border 19 years ago. They have managed to buy a home and raise two sons. Their oldest plans to enlist in the Marines. But Ms. Ramirez said she asked herself, ''Why should my son give his life to a country that doesn't value his parents?''
  Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama both championed comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to legalization for undocumented people. But the immigration packages that were debated in Congress -- in 2006, 2007 and 2013 -- all stalled.
  Among the concerns raised by opponents are that new citizens will vote as a solid Democratic bloc, displace American workers and become a burden on public services. Some predict that any legalization program would encourage more people to make the trek north.
  ''Legalizing countless millions of illegal aliens -- even discussing it -- rings the bell for millions more to illegally enter the U.S. to await their green card,'' said Lora Ries, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation.
  Others argue there are benefits to legalization. Opening a pathway to citizenship for nearly 11 million people, seven to eight million of whom participate in the labor force, is tantamount to ''an economic stimulus,'' according to Giovanni Peri, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis.
  Between 2005 and 2015, new immigrants accounted for nearly half of the growth in the working-age population, and in the next two decades, immigrants will be key to replacing retirees. Demographers say a shortage of blue-collar workers highlights the need for immigrants, in ever larger numbers, to perform low-skilled jobs. About five million of them work in jobs designated as ''essential'' by the government.
  Among the biggest backers of the Biden initiative are employers who rely on immigrants. Through the years, dairies, packing plants and other worksites have been caught up in immigration raids targeting unauthorized workers.
  The Reagan-era amnesty in 1986 caused only a temporary drop in the number of undocumented immigrants because it was not accompanied by a robust system for legally bringing in low-skilled workers. Employers faced fines for knowingly hiring undocumented immigrants but were not responsible for vetting documents presented by job applicants, spawning a huge industry of fake Social Security numbers.
  ''The principle is simple: If you carry out a broad legalization, it doesn't freeze undocumented migration flows as long as labor demand persists,'' said Wayne Cornelius, director emeritus of the Center for Comparative Immigration Studies at the University of California, San Diego.
  The illegal influx began to swell again in the early 1990s.
  Economic imperatives prevailed, driving illegal immigration up year after year. A building boom in Sun Belt states drew hundreds of thousands of undocumented construction workers. And as farm workers who had benefited from the amnesty aged and exited the fields, young undocumented labor arrived to replace them.
  From 1986 to 2008 the country's undocumented population swelled to 12 million from three million despite an exponential increase in funding for border security, including boots on the ground. The militarization did not reduce illegal entries. Instead, it turned a seasonal migration of mainly men who returned home each year to Mexico into a settled population of families.
  The 2007 recession ultimately reduced the flow of immigrants. Despite successive waves of Central American migration, illegal entries remain substantially lower than in the early 2000s.
  It has been about two decades since Ms. Hernandez stuffed a change of clothes in a bag, grabbed her three young children and slipped across the border.
  ''We didn't have papers, but I was determined to head north for a better life,'' she said. ''I had relatives who had benefited from a 1986 amnesty and I figured our day would come.''
  Ms. Hernandez got a job in Los Angeles packing CDs. Her husband, Pedro Hernandez, joined them shortly after and found work at a nursery. Their children, Luis, then 7, and Elitania and Juan, then 4-year-old twins, thrived in school. They lived modestly, in apartments where the children slept in the bedrooms and the couple in the living room.
  Their hopes were lifted, dashed and revived as Congress took up various immigration bills.
  ''Every president gave us hope that something good was coming, and then nothing. Again maybe. Then nothing,'' Ms. Hernandez recalled.
  ''We tried to do everything right, according to the law, in a country that had not opened its doors to us, but that we had entered anyway,'' she said.
  Things got more challenging when Mr. Hernandez lost his job in 2006. His employer, concerned about government audits, had asked him to prove he was in the country legally.
  When Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents began showing up in their neighborhood, the family avoided going out for days at a time. Mr. Hernandez rode his bike to a new job, figuring he would be less likely to encounter law enforcement than while driving his old Mazda. Ms. Hernandez signed up for adult English classes. As the children got older, she advised them to always be on their best behavior.
  ''I grew up hearing that you have to be an extra good citizen,'' said Luis Hernandez, her oldest child, now 28. ''Mom always said that: 'People who have papers can make mistakes, but you can't,''' he said.
  Because of their undocumented status, Luis, who played club soccer, and Juan, a varsity football player, skipped games that required travel.
  When Mr. Obama created a program known as DACA in 2012 to temporarily shield undocumented immigrants who had been brought into the country as children, Luis Hernandez and his siblings, then teenagers, applied immediately. It enabled them to work legally. They got their driver's licenses.
  But President Donald J. Trump's incendiary anti-immigrant rhetoric and his administration's attempt to rescind DACA generated deep anxiety in the Hernandez household. When Mr. Biden took office, the family rejoiced.
  After the inauguration, Ms. Hernandez was at her dining room table thinking about the imminent birth of her second grandchild, who will be an American citizen. She and her husband planned to drive to Utah to meet the baby, and she worried about making a trip across state lines without legal status, lest law enforcement stop them.
  When she learned that the president had unveiled a blueprint for legalization, she said, she was stunned at first. Then she went to retrieve the box of documents.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/27/us/biden-undocumented-immigrants-citizenship.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Maribel Ramirez and her sons, Eusebio and Jesus Gomez. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNA SCHOENEFELD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1)
A New York rally for immigration reform in November, after President Biden was elected. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Luis Alfonso Hernandez with his parents, Maria and Pedro, who are undocumented. Luis and his two siblings are DACA recipients, and the family rejoiced when President Biden took office.
 Maria Hernandez has stored documents, above, attesting to her family's U.S. residence for decades. Her husband, Pedro, left, rides a bicycle to work instead of driving his car to decrease his chances of running into the police. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JESSICA PONS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21)               

Load-Date: January 28, 2021


End of Document
TECHNOLOGY; Special Visa's Use forTech Workers Is Challenged
 The New York Times
May 30, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1389 words
Byline:  By KATIE HAFNER and DANIEL PREYSMAN  
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO, May 29  
Body


With the economy in a slump, a growing number of American technology workers say their jobs are going not only to lower-cost foreign workers abroad, but also increasingly to workers who enter the United States under a little-known visa category known as L-1. 
     In the nearly three years since the technology bubble burst, the use of L-1 visas to bring in workers -- with a large percentage from India -- has become a popular strategy among firms seeking to cut labor costs. The number of these temporary visas granted rose nearly 40 percent to 57,700 in 2002 from 41,739 in 1999. 
 The visas are intended to allow companies to transfer employees from a foreign branch or subsidiary to company offices in the United States. But they are now routinely used by companies based in India and elsewhere to bring their workers into the United States and then contract them out to American companies -- in many instances to be replacements for American workers. The number of Americans who have been replaced by foreign contract workers is unknown. American companies that use contract workers have said that the decision to do so is based on factors like skills, and not on cost alone. 
Some immigration experts are questioning the legality of this use of the visa. Officials at the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services, or B.C.I.S., a division of the Department of Homeland Security that oversees the granting of L-1 and other work visas, say the bureau is conducting an assessment of the L-1 visa to determine whether there is misuse. 
"If this is a company offering the services of their employee to go work for another company, it sounds dubious," said Bill Strassberger, a spokesman for B.C.I.S.
"To bring someone in ostensibly as an intracompany transfer and then put him to work for somebody else and then to say that we're paying him still, that just sounds like someone's trying to really stretch the envelope on that visa category," Mr. Strassberger said. 
The legal questions, however, remain murky. Steve Yale-Loehr, who teaches immigration law at Cornell, said that strictly speaking, what these companies are doing is legal, though perhaps not what Congress intended. However, Mr. Yale-Loehr added, "If Congress is upset about this, then Congress will act on it."
In response to the controversy, Rep. John L. Mica, a Republican from Florida, introduced a bill this month to prevent companies from hiring foreigners with L-1 visas.
"When you have people using this to bring in lower-cost labor to displace Americans, it's something we need to address," Mr. Mica said in a telephone interview.
During the boom years, the technology industries successfully lobbied Congress to expand the number of foreign software engineers who could be permitted to fill programming needs in the United States. In 2000, Congress increased the annual cap on more restrictive temporary visas -- known as H-1B visas -- for highly skilled foreign workers to 195,000 from 115,000. That quota will drop automatically to 65,000 on Oct. 1 unless Congress approves an extension, a move that is considered unlikely.
In the last two years, the trend in the use of H-1B visas has declined sharply. Many experts say the use of L-1 visas will grow. 
Unlike the H-1B visa, the L-1 does not require employers to pay workers prevailing wages. In addition, there is no cap on the number of L-1 visas. 
This has ignited an outcry among technology workers who have lost jobs and say that foreign contract workers are paid substantially less than prevailing wages in the industry. 
Over the last three years, William O'Neill has seen his small computer consulting firm in East Granby, Conn., dwindle from six contract workers to none. The work itself has not disappeared, said Mr. O'Neill, but his clients, most of them large insurance companies in Connecticut and western Massachusetts, are turning to foreign companies, some with workers who are in the United States on temporary visas. Satyam Computer Services, a consulting firm based in India, for example, now has a contract with the Cigna Corporation that has around 100 Satyam employees working on computer applications management in Cigna offices. 
And as others have claimed, Mr. O'Neill said that in many cases, existing technology employees are asked to train their replacements. The L-1 visa requires that the foreign workers possess specialized knowledge of the work to be done. 
Mr. O'Neill said that the people he knows who are currently training their replacements will not talk about their situation for fear of losing what is left of their jobs. "They're scared to death they're going to lose their jobs instantly versus six or eight or nine months down the road," he said.
Once the replacement workers are trained, Mr. O'Neill said, the foreign workers are often sent back to India to do programming and computer work there for the American companies. 
Wipro, InfoSys and Tata Consultancy Services, all of them based in India, are other companies that are using L-1 visas to get workers into the United States.
Girish Surendran, a human resources manager who oversees immigration issues at Tata, said his company "is committed in letter and spirit to all the requirements and regulations of all visa categories." He added: "If workers are replaced, it's not that T.C.S. comes in and employees get let go." Mr. Surendran said he could not comment on a company's reason for laying workers off. 
Wipro plans to lobby against Mr. Mica's bill. If it becomes law, said Sridhar Ramasubbu, investor relations manager at Wipro, the company will simply turn back to H1-B visas. "We will not be affected financially because our compensation is the same whether somebody comes in under an H-1 or an L-1," Mr. Ramasubbu said. 
But trade groups representing American workers say the foreign workers are paid considerably less. "I have friends that were told in the last three months that they must take a $30,000 pay cut to keep their job," said John Bauman, president of the Organization for the Rights of American Workers, a nonprofit group based in Meriden, Conn.
Gary Burns, the legislative director for Mr. Mica, said there were about 325,000 L-1 visa holders in the United States. Those who stay in this country can remain for up to five or seven years, depending on the category of L-1 they hold. 
Some experts say that the use of L-1 visas for contract workers is not widespread and that fears of losing jobs to foreign workers are exaggerated. 
"Even if this brouhaha is about a real problem, I think when you look at the number of workers involved, it is a totally insignificant drop in a massive labor market," said Daryl Buffenstein, a immigration lawyer in Atlanta who has corporate clients and is general counsel for the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
Mr. Buffenstein said that those who oppose the L-1 visa do not understand how important it is for American industry. "It will hurt employment in the United States if we impede the ability of legitimate users to transfer managers and specialists between different affiliates of international organizations," said Mr. Buffenstein, a lawyer who advised legislators on the law governing L-1 visas.
Mr. Buffenstein said he was also worried that public overreaction would result in measures like the Mica bill, which he contended would go too far in restricting international companies from using L-1 visa holders to do on-site client work. 
Controversy over the visa, which has been in existence for 33 years, is not entirely new. Three years ago, the General Accounting Office reported that the the Immigration and Naturalization Services, the precursor to B.C.I.S., had found a high incidence of fraudulent use of L-1 visas and had called abuse of the visas "the new wave in alien smuggling."
But protest over the use of temporary foreign workers has become more vocal in a rocky economy. One 57-year-old computer consultant in Avon, Conn., who has been out of work for five months said, "This isn't just an I.T. issue," referring to the information technology industry.
"It's a big issue with multiple professions, and has a serious effect on the economy," said the consultant, who asked that his name not be used for fear of jeopardizing his chances to find work. "A lot of this is about the economy and the L-1 issue is just exacerbating the problem."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: A flier from the Organization for the Rights of American Workers, which wants to restrict visas that allow companies to transfer workers to the United States. (Richard L. Harbus for The New York Times)(pg. C1); John Bauman, president of The Organization for the Rights of American Workers, which opposes a visa loophole for foreign technology workers. (Richard L. Harbus for The New York Times)(pg. C5) Chart: "Alternative Labor"The economic slowdown has reduced the use of H-1B temporary visas, a favorite of the technology industry. But demand for the lesser-known, less restrictive L-1 visa is growing. Graph tracks visas issued, fiscal years ended September, from 1995 through first six months of 2002 and 2003. (Source: State Department, Consular Affairs Bureau)(pg. C1)      

Load-Date: May 30, 2003


End of Document
Your Thursday Briefing
The New York Times 
April 22, 2020 Wednesday 18:26 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1675 words
Byline: Carole Landry
Highlight: Let us help you start your day. 
Body


Good morning.
We’re covering global instability from plummeting oil prices, anger in the Indian diaspora about U.S. immigration and a looming hunger crisis.
Collapsing oil prices are upending the world
The collapse in oil prices brought on by the coronavirus pandemic spells disaster for countries like Nigeria and Venezuela that rely on oil production for their economic survival.
“No one imagined a crisis of this scope. This was in no scenario,” one global energy expert said.
Our reporters looked at the destabilizing effects of the oil-coronavirus shock in countries around the world.
Here are the latest updates on the pandemic as well as updated maps.
    • Oil prices, which had been sinking since lockdown orders sharply cut demand in late February, reversed some of the tremendous losses of recent days, leading U.S. and European stocks to rally.
    • Eight infants and toddlers at a care center in Tokyo tested positive for the coronavirus, raising concerns about a wider outbreak at Japanese care facilities for neglected or abused children.
    • Taiwan is competing with Chinaon pandemic aid diplomacy, promoting itself as a model of democracy, in defiance of Beijing’s efforts to isolate the self-ruled island that it claims as its own.
    • British lawmakers carried out their normally boisterous question-and-answer session in the House of Commons by video link. Just a few dozen lawmakers sat in the chamber, to comply with social distancing rules.
    • The first death from the virus in the U.S. was earlier than previously thought. A medical examiner in Santa Clara County, California, said two residents there died of the coronavirus in early and mid-February, weeks earlier than was previously known. (See our Back Story below.)
The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.
U.S. immigration restrictions unsettle the Indian diaspora
A majority of the 800,000 immigrants currently wait-listed for a green card to live or work in the U.S. are Indian nationals, and many of them fill specialized roles in the tech sector for companies like Google and Apple.
So after President Trump announced a suspension of issuing green cards, members of the Indian community expressed fears over their futures.
“I likely won’t receive a green card in this lifetime unless the laws change,” said an electrical engineer who applied for a green card in 2011.
The potential for family separation is another concern: “I am afraid of losing everything,” said an Indian software developer in Atlanta, whose daughters are naturalized American citizens. “This is not really about a job. It is about dreams.”
Mr. Trump has suggested that further immigration restrictions are not out of the question, though they would be unlikely to immediately impact other popular visa programs like H-1B.
Rationale: Mr. Trump, who has taken a number of measures against immigration through his presidency, says that his latest moves are meant to protect jobs for Americans put out of work by the pandemic.
Chinese trolls are pushing disinformation, U.S. says
Alarming messages that popped up last month on the cellphones and social media feeds of millions of Americans warned that the Trump administration was about to lock down the entire country.
U.S. intelligence agencies have determined that the warnings were amplified by Chinese operatives.
American officials said the operatives had adopted some of the techniques mastered by Russia-backed trolls, like creating fake social media accounts to push false messages to receptive Americans, who in turn unwittingly help spread them.
Related: China’s state propaganda machine has highlighted other countries’ mistakes during the pandemic while suppressing domestic problems, fueling anger toward foreigners and domestic critics alike, our columnist writes.
If you have 7 minutes, this is worth it
‘Instead of coronavirus, hunger will kill us’
Lockdowns are drying up work and incomes, leaving millions to worry about getting enough to eat. The World Food Program estimates that 265 million people could be pushed to the brink of starvation by year’s end — 130 million more than expected before the pandemic.
Our reporters spoke to people worldwide who are alarmed: a migrant worker in Delhi, a construction worker displaced from his home in Syria, an aid worker in a Nairobi shantytown.
Here’s what else is happening
U.S.-Iran tensions: President Trump told the Navy to “shoot down” and destroy any Iranian gunboats that harass U.S. naval ships. The threat came a week after the Pentagon accused Iranian boats of “dangerous” approaches to U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf.
Iranian satellite: Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps said it put a military satellite into orbit for the first time, a surprise launch that came during wider tensions with the U.S. The launch has not been independently confirmed.
Indian tech: Facebook made its largest single investment by putting $5.7 billion into Jio Platforms of India, a subsidiary of Reliance Industries. Facebook intends to bring together its WhatsApp service and JioMart, Jio’s small-business initiative.
U.S. presidential campaign: Polls show that Joe Biden leads Donald Trump by just under six percentage points among registered voters, but they also indicate that Mr. Biden, the former vice president, has gained appeal among older voters while support for President Trump has grown among nonwhite voters.
Snapshot: Above, two nuns label food products for sale at thePhoka Nunnery of St. Nino in the country of Georgia. The photojournalist Robert Presutti has visited the nunnery, which is housed in a restored 11th-century church, several times over the years. His report is the latest in our travel series “The World Through a Lens.”
What we’re reading: Outside’s deep dive on the eruption of the volcano on White Island in New Zealand. Elisabeth Goodridge, our deputy travel editor, calls it “a well-written, thoroughly reported and very, very gripping read, which shines a light on the risks of adventure tourism and the question of who’s responsible when disaster strikes.”
Now, a break from the news
Cook: Meatballs work with almost any meat, including vegan substitutes. And once you master the basics, you can change the seasonings for lots of variety.
Explore: The Lyrid meteor shower will reward anyone with a clear view of the night sky. We have art to discover and Merce Cunningham choreography to learn. And check in on these graphic designers and illustrators to see what they’ve been up to.
Cope: Here’s how to be a good roommate at this juncture in history, as well as how to get your garden going. And wouldn’t you like your kids to treat you the way they treated their teacher, in the days before home schooling?
Need a little inspiration? We have many more ideas on things to cook, watch, read and do on our At Home page.
And now for the Back Story on …
A new U.S. timeline for the coronavirus
News that a person who died in Santa Clara County, California, on Feb. 6 had the coronavirus has raised questions about the timeline of the U.S. outbreak, which is by far the world’s largest. To get a scientific view of the implications, we spoke to Carl Zimmer, a science reporter, Times columnist and the author of the book “A Planet of Viruses.”
What do we know about the timing of the virus’s arrival in the U.S.?
The virus itself jumped from bats into humans in Asia, most likely China. Then there’s the outbreak in Wuhan, picking up speed in December. Then it’s in Europe, probably in early January.
Studies of samples of virus from New York showed that the vast majority belonged to lineages introduced from Europe, and probably arrived early to mid-February. You can see this from minor but telltale mutations in their genes that act like a signature. What the New York viruses are most similar to is not the viruses in Italy, but viruses in England, in France, in Belgium. It looks like a lot of viruses were moving around in Europe, and some were brought to the United States.
The evidence from California indicates it was arriving there by early or mid-January.
Could the virus have been circulating in California even earlier?
Scientists don’t believe Covid was raging in California in November. Looking at virus genes, they can see it was just getting started around then in Wuhan. They don’t see the kind of hospitalizations in California you’d see if it was taking off. We know what it’s like when Covid-19 takes off, and it was not happening in November.
What are you looking for next?
In the autopsy for the Feb. 6 case, all they needed to find to confirm that this person had Covid-19 was some fragments of the virus’s genes.
If you really want to know more, you need the whole genome — all the genetic material in the virus. Then, looking at the mutations, you can see where the virus came from and you can start getting some guesses about how it got there.
But we’re dealing here with a deceased person. The virus in their remains is breaking down.
Still, it’s possible that scientists may be able to extract enough virus to put the genome back together. I’m hoping for that.
That’s it for this briefing. See you next time.
— Carole
Thank you
To Melissa Clark for the recipe, and to Theodore Kim and Jahaan Singh for the rest of the break from the news. Andrea Kannapell, the Briefings editor, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.
P.S.
 We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about protests in the U.S. against stay-at-home orders.
 Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Varieties (five letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
 The Times print edition was named World’s Best Designed Newspaper for the third straight year by the Society for News Design, and our Photo and Video teams won six World Press Photo awards.
PHOTO: A worker wearing a mask following an outbreak in March at an oil field north of Basra, Iraq. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Essam Al-Sudani/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
A New Source of Worry For All Those Seeking Better Lives and Work
The New York Times
April 22, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 26
Length: 1499 words
Byline: By Caitlin Dickerson and Miriam Jordan
Body


President Trump's move to suspend some green cards could make it harder for many immigrants to reunite with loved ones or work in the United States.
Families that have waited years to be reunited, businesses that rely on foreign workers, universities that recruit international students with the promise of high-paying American jobs -- all of their plans faced new uncertainty on Tuesday as the Trump administration announced new temporary restrictions on permanent residency in the United States. 
  President Trump signaled that a 60-day ban on most green cards, which could be imposed as early as Wednesday, was intended to protect work opportunities for the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs in the coronavirus pandemic. But, if it is extended, its impact on businesses and families could be much broader.
  The new policy would close the doors to thousands of people hoping to enter the United States or lay down permanent roots in the country through long-term work or family connections -- at least temporarily.
  ''It's really worrying news,'' said Elsa Ramos, whose 22-year-old son, Eder, is in Honduras, waiting for a green card that would allow him to join his parents and sister in the United States. They are among many families and employers who have spent thousands of dollars on years of legal work and are now on hold.
  ''Imagine the excitement that you have that your son is on his way into the country and then Trump destroys that. It's really hard,'' Ms. Ramos said.
  Mr. Ramos applied for residency through his father, a legal permanent resident who lives in Philadelphia. His application had already been mired in months of unexpected delays because of the extra reviews applied to green card applications since Mr. Trump took office.
  Living alone in the small house the family left behind, which is in a dangerous neighborhood, her son is vulnerable to exploitation by gangs because of his connections to the United States, Ms. Ramos said. But because his father is not a United States citizen, he would most likely be ineligible to enter the country under the planned new order.
  ''He's desperate and sad. He told me, 'I never thought I would be stuck here for so long,''' Ms. Ramos said.
  Newly tightened policies have already imposed drastic limits on immigration in recent months, all but ending prospects of asylum for most people fleeing troubled situations in their home countries, and imposing higher fees, added scrutiny and longer wait times onto those pursuing visas.
  The announcement that, amid a pandemic, Mr. Trump planned to impose a temporary block on most permanent residency applications opened the door to a situation with few parallels, in which almost no level of family connection, education or resources guarantees the right to immigrate to the United States -- though it was not clear for how long.
  Administration officials said the pause would be re-evaluated after 60 days, and Mr. Trump said he could extend the ban ''based on economic conditions at the time.''
  Of the roughly one million green cards that were issued in 2019, nearly two-thirds of applicants, like Mr. Ramos, were granted on family-based petitions for permanent residency in the United States. The spouses and children of American citizens would still be eligible for green cards under the new policy, but their parents would not, nor would the family members of current legal permanent residents who do not hold citizenship.
  About 50,000 permanent resident slots a year, issued in a lottery aimed at diversifying the immigrant population, would also be blocked under the new policy.
  A smaller, yet economically important group of immigrants who also could be severely affected are those who apply for green cards through employers. The science, technology and engineering industries rely heavily on those petitions.
  Such employers would still be able to hire foreign workers on a temporary basis, for instance through H1-B visas, but the ability to offer permanent resident status is often seen as crucial to recruiting highly sought-after workers with specialized skills who demand stability for themselves and their families.
  Brad Smith, the president of Microsoft, a major employer of foreign workers, spoke out on Twitter on Tuesday, saying immigrants were ''vital to our company & the nation's economy'' and an important source of workers in health care, research, information technology, infrastructure and food supply.
  Because the new restrictions would not curtail guest worker programs that bring high-tech employees in on temporary visas, it is unlikely that the new policy would open up many of those jobs to Americans, who often command higher salaries than immigrants.
  ''If the order only applies to foreign workers coming in on green cards, then it is words with no teeth because the foreigners competing with most Americans are on H-1Bs and other nonimmigrant visas,'' said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer who represents displaced tech workers.
  She added, ''If this temporary moratorium does not include those visas, then I am without understanding of its purpose.''
  About 140,000 employment-based green cards were granted in 2018, often to people who were educated in the United States or who first arrived on temporary work visas. Even if the new policy allows workers to continue renewing their temporary status, as it appeared it would, the announcement caused widespread concern among foreign professionals who have long sought the stability of being able to settle in the United States.
  Among them are Twinkle Anand Pullat, a dentist, and Sushita Surendran, a pediatric cardiologist. The couple work in Olive Branch, Miss., where they have built a life, bought a home and had a son, Vivaan, 3.
  The uncertainty ''has thrown all our plans asunder and we are extremely anxious about our future,'' said Dr. Pullat, adding, ''We want to be focusing on our patients instead of visa status.''
  Groups advocating restrictions on immigration, which have long argued that importing foreign workers diminishes the earning potential of Americans, celebrated the planned new limits and expressed hope that they would become permanent.
  ''There's nothing more useful for improving the opportunities of working Americans than an acute labor shortage,'' said Dan Stein, president of the Federation for American Immigration Reform.
  But Mr. Stein expressed concern that, much like many of the president's previous attempts to curtail immigration, the latest policy could be blocked by the courts.
  ''Hopefully the president will draft a rationale which is tight enough to satisfy even the most intrusive activist judges,'' Mr. Stein said.
  After Mr. Trump's surprise announcement of the coming new policy on Twitter on Monday night, a variety of immigration lawyers said, clients began contacting them with questions for which answers at the time did not exist.
  For Sandra Feist, who practices immigration law in Minneapolis, said the emails began to pour in seconds after the president's tweet. ''It's an absolute barrage of email from people who saw this tweet, with no details, and assumed it was going to be devastating for their case,'' she said.
  She said she heard from a South Korean energy analyst, an Iranian engineer, a Brazilian scientist and a French researcher -- all in the process of securing employment-based green cards. A Minneapolis church contacted Ms. Feist to ask whether a Colombian pastor whom the congregation was expecting would still be able to come on a religious worker visa.
  But it became apparent after the policy was clarified Tuesday evening that many of the worries clients expressed to their lawyers may have been unwarranted, given that the ban would last for 60 days and many people would be exempt from it.
  For green card applicants of all kinds, navigating the legal immigration system has become significantly more arduous under Mr. Trump: All are now required to attend in-person interviews at government offices before being approved, and many more than under previous administrations are asked to provide additional evidence of their work, health histories and education, which can cause months of delays.
  Even before the ban, the added hurdles had already affected immigration to the United States. Green cards that were issued to new arrivals in the country, as opposed to people who were already living in the United States, declined by 13 percent from 2018 to 2019.
  Some of those who have been waiting years to settle in the United States said both the substance of the ban and the way that it was announced made them wonder whether they should keep pursuing a process that seems to keep getting longer all the time.
  ''The combination of restrictions we have put in place since January of 2020 have effectively barred a large section of immigrants from entering the United States already,'' said Muzaffar A. Chishti, a senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute. ''This is just one more.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/21/us/trump-immigration-ban-covid.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A Nicaraguan family waited at the port of entry in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, this month to change their asylum court dates, an already trying process that will virtually shutter under President Trump's plan to suspend immigration for at least 60 days. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PAUL RATJE/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES
 JASON REDMOND/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)               

Load-Date: April 22, 2020


End of Document
The Enduring Importance of the 1965 Immigration Act; Jay Caspian Kang
The New York Times 
October 7, 2021 Thursday 05:04 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 2417 words
Byline: Jay Caspian Kang
Highlight: How Asians arrived in America.
Body


What follows is an excerpt from my book “The Loneliest Americans,” which will be published on Oct. 12. (I also published an excerpt this week in the Times magazine.) The book is a meditation on the 1965 Immigration Act, which I argue is the starting point of the multiethnic society we live in today.
***
On Oct. 3, 1965, President Lyndon Johnson stood in front of the Statue of Liberty and said something that would be proved wrong: “This bill that we sign today is not a revolutionary bill. It does not affect the lives of millions. It will not reshape the structure of our daily lives.” He was referring to the Hart-Celler Immigration Act, a landmark piece of legislation that lifted restrictive quotas on immigration from Asia, Africa and southern and Eastern Europe.
Its opponents at the time it was finally passed described apocalyptic scenarios in which the United States and its white population would be overrun by a horde of foreigners. Johnson, for his part, assured the public that the easing of restrictions would have only a mild effect on the demographics of the country. Most people, he believed, would stay in their home countries.
Over the next five decades, the Hart-Celler Act would bring tens of millions of immigrants from Asia, southern and Eastern Europe, and Africa. No single piece of legislation has shaped the demographic and economic history of this country in quite the same way.
Before Hart-Celler, immigration into the United States operated under the National Origins Act, a seemingly simple system that doled out up to 150,000 visas a year, distributed among different quotas for each nationality, calculated according to the 1920 census. The more people of your kind you had in the United States, the more people could immigrate from your country of origin. As a result, countries like Ireland, Germany and England would receive far more visas than those in Eastern Europe, Asia or Africa. (African Americans and African immigrants were excluded from the calculation of quotas. While white Americans were classified by nation of origin, all Black Americans were classified by race, and as a result African countries were held to the minimum number of slots.)
This quota system did not extend to the “Orient.” The official practice of excluding Asians from the United States’ immigration policies had begun in 1875 with the Page Act, which barred Chinese women from entering the country to limit the ability of Chinese workers to start families. Just seven years later, the Chinese Exclusion Act was passed, ending all immigration from China and preventing any Chinese people living in America from ever attaining citizenship.
The law was largely a response to the labor market in California. A majority of Chinese people who had immigrated to the United States were young men. During the Gold Rush and railroad eras, these men served as cheap labor and were generally kept apart from mainstream society.
But as an increasing number of manufacturers and agricultural barons began replacing their work force with the Chinese, a nativist backlash quickly ensued, depicting the Chinese as subhuman carriers of smallpox and cholera. In 1881, George Frederick Keller, an influential cartoonist, drew what would become the defining image of the exclusion fight. A cartoon titled “A Statue for Our Harbor” reimagined the Statue of Liberty as a Chinese man dressed in rags, his right foot stepping on a skull. Around his head, in radiating points of light, are the words “ruin to white labor,” “diseases,” “immorality” and “filth.”
These indignities carried on into the early 20th century. Young Japanese workers, for example, were still permitted to enter the United States after the Chinese Exclusion Act and split their time among railroad work, mining, logging and small farming ventures. They, too, would soon feel the racialized effects of competition in America’s labor market.
After the San Francisco earthquake in 1906, nativist mobs openly attacked Japanese immigrants in the streets and called for boycotts of their businesses. This rash of xenophobic violence spilled over into local politics. Japanese students, who had been free to attend San Francisco’s public schools, were expelled and forced to enroll in the already segregated Chinese schools. This move, which caused a furor back in Japan, created a diplomatic headache for President Theodore Roosevelt, who had recently been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for successfully negotiating the end of the Russo-Japanese War.
In the end, Roosevelt could not smooth over America’s relationship with Tokyo, in part because of a man named Takao Ozawa, a Japanese immigrant who had settled in San Francisco, studied at the University of California and ultimately relocated to Hawaii after the earthquake. Ozawa was the first foreign-born Asian person to apply for U.S. citizenship, in 1915. The fight went all the way to the Supreme Court, which concluded that while Ozawa was more than fit to become an American, the rights of citizenship could be extended only to white people.
This decision, which came down in 1922, set off a fight in Congress between lawmakers who saw an opening to create a fully racialized immigration system — one that kept out not only the Japanese, Chinese and Koreans but Jews as well — and a group of lawmakers, who, along with President Calvin Coolidge, believed new restrictions on immigration would destroy any hope of diplomatic relations with Japan.
Coolidge and his allies lost. The Johnson-Reed Immigration Act of 1924 defined an “immigrant” as someone who also had the right to eventual citizenship. And because people from the “Orient” were not white and, therefore, could not become citizens, the law effectively ended all Asian immigration to the United States.
Immigration law usually moves in lock step with a country’s foreign policy goals. The day after the bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941, the United States and China both declared war on Japan, which prompted a two-year diplomatic effort to classify China as a long-term ally of the United States. In response, Japan began a propaganda campaign that recast the war as a fight against Anglo-Saxon imperialism in the “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.”
In dozens of pamphlets, articles and radio programs broadcast throughout Asia, Japanese propagandists derided any Asians who believed Americans would treat them as citizens with the same rights as white immigrants. They also set forth a vision of a unified East Asian continent that could usher in an era of unparalleled harmony and economic might. Much of the critique centered on a simple, compelling question: How could the Chinese ally themselves with a country whose racist immigration laws specifically targeted their people?
The provocation worked, although not exactly in the way the Japanese might have envisioned. Between 1941 and 1943, scholars, politicians and members of the media in the United States argued for an end to the Chinese Exclusion Act. The author Pearl Buck, whose Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, “The Good Earth,” drew upon her childhood in China as the daughter of Presbyterian missionaries, became a tireless advocate of the end of racist laws against the Chinese.
At a lunch gathering at the Hotel Astor in 1942, Buck noted that Japanese propaganda was starting to show signs of success and concluded that the United States could not win the war unless it convinced its Asian allies that they would be seen as equals in the eyes of American law. Later, Buck would write that as long as the United States continued to discriminate against Chinese people, “we are fighting on the wrong side in this war. We belong with Hitler.”
In May 1943, Buck, her husband and a group of intellectuals and publishers formed the Citizens Committee to Repeal Chinese Exclusion and Place Immigration on a Quota Basis. They used their influence in the media to blast out their message. That same month, the House Committee on Immigration and Naturalization held public hearings on the possible repeal of the act. The opposition came mostly from labor organizations, veterans’ groups and “patriotic societies,” who dredged up much of the original logic for Chinese exclusion: an Asian influx would bring a wave of morally depraved men who would quickly displace native workers.
But the Citizens Committee had some powerful allies: Top military officials argued that China’s allegiance was crucial not only to winning in the Pacific theater but also to stabilizing the region after the fighting ended. And in October, as the Exclusion Act was being debated in Congress, President Franklin Roosevelt came out in favor of repeal. In an address, he said: “Nations, like individuals, make mistakes. We must be big enough to acknowledge our mistakes of the past and to correct them. By the repeal of the Chinese exclusion laws, we can correct a historic mistake and silence the distorted Japanese propaganda.” Just over two years after the Pearl Harbor attack, the law was repealed with the passage of the Magnuson Act, which allowed for some immigration from China.
Buck and her allies had put forth a vision of strength through pluralism — a nation whose diplomatic and economic ties to Asia could be deepened by liberal immigration laws that proved the United States did indeed consider the Chinese to be potential contributors to American society as opposed to inscrutable outsiders. In 1942, a poll commissioned by the Office of War Information found that over 80 percent of Americans considered China to be a strong ally of the United States.
The reality of the Magnuson Act, however, did not match the worldly rhetoric. Roosevelt, who just two years before had authorized the internment of Japanese Americans, brokered a compromise that allowed for only a small increase in the number of Chinese immigrants per year.
Future immigration bills would continue to restrict immigrants from Asia, though some concessions were made. In 1952, Patrick McCarran, a Democratic senator from Nevada, and Francis Walter, a Democratic representative from Pennsylvania, pushed through a complex, endlessly negotiated immigration law that both amplified the rhetoric of fear around Asian and Jewish immigrants and also, counterintuitively, lifted the ban on Asian naturalization, meaning Asian immigrants could now become full citizens. All “Oriental” countries were given a quota of visas, though they were minuscule: 100 to 185 per year.
But these allowances came with a caveat: Tight restrictions were placed on who, exactly, could come to the United States. Educated, oftentimes wealthy professionals with families were given preference over poor laborers. And while some new pathways for immigrants had been laid out, the bill also contained an “Asian-Pacific Triangle” provision that capped the number of total Asian immigrants at 2,000 per year.
The classification of “Asian-Pacific” was purely racial: A second-generation Chinese immigrant from, say, Argentina would not be able to apply for a visa as an Argentine. Because of his racial origin, he would always be Chinese, whereas the British-born child of Italian immigrants could come to the United States under the British quota. The McCarran-Walter Act also curtailed Jewish immigration. In both instances, the justification came out of the budding Cold War and the belief that Asians and Jews would propagate communism within U.S. borders.
The bill was intensely debated between nativists and more liberal immigration advocates in Congress. Senator McCarran argued, “The cold, hard truth is that in the United States today there are hard-core, indigestible blocs who have not become integrated into the American way of life, but who, on the contrary, are its deadly enemy.”
President Harry Truman ultimately vetoed it, only to be overridden.
In the past, pro-immigration politicians had been reluctant to commit to a full-throated defense of their principles for the very simple reason that nativism had always been popular. But in the debates over McCarran-Walter, a handful of lawmakers led by Representative Emanuel Celler of New York began to advance the idea that the restrictions on Asian immigration were racist and immoral. In a speech, Senator William Benton of Connecticut argued that the “great investment of our boys’ blood” in the Korean War had been undercut by this sort of shallow and ultimately meaningless immigration reform. “We can totally destroy that investment, and can ruthlessly and stupidly destroy faith and respect in our great principles, by enacting laws that, in effect, say to the peoples of the world: ‘We love you, but we love you from afar. We want you, but for God’s sake, stay where you are.’”
Those rebuttals, along with pressure to make the country’s immigration laws reflect the logic of the civil rights movement, would lay the groundwork for the eventual passage of the Hart-Celler 1965 Immigration Act. In 1960, white immigrants from Europe and Canada made up roughly 84 percent of the immigrant population in the United States. East and South Asians, by contrast, were around 4 percent. Between 1980 and 1990, a majority of the millions of immigrants to the United States came from Latin America or Asia.
Many of these workers brought over their relatives through the family reunification statute in the Hart-Celler Act. A Pew Research Center report found that in 2011, 62 percent of immigrants from the six largest “source countries” (China, India, the Philippines, Korea, Vietnam and Japan) received their green cards through family sponsorships. You may have come to the United States from Korea to study engineering, received your H-1B visa and fallen right into the track of assimilation into the middle class, but your brother and sister might come over with a very different set of abilities, ambitions and visions for their life in this country.
As it turns out, the nativists were right about the coming hordes. The immigrants from Asia arrived in a series of waves throughout the 1970s, ’80s and ’90s. They included my parents, my grandparents, my mother’s five siblings, two of my cousins and me. And although their new country did have pockets of people who looked like them, they shared almost nothing in common with their fellow “Asian Americans” except some well-worn threads of culture, whether food or holiday rituals, and the assumptions of white people.
Have feedback? Send a note to kang-newsletter@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Alberto Miranda FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 13, 2021


End of Document
Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1265 words
Byline: GLENN THRUSH, NICK WINGFIELD and VINDU GOEL
Highlight: The president said the executive order was a way to end the “theft of American prosperity,” which he said had been brought on by low-wage immigrant labor.
Body


KENOSHA, Wis. — President Trump, hammering his “America First” campaign theme, signed an order on Tuesday that he said would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the visa program for foreign technical workers.
After recent policy reversals that have angered his populist base, Mr. Trump described the visa program as an initiative gone awry that has driven down wages for Americans. The order was a means to end the “theft of American prosperity,” which he said had been brought on by low-wage immigrant labor.
Yet the order calls for a series of relatively modest steps, like a multiagency report on changes needed for the H-1B program, under which the government admits 85,000 foreign workers annually, many of them in the high-tech, industrial, medical and science fields. Collectively, the efforts outlined in the order could take years to carry out.
The H1-B program has become a focus in the debate over the impact of foreign workers. Mr. Trump has criticized employers for abusing the program and using it to avoid hiring higher-paid American counterparts. He vowed to revamp its lottery-based selection process.
The order, signed at the sprawling Snap-on tool factory here, represents a small win for bigger tech companies, which have been in pitched battles for those visas. Companies like Google and Microsoft, which rely heavily on high-skilled foreign workers, had worried that President Trump would make drastic curbs to worker programs that could cripple them.
“I think people are cautiously optimistic that this will be O.K., and maybe even better,” said Tom Alberg, a venture capitalist at Madrona Venture Group, a Seattle firm that invests in high-tech start-ups.
But the order would likely hurt the biggest users of the visa program, technology outsourcing firms that bring foreign workers to the United States to perform technical jobs, typically from India.
On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump stoked outrage from his supporters with accounts of companies like Walt Disney forcing laid-off technical workers to train their overseas replacements.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump spoke in terms of an apple-pie populism that helped him pull off upset victories in November in Midwestern states like Wisconsin.
H-1B visas “should include only the most skilled and highest-paid applicants and should never, ever be used to replace American workers,” Mr. Trump told a gathering of about 500 workers and local luminaries, including the White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus, who hails from Kenosha.
On this point, many executives at American technology companies agree with Mr. Trump. They argue that they mostly apply for H-1Bs for workers when they can’t find qualified American workers, usually those with advanced degrees like a masters or Ph.D.
In recent years, there has been so much demand for H-1B visas that the whole fiscal year’s allocation has run out in a few days in April, when applications are accepted. The visas are then awarded by lottery to qualified applicants. Some 600,000 to 900,000 immigrants are currently in the United States on H-1B visas, researchers estimate.
Outsourcing firms — the top 13 of which accounted for a third of all granted visas in 2014, the last year for which information is publicly available — typically flood the system with visa applications. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all from India.
India’s leading tech trade group, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, said Indian companies were being treated unfairly. “We believe that the current campaign to discredit our sector is driven by persistent myths, such as the ideas that H-1B visa holders are ‘cheap labor’ and ‘train their replacements,’ neither of which is accurate,” the group said in a statement.
Companies like Microsoft, Intel and Amazon are also big recipients. At least 15 percent of the American workforces of Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm hold H-1Bs, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department.
The announcement came at a jittery time for the White House, as Mr. Trump faces the 100th day of his presidency without much to show for it in the way of legislative accomplishment, after the defeat of his health care overhaul. And his two high-profile executive orders cracking down on immigration from predominantly Muslim nations have been stymied by the courts.
“This does nothing,” said Senator Charles Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader. “Like all the other executive orders, it’s just words — he’s calling for new studies. It’s not going to fix the problem. It’s not going to create a single job.”
Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat whose district includes Silicon Valley, said the issue of foreign workers was real, but dismissed the president’s order as poorly targeted and unlikely to achieve its desired result.
“Half of the start-ups in Silicon Valley were created by highly skilled people from other countries,” she said. “I don’t think the president and his staff fully appreciates that fact.”
In a briefing with reporters on Monday, White House officials said the “Buy American and Hire American” order would also overhaul federal procurement practices to increase the selection of products from American companies, especially in the domestic steel industry, which has faced stiff competition from China.
One reform advocated by the Trump administration, which has drawn bipartisan support from Congress, would change the lottery system for awarding H-1B visas, giving extra preference to the highest-paying jobs — a proposal favored by many in the American technology industry.
Representatives from Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Google either declined to comment or didn’t respond to requests for comment.
Blake Irving, the chief executive of domain name and web hosting firm GoDaddy, said he supported the idea of changing the system for issuing H-1Bs to give priority to higher-skilled workers. He said GoDaddy typically receives only about 20 percent of the H-1B visas it applies for.
“If anything, it moves the policy towards something that’s preferential to the expert work force,” said Mr. Irving. “Anything that gets us closer to that is goodness.”
But some smaller technology companies said they were concerned about the changes proposed by the Trump administration.
Punit Soni, the chief executive of Learning Motors, a six-person company in Silicon Valley that is trying to apply artificial intelligence to health care, said the visa changes proposed by the Trump administration would hurt start-ups.
Small companies cannot afford to pay high salaries and are already struggling to attract talent in a tight market, he said. A visa system that favors the highest-paid workers will steer immigrants only to already successful big companies like Google, his former employer.
“We’re a small start-up. Everyone is getting way below-market average salary,” he said.
Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook,            Twitter and in            the Morning Briefing newsletter.
Glen Thrush reported from Kenosha, Nick Wingfield from Seattle and Vindu Goel from San Francisco. Miriam Jordan contributed reporting from Los Angeles.
PHOTO: Facebook is heavily dependent on H-1B visas. Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)
Related Articles
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Planned Trump Order Will Discourage Hiring of Low-Wage Foreign Workers

Load-Date: April 20, 2017


End of Document
Immigration Declines and Some Regions Sputter
The New York Times
August 11, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1750 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan and Terra Fondriest
Body


BENTONVILLE, Ark. -- Northwest Arkansas, where the Ozark Mountains rise, used to be a sleepy corner of the state, its only claim to fame that Sam Walton opened a five-and-dime in Bentonville and the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers -- outposts that became the seeds of a global retail empire. The founders of Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt got their start in the same region, and a network of software companies moved in later to meet big business's insatiable appetite for new technology.
But there were not enough locals to build the burgeoning economy. Answering the call to work in poultry production, trucking, construction and computer programming were legions of immigrants from El Salvador, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, India and elsewhere. 
  With tens of thousands of immigrants helping to catalyze its development, Northwest Arkansas has emerged as one of the country's fastest-growing metropolitan areas. Brimming with optimism, it is wooing newcomers with cheaper housing, a world-class art museum, upscale restaurants and forested bike trails.
  But as much of the U.S. economy comes back from the coronavirus pandemic, the decades-long influx of immigrants that fueled such enormous expansion in places like Arkansas has begun to stall, posing challenges to the region and the country at large.
  The United States over the past 10 years experienced the slowest population growth rate in eight decades, according to the 2020 census, because of plunging fertility rates and shrinking immigration.
  The surge of unauthorized migrants from Mexico and Central America is testing the Biden administration, but images are deceptive: A vast majority of the single adults crossing the border to find work are quickly deported. And the flow of legal immigrants, whom Northwest Arkansas companies also heavily rely on, has fallen precipitously since the Trump administration clamped down on all kinds of immigration with the belief that it was displacing American workers.
  Now, business leaders are hoping that President Biden will make good on his pledge to overhaul the immigration system and establish a legal pipeline for foreign workers to take jobs in Northwest Arkansas and other places that depend on them.
  The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has called on Congress and the White House to double the number of visas for high-skilled temporary workers under the H-1B program and also for seasonal workers in sectors like agriculture and meat production, another economic mainstay in this part of the country.
  Lifting the ceiling on H-1B visas has been contentious, with some labor groups arguing that foreign workers imported from places like India and China displace Americans and drive down wages.
  So far, Mr. Biden has concentrated on the surge of unauthorized immigrants at the southwestern border, and has not advanced measures to bring large numbers of new workers into the country.
  ''In addition to securing the border, we should be focusing on how to secure avenues for more legal immigration,'' said Neil Bradley, chief policy officer for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. ''For a whole host of communities all across the United States, immigration will determine whether the local economy will continue to grow for those moving there and the residents who have called that place home for decades.''
  The decline in immigration is an important factor in the long-term decline in population growth that demographers are forecasting in the United States.
  ''When you are not going to have enough births -- and deaths will continue with an aging population -- the only variable that can make an appreciable difference is immigration,'' said Joseph Chamie, a demographer who formerly headed the United Nations division on population.
  Areas such as Northwest Arkansas can ''forget about'' continued growth, Mr. Chamie said, without the steady arrival of new immigrants.
  The Census Bureau had projected that the number of immigrants in the United States would increase by 1.4 million from July 2017 to July 2019. Instead, it climbed by a net 400,000.
  In Northwest Arkansas, 1,750 foreign newcomers arrived in 2016, accounting for more than 14 percent of all new residents, according to the census. In 2019, only 750 new immigrants settled in the area.
  The drop comes as employers in the region -- like many across the country -- are also facing an intense labor shortage from the pandemic. Home builders, hospitals and technology companies are all struggling to find workers. Poultry processors have been offering higher hourly rates as well as attendance, referral and sign-on bonuses.
  Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt, a transportation and logistics giant, are posting for workers to take unfilled tech jobs.
  Jared Smith, the chief executive of Kitestring, a boutique technology company that serves retailers, has been trying for months to fill 30 jobs.
  The firm pays six-figure salaries for software engineers. ''The battle for talent has become even fiercer,'' he said.
  About 35 percent of his 175 employees are on H-1B visas. ''If I were to depend exclusively on U.S. citizens, it's hard to imagine I would grow,'' he said.
  Immigrants have transformed the area not just culturally, but politically as well.
  As of the 1990 census, Northwest Arkansas was 95 percent white. But by 2019, that figure had dropped to 72 percent, thanks to immigration. In Bentonville, 15.5 percent of the population was foreign born by then, and in Springdale, the state's poultry center, 37.6 percent of the population was Hispanic.
  Springdale voters in November sent the first Latino to the City Council, Kevin Flores, the son of a poultry worker; Bentonville elected the first Indian American, Gayatri Agnew, to the City Council. Even in the state's Republican-majority legislature, there has been recognition of the role of immigrant labor. This year the General Assembly passed a bill to enable undocumented immigrants who were brought to the country as children, often known as ''Dreamers,'' to obtain any professional or occupational license, one of the most liberal such laws in the country.
  ''We have a fast-growing economy, and we are concerned about a labor shortage,'' said Nelson Peacock, who heads the Northwest Arkansas Council, founded by major employers in the region to promote economic development. ''We need workers of all skill levels, and immigrants are an important part of the equation.''
  Baaju Chepuri remembers vividly the Bentonville he encountered in 2008, when he accepted a job to work as a software engineer for Walmart.
  On the drive into town from the regional airport, he felt like a city boy lost in the woods. The Indian community was minuscule. To stock up on Indian groceries, eat at Indian restaurants and watch Bollywood movies, they journeyed to Kansas City, Mo., or Tulsa, Okla.
  ''This place was 20 percent of what it is today,'' Mr. Chepuri said. ''There was literally nothing to do.''
  Bentonville's Indian population grew by 361 percent between 2010 and 2019. By then, there were Indian cafes and supermarkets dotting strip malls. A gleaming Hindu temple opened for worship in 2012, and the city is erecting two cricket pitches for the 25-team local league.
  Less than 20 miles south of Bentonville along Interstate 49, immigrants also transformed Springdale, the center of the state's multibillion-dollar poultry industry, as tens of thousands of Latin Americans, both legal residents and undocumented, arrived.
  Hispanic-owned groceries, bakeries and car repair shops popped up on Thompson Street. At Murphy Park, Hispanic families grilled carne asada and celebrated birthdays with piñatas.
  Families from the Marshall Islands also arrived. Arkansas certified the nation's first Marshallese court interpreter in Springdale, and a Marshallese consulate opened its doors.
  The immigrants have not found a universal welcome.
  Unease prevails among some longtime residents, like Debbie Eden, a business owner in Springdale. ''Many immigrants are hard workers,'' she said, ''but they come in and undercut you working for less money.''
  For the immigrants who have arrived, the region's boom has led to ample employment.
  Ershad Ismail Gani, who came five years ago from India and now works at Kitestring developing software that runs cash registers at Sam's Club and Walmart, said that several of his friends have been hired away by other employers scrambling for workers, and that he had also been approached.
  Wages have been high enough that he and his wife have welcomed a daughter into their family and bought a four-bedroom house with a home theater. ''It's really amazing how many jobs are available,'' Mr. Gani said. ''Everywhere I turn there are opportunities.''
  In Springdale, Yanira Umana, a wing cutter at a Simmons Foods turkey plant who is an immigrant from El Salvador, showed off the tidy three-bedroom brick house -- with a flower garden in full bloom -- that she recently acquired.
  ''I achieved all this working with chicken and turkey,'' said Ms. Umana, a single mother of two.
  But she is raising her American daughters, 9 and 12, to have loftier ambitions. ''Day after day, I tell them this is not the life I want for you,'' she said.
  Older immigrants, like American baby boomers, are not being replaced by their children. And while immigrants illegally crossing the southwestern border may be willing to take unforgiving jobs, they are not a hiring option for big-name companies like those in Northwest Arkansas.
  Meanwhile, legal workers are graying.
  When Marta Merlos of El Salvador moved there in 1995 to work on Tyson's lines, her son, then in the first grade, was one of only 10 Latino children at Robert E. Lee Elementary.
  Ms. Merlos, 61, who is now a U.S. citizen, still endures 12-hour shifts. The middle finger on her right hand is damaged, and she feels body aches at the end of each day.
  But it has paid off, she said.
  Her oldest son, Kevin Flores, joined the Marines, then went to college and became a lawyer. In November, with a campaign touting him as a product of the new, diverse Springdale, he became the first Latino elected to the City Council.
  ''The makeup of Northwest Arkansas has changed dramatically thanks to immigrants, and we are much better off because of them,'' said Mr. Flores, 33, who arrived in the United States when he was 3 years old. ''To keep flourishing, the region will need immigrants to continue moving here.''
  Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Alain Delaquérière contributed research.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/10/us/immigration-arkansas-population.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton's global retail empire.
Yanira Umana watering the flowers that she and her daughters planted at their home in Springdale. She works at a turkey plant.
Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton's global retail empire. Gayatri Agnew with her family in Bentonville. In November, voters made her the first Indian American on the City Council.
Ershad Ismail Gani, with his wife and daughter, came to Bentonville from India five years ago. He is a software developer.
Kevin Flores on a trampoline with his nephews. A former Marine, he became the first Latino council member in Springdale.
At top, performers practicing the Bharatanatyam form of Indian classical dance at the Kalaloka Institute of Fine Arts
Blanca Ramirez making pupusas for sale in downtown Springdale
 and a food truck at the farmers' market in Bentonville's square. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TERRA FONDRIEST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16-A17)               

Load-Date: August 11, 2021


End of Document
HOME FRONT; Fees From Visas Now Train Americans - Correction Appended
 The New York Times
June 1, 2003 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 10; Column 1; Job Market; Pg. 1
Length: 748 words
Byline:   By Anthony DePalma 
Body


FEW subjects can start an argument faster than illegal immigration and the way some people see foreigners taking jobs from Americans.
     But foreign workers who legally take American jobs may just be one of them. 
 Each year, for the last few years, some 195,000 foreigners have been given special visas to come to the United States to fill specialized jobs for which employers said they could not find enough skilled Americans, despite the national unemployment rate of 6 percent. 
A special class of visa, called H1-B, is used to bring in those skilled foreign workers. And now fees collected on the visa are used to train Americans at institutions like the Borough of Manhattan Community College to fill the same jobs. 
The visas give foreigners the right to work in the United States for a total of six years, but not to settle here permanently. Usually the jobs are in high technology fields involving computers and computer software.
Not surprisingly, unions and some politicians hated the program. They managed to tack on restrictions to make it more difficult for companies to import foreign workers. But the number of visas granted has grown steadily nonetheless. 
To address the concerns of critics, the government began to charge a $1,000 fee a few years ago for every application for an H1-B visa, paid by the employer who is hiring the foreign worker.
The money goes into a national pool, and more than half of the total is distributed to educational institutions and work force programs around the country that train American workers to fill the positions for which foreigners are recruited. 
Since the program began in 1998, the government has given out $228.5 million in training grants, according to the Employment and Training Administration, part of the United States Department of Labor. New York State has received eight grants, the most recent for $2.87 million that went to Borough of Manhattan Community College, in partnership with Thirteen/WNET New York television. 
"Part of our responsibility as a community college is to service the whole community, and that means not just the students but the for-profits and not-for-profits in Manhattan," said Dr. Antonio Perez, the college's president. "When you break it down, our mission is no different in that regard from any small community college around the country, except that our community is the financial capital of the world." 
The college, which has 24,000 full-time and part-time students in several downtown buildings and is part of the City University of New York, will provide specialized training for 500 people at little or no charge and then help those people find jobs or get promotions. 
Unemployed or underemployed residents of New York City are eligible, as is anyone displaced as a result of the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, regardless of where they live. To apply, interested workers may call the college at (212) 220-8350. 
Acte Maldonado, dean of the Center for Continuing Education and Workforce Development, said the new courses will begin in September at the college's training center at 45 John Street in the financial district. 
Five different programs will be offered over two years. They include courses in computer network security, the Cisco Certified Network Associate program, the Cisco Certified Network Professional program, Oracle database design and engineering, and A+, a personal computer technician certification program. 
In the current economic climate, employers who need workers with new skills simply go out and get them -- from foreign countries if need be -- rather than take the time to retrain existing workers, said Rodney Alexander, director of the Institute for Business Trends Analysis at the college. 
"What we're seeing is the 'just-in-time' delivery system applied to human resources," he said, referring to the practice, common in manufacturing, of having parts delivered as needed, rather than keeping them on site. 
Figuring out what skills are most in demand is a complicated process, because the needs of the high technology companies change so rapidly, Dr. Maldonado said. The application for the H1-B visa grant that was originally filed in May 2001 was rejected. It was resubmitted the following year with multimedia training replaced by network security classes. 
The second time around the application was approved. 
"We had to modify it to best suit the labor market," Dr. Maldonado said, "because in the final analysis, we have to find jobs for these people." 

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


The Home Front column last Sunday about job training programs financed through work visa fees referred imprecisely to the timing of a training grant to the Borough of Manhattan Community College and Thirteen/WNET New York television. It was one of the two latest grants, given simultaneously in New York State, not the "most recent" grant. The other was given to the New York Workforce Investment Board and the New York City Department of Employment.
Correction-Date: June 8, 2003

Graphic

 
Photo: Acte Maldonado, a dean at Borough of Manhattan Community College, said the needs of technology companies change rapidly. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times) 

Load-Date: June 1, 2003


End of Document
Decline in Immigration Threatens Growth of Regions on the Rise
The New York Times 
August 10, 2021 Tuesday 13:23 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1944 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Terra Fondriest
Highlight: Immigrants helped make places like Northwest Arkansas economic dynamos. But their dwindling numbers, a big factor in slower population growth, could have long-term repercussions.
Body


BENTONVILLE, Ark. — Northwest Arkansas, where the Ozark Mountains rise, used to be a sleepy corner of the state, its only claim to fame that Sam Walton opened a five-and-dime in Bentonville and the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers — outposts that became the seeds of a global retail empire. The founders of Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt got their start in the same region, and a network of software companies moved in later to meet big business’s insatiable appetite for new technology.
But there were not enough locals to build the burgeoning economy. Answering the call to work in poultry production, trucking, construction and computer programming were legions of immigrants from El Salvador, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, India and elsewhere.
With tens of thousands of immigrants helping to catalyze its development, Northwest Arkansas has emerged as one of the country’s fastest-growing metropolitan areas. Brimming with optimism, it is wooing newcomers with cheaper housing, a world-class art museum, upscale restaurants and forested bike trails.
But as much of the U.S. economy comes back from the coronavirus pandemic, the decades-long influx of immigrants that fueled such enormous expansion in places like Arkansas has begun to stall, posing challenges to the region and the country at large.
The United States over the past 10 years experienced the slowest population growth rate in eight decades, according to the 2020 census, because of plunging fertility rates and shrinking immigration.
The surge of unauthorized migrants from Mexico and Central America is testing the Biden administration, but images are deceptive: A vast majority of the single adults crossing the border to find work are quickly deported. And the flow of legal immigrants, whom Northwest Arkansas companies also heavily rely on, has fallen precipitously since the Trump administration clamped down on all kinds of immigration with the belief that it was displacing American workers.
Now, business leaders are hoping that President Biden will make good on his pledge to overhaul the immigration system and establish a legal pipeline for foreign workers to take jobs in Northwest Arkansas and other places that depend on them.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has called on Congress and the White House to double the number of visas for high-skilled temporary workers under the H-1B program and also for seasonal workers in sectors like agriculture and meat production, another economic mainstay in this part of the country.
Lifting the ceiling on H-1B visas has been contentious, with some labor groups arguing that foreign workers imported from places like India and China displace Americans and drive down wages.
So far, Mr. Biden has concentrated on the surge of unauthorized immigrants at the southwestern border, and has not advanced measures to bring large numbers of new workers into the country.
“In addition to securing the border, we should be focusing on how to secure avenues for more legal immigration,” said Neil Bradley, chief policy officer for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. “For a whole host of communities all across the United States, immigration will determine whether the local economy will continue to grow for those moving there and the residents who have called that place home for decades.”
The decline in immigration is an important factor in the long-term decline in population growth that demographers are forecasting in the United States.
“When you are not going to have enough births — and deaths will continue with an aging population — the only variable that can make an appreciable difference is immigration,” said Joseph Chamie, a demographer who formerly headed the United Nations division on population.
Areas such as Northwest Arkansas can “forget about” continued growth, Mr. Chamie said, without the steady arrival of new immigrants.
The Census Bureau had projected that the number of immigrants in the United States would increase by 1.4 million from July 2017 to July 2019. Instead, it climbed by a net 400,000.
In Northwest Arkansas, 1,750 foreign newcomers arrived in 2016, accounting for more than 14 percent of all new residents, according to the census. In 2019, only 750 new immigrants settled in the area.
The drop comes as employers in the region — like many across the country — are also facing an intense labor shortage from the pandemic. Home builders, hospitals and technology companies are all struggling to find workers. Poultry processors have been offering higher hourly rates as well as attendance, referral and sign-on bonuses.
Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt, a transportation and logistics giant, are posting for workers to take unfilled tech jobs.
Jared Smith, the chief executive of Kitestring, a boutique technology company that serves retailers, has been trying for months to fill 30 jobs.
The firm pays six-figure salaries for software engineers. “The battle for talent has become even fiercer,” he said.
About 35 percent of his 175 employees are on H-1B visas. “If I were to depend exclusively on U.S. citizens, it’s hard to imagine I would grow,” he said.
Immigrants have transformed the area not just culturally, but politically as well.
As of the 1990 census, Northwest Arkansas was 95 percent white. But by 2019, that figure had dropped to 72 percent, thanks to immigration. In Bentonville, 15.5 percent of the population was foreign born by then, and in Springdale, the state’s poultry center, 37.6 percent of the population was Hispanic.
Springdale voters in November sent the first Latino to the City Council, Kevin Flores, the son of a poultry worker; Bentonville elected the first Indian American, Gayatri Agnew, to the City Council. Even in the state’s Republican-majority legislature, there has been recognition of the role of immigrant labor. This year the General Assembly passed a bill to enable undocumented immigrants who were brought to the country as children, often known as “Dreamers,” to obtain any professional or occupational license, one of the most liberal such laws in the country.
“We have a fast-growing economy, and we are concerned about a labor shortage,” said Nelson Peacock, who heads the Northwest Arkansas Council, founded by major employers in the region to promote economic development. “We need workers of all skill levels, and immigrants are an important part of the equation.”
Baaju Chepuri remembers vividly the Bentonville he encountered in 2008, when he accepted a job to work as a software engineer for Walmart.
On the drive into town from the regional airport, he felt like a city boy lost in the woods. The Indian community was minuscule. To stock up on Indian groceries, eat at Indian restaurants and watch Bollywood movies, they journeyed to Kansas City, Mo., or Tulsa, Okla.
“This place was 20 percent of what it is today,” Mr. Chepuri said. “There was literally nothing to do.”
Bentonville’s Indian population grew by 361 percent between 2010 and 2019. By then, there were Indian cafes and supermarkets dotting strip malls. A gleaming Hindu temple opened for worship in 2012, and the city is erecting two cricket pitches for the 25-team local league.
Less than 20 miles south of Bentonville along Interstate 49, immigrants also transformed Springdale, the center of the state’s multibillion-dollar poultry industry, as tens of thousands of Latin Americans, both legal residents and undocumented, arrived.
Hispanic-owned groceries, bakeries and car repair shops popped up on Thompson Street. At Murphy Park, Hispanic families grilled carne asada and celebrated birthdays with piñatas.
Families from the Marshall Islands also arrived. Arkansas certified the nation’s first Marshallese court interpreter in Springdale, and a Marshallese consulate opened its doors.
The immigrants have not found a universal welcome.
Unease prevails among some longtime residents, like Debbie Eden, a business owner in Springdale. “Many immigrants are hard workers,” she said, “but they come in and undercut you working for less money.”
For the immigrants who have arrived, the region’s boom has led to ample employment.
Ershad Ismail Gani, who came five years ago from India and now works at Kitestring developing software that runs cash registers at Sam’s Club and Walmart, said that several of his friends have been hired away by other employers scrambling for workers, and that he had also been approached.
Wages have been high enough that he and his wife have welcomed a daughter into their family and bought a four-bedroom house with a home theater. “It’s really amazing how many jobs are available,” Mr. Gani said. “Everywhere I turn there are opportunities.”
In Springdale, Yanira Umana, a wing cutter at a Simmons Foods turkey plant who is an immigrant from El Salvador, showed off the tidy three-bedroom brick house — with a flower garden in full bloom — that she recently acquired.
“I achieved all this working with chicken and turkey,” said Ms. Umana, a single mother of two.
But she is raising her American daughters, 9 and 12, to have loftier ambitions. “Day after day, I tell them this is not the life I want for you,” she said.
Older immigrants, like American baby boomers, are not being replaced by their children. And while immigrants illegally crossing the southwestern border may be willing to take unforgiving jobs, they are not a hiring option for big-name companies like those in Northwest Arkansas.
Meanwhile, legal workers are graying.
When Marta Merlos of El Salvador moved there in 1995 to work on Tyson’s lines, her son, then in the first grade, was one of only 10 Latino children at Robert E. Lee Elementary.
Ms. Merlos, 61, who is now a U.S. citizen, still endures 12-hour shifts. The middle finger on her right hand is damaged, and she feels body aches at the end of each day.
But it has paid off, she said.
Her oldest son, Kevin Flores, joined the Marines, then went to college and became a lawyer. In November, with a campaign touting him as a product of the new, diverse Springdale, he became the first Latino elected to the City Council.
“The makeup of Northwest Arkansas has changed dramatically thanks to immigrants, and we are much better off because of them,” said Mr. Flores, 33, who arrived in the United States when he was 3 years old. “To keep flourishing, the region will need immigrants to continue moving here.”
Alain Delaquérière contributed research.
Alain Delaquérière contributed research. 
PHOTOS: Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton’s global retail empire.; Yanira Umana watering the flowers that she and her daughters planted at their home in Springdale. She works at a turkey plant.; Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton’s global retail empire. Gayatri Agnew with her family in Bentonville. In November, voters made her the first Indian American on the City Council.; Ershad Ismail Gani, with his wife and daughter, came to Bentonville from India five years ago. He is a software developer.; Kevin Flores on a trampoline with his nephews. A former Marine, he became the first Latino council member in Springdale.; At top, performers practicing the Bharatanatyam form of Indian classical dance at the Kalaloka Institute of Fine Arts; Blanca Ramirez making pupusas for sale in downtown Springdale; and a food truck at the farmers’ market in Bentonville’s square. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TERRA FONDRIEST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16-A17)

Load-Date: June 23, 2023


End of Document
Is Anyone Good Enough for an H1-B Visa?
The New York Times
November 24, 2017 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Length: 858 words
Byline: By FRIDA YU
Frida Yu is a lawyer and entrepreneur.
Body


Six months ago I won the lottery -- the H-1B visa processing lottery for skilled foreign workers. I called my thrilled parents and celebrated with friends. I'm from northeastern China and have an M.B.A. from Stanford, and was planning to stay in Silicon Valley to help start a company based on a promising new technology to improve the use of data. I was overjoyed because, historically, being selected in the lottery was a near guarantee that an applicant could remain in this country at least three more years.
But at the end of July, I received the dreaded Request for Further Evidence from immigration authorities. I provided the extra information that United States Citizenship and Immigration Services asked for. In September, I got another request. I complied again. Finally, on Oct. 11, half a year after my celebration, I learned I had been denied a visa. 
  After earning law degrees in China and at Oxford, after having worked in Hong Kong as a lawyer at a top international firm, after coming to United States three years ago for an M.B.A. and graduating and joining a start-up, I was given just 60 days to leave the country. I have 17 days left.
  In the past, it was fairly safe to assume that once you were selected in the lottery, your H-1B petition would be accepted by immigration officials. In 2016, this happened about 87 percent of the time. But things began to change in April when the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice announced measures to increase scrutiny of the highly skilled applicants who use the H-1B program, and President Trump signed an executive order calling for federal agencies to suggest reforms to the program.
  While it's unclear exactly what percentage of petitions have been approved so far in 2017, requests for evidence like the ones I received have increased by 44 percent compared with last year, according to immigration statistics, strongly suggesting that more people are being denied than before Mr. Trump took office.
  Many of my fellow international students are in situations similar to mine. Some had job offers from companies like Google, Apple and PwC when they learned that their applications had been denied or did not even make it into the lottery. For those whose employers have only United States offices, losing the lottery meant losing jobs and going home, with no real way to use the skills they were on the verge of contributing to the American economy.
  And some classmates who, like me, were picked in the H-1B lottery last spring are still waiting for an answer. The Trump administration on April 3 announced that it would  suspend the ''premium processing'' service that, for a fee, guaranteed applicants responses to their petitions within 15 days. This has caused problems for students who needed a quick decision because their work authorization expired over the summer or because they wanted to plan overseas trips that they couldn't make while their status was in limbo. My mom had surgery for cancer in July, but I simply couldn't go back to China to be with her and risk being denied at the border upon my return because I didn't have H-1B approval.
  My two requests for evidence asked me to prove my job was a ''specialty occupation'' -- that is, work that only someone with a bachelor's degree or higher can do. My work involves artificial intelligence and big data, and my letters of support came from an authority in my industry and veteran start-up investor, and a Nobel Prize winner. But it wasn't enough to convince the government that my job requires advanced skills.
  While I gave up my law job and used my savings and my parents' to pay my Stanford graduate school tuition, in the grand scheme of things, I know my situation is much better than that of many immigrants who are forced to leave this country: Just this week, thousands of Haitians in the United States learned that they may have to return to Haiti as a result of the administration's decision to strip them of the Temporary Protected Status they were granted while their country recovered from disasters.
  It's true that I'm brokenhearted about missing the chance to return to China to care for my mother (she insisted that I stay and pursue the visa that was her dream for me), but I'm not looking for sympathy. As much as I hate to leave, I know I will be fine.
  Rather, I'm frustrated, because I know I'm part of a pattern: America is losing many very skilled workers because of its anti-immigrant sentiment, and while this is a disappointing blow to me and my classmates, it will also be a blow to the United States' competitiveness in the global economy. Tech giants such as Google and Tesla were founded by immigrants.
  I can't make sense of why an administration that claims to want this country to be strong would be so eager to get rid of us. We are losing our dreams, and America is losing the value we bring.
  As I make plans to go back to China, I find myself wondering: If I am not qualified to stay in the United States, then who is?
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/23/opinion/immigration-visa-h1b-trump-.html

Load-Date: November 24, 2017


End of Document
Who Has the Cure for America’s Declining Birthrate? Canada.; Guest Essay
The New York Times 
August 18, 2021 Wednesday 23:51 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1526 words
Byline: Shikha Dalmia
Highlight: Let states bring in workers from around the world, based on their labor needs.
Body


Over the past century, two moments that transformed America and positioned it as the global economic leader were the post-World War II economic boom and the I.T. revolution of the 1990s. In both cases, America tore down many forms of discrimination and other barriers to harness the talents of marginalized groups in the country and to welcome new ones, injecting demographic vitality into the economy.
To continue America’s upward trajectory in the 21st century, the country must reverse its current demographic decline. As the Census Bureau reported last week, in the past decade, the U.S. population grew at the second-slowest rate since the government started counting in 1790 — and the slowest since the 1930s.
The most expeditious way out might be if the federal government gave up its monopoly on immigration and allowed states to bring in workers from anywhere in the world, based on their own labor needs, without being held to federal quotas. The growing concern is that the United States is facing a population bust. The U.S. fertility rate, which had bucked Europe’s low-fertility trend during the past century, is now around 1.73 children per woman — roughly on par with that of Denmark and Britain.
Declining population growth because of lower fertility rates by definition means that the ratio of young to old declines — which is not a formula for a dynamic economy or a competitive country. The risk-taking and experimentation of young workers make them the engine of capitalism. They are also more mobile: They can move to places where they will be most productive.
That is what America had in abundance after World War II. The Nobel prize-winning economist Vernon Smith notes that the prewar American labor force was quite immobile. But the returning 16 million World War II veterans, having traveled to foreign lands, weren’t daunted by moving within their own country for jobs.
The domestic shortage of men during the war also broke down barriers that had kept teenagers, women and Black Americans out of the labor force.
Young men like Mr. Smith (who worked at a Boeing factory in Wichita, Kan., from age 16 to 18) entered the work force and gained valuable skills and experience in the postwar economy. At the same time, weakening social norms against working women, even married ones, increased female labor participation by 50 percent between 1940 and 1945. The shortage of men also opened opportunities for Black workers, helping to trigger the second Great Migration from the South.
Some of these barriers shot up again after the war to accommodate the returning veterans. Still, there were gains: After the World War II generation, the baby boom generation, together with its progeny, kept the American work force humming until the 1980s.
The seeds of the 1990s I.T. revolution were planted in the 1960s. That era of civil rights activism dismantled at least many formal barriers preventing robust Black participation in the economy. And it eliminated the 1924 Johnson-Reed Act, which had blocked foreign talent. This law had not only cut immigration rates overall but imposed national-origin quotas expressly designed to maintain America’s Western European ethnic makeup by discouraging immigration from Eastern Europe and Asia. Its end in 1965 resulted in 58.5 million new immigrants over the next 50 years, about 25 percent Asian. Many were high-tech professionals from China and India.
Their innovations and entrepreneurship helped power the I.T. revolution that transformed the world. According to a study by the nonpartisan National Foundation for American Policy, more than half of the 91 start-ups that became $1 billion companies had one or more immigrant founders. Likewise, the Partnership for a New American Economy found that immigrants or their children had founded more than 40 percent of the 2010 Fortune 500 companies.
So what’s the cure for America’s dwindling demographic vitality?
A new baby boom generation would be enormously difficult to produce in a world with easy birth control. On average, women say they want 2.5 children. But returning America to just a 2.1 replacement level through cash incentives would be “prohibitively costly,” as Lyman Stone of the American Enterprise Institute concluded after examining how these policies fared in European and other countries.
Instead, America might borrow a page from Canada. Its immigration policy is expressly meant to offset its aging population and low birthrates. Canada’s immigration intake is 0.9 percent of its population — or three times America’s per capita rate.
It has admitted immigrants in an ingenious way. In 1998, Canada initiated its Provincial Nominee Program, which gives most provinces a quota, based on their population, of immigrants to sponsor as they see fit (in addition to the immigrants the federal government in Ottawa admits). A province sets criteria based on its needs for workers, and it can sponsor immigrants from anywhere in the world for permanent residency, provided they pass a basic background and health check. (The federal government has the final say.)
The average processing time for this program is about 18 months. In the United States, by contrast, many low-skilled immigrants on work visas have no pathway to green cards, and highly skilled immigrants on H-1B visas wait years — and in the case of Indian and Chinese nationals, up to half a century.
Although, in principle immigrants, sponsored by a Canadian province are free to relocate to another province anytime, in practice the five-year retention rate for many provinces is upwards of 80 percent, according to a 2017 assessment by the Canadian government. That’s because the granular matching between skills and the local labor market ensures employment, which removes the main reason that immigrants leave. The program started small, but from 2021 to 2023, about 30 percent of Canada’s total immigrant admissions are expected to be through it.
America should begin its own version of this program but take it one step further and let states set their own limits on foreign workers. This would get federal bureaucrats out of the business of centrally planning the labor market for the whole country. States that understand their own labor markets would do a much better job of finding suitable workers for their businesses.
The states wouldn’t have to hew to the federal high-skilled and low-skilled distinction for visas. Right now, both high-tech and low-tech states are suffering from a tight labor market. States that don’t want or need immigrant workers could opt out of the program. Foreign workers would be free to travel anywhere in the country, but they would be limited to jobs in participating states until they are naturalized. This would be an improvement over the existing system for them, since work visas currently tether them to a single employer, unless they find a new employer to undertake the onerous process of sponsoring them. It would also reassure states that they would have a measure of control over the level of in-migration from other states, at least for some time.
States wouldn’t be required to participate, but they would face an inherent incentive to do so because businesses are far more likely to prefer locations where there are suitably skilled, motivated workers. Such a program would render the current broken and dysfunctional federal immigration system beside the point. (Constitutionally, immigration is a federal function, but nothing prevents Washington from voluntarily giving states more latitude to make their own decisions about foreign workers. Other aspects of immigration policy can remain in federal hands.)
Fiscally costly schemes won’t be necessary to attract immigrants. These workers are highly motivated to build their lives in America and will happily pay fees for state sponsorship. They often come to America during their peak productive years after another society has usually borne the cost of raising them, which bestows a one-time fiscal windfall on America. Also, given that immigrant fertility rates may not typically drop to native levels for a generation or two, foreign workers would stabilize the population for longer than would a short-term family-policy approach.
Another benefit of federalizing immigration would be that the restored demographic health and improved economic performance of participating states would make it easier for U.S. citizens to see immigrants as assets and saviors rather than liabilities and threats. America would then have a material — not just an idealistic — interest in redoubling its commitment to its core value of pluralism and tolerance.
Shikha Dalmia (@shikhadalmia) is a visiting fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University studying the rise of populist authoritarianism and a columnist at The Week.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY O.O.P.S. FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: November 3, 2021


End of Document
Ted Cruz Steps Up Attacks on Marco Rubio on Immigration
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
November 12, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 503 words
Byline: ALAN RAPPEPORT and MATT FLEGENHEIMER
Highlight: Immigration reform continues to be a sticking point between two of the Republican senators running for president, with Ted Cruz saying that selecting a nominee who is said to support amnesty, like Marco Rubio, &#8220;is a path to losing&#8221; the general election. 
Body


Senator Ted Cruz continued to pound Senator Marco Rubio over his immigration record on Thursday, escalating the tension between the two rivals for the Republican presidential nomination. 
Speaking on Laura Ingraham's radio program, Mr. Cruz reiterated his view that Mr. Rubio is weak when it comes to immigration.
"Talk is cheap," the Texas senator said. "You know where someone is based on their actions. As the Scripture says, you shall know them based on their fruits."
Mr. Cruz went on to recall that Mr. Rubio, the Florida senator who was a member of the so-called Gang of Eight group of lawmakers who sought to overhaul the immigration system, opposed measures to tighten border security. 
"He opposed every single one of them," Mr. Cruz said of amendments Mr. Rubio opposed that would have increased border patrol resources, created a strong e-verity system and an developed exit-entry system for visa overstays. "The Gang of Eight voted against securing and enforcing the border."
Speaking to reporters in Concord, N.H., where he officially filed to be on the primary ballot, Mr. Cruz twice said that Tuesday's debate saw "candidate after candidate basically compose an epic poem to amnesty."
Without mentioning Mr. Rubio by name, he assailed the "establishment Republicans" who joined with Democrats like President Obama and Senator Chuck Schumer "in pushing the massive amnesty plan." 
Mr. Rubio now says that immigration must be handled in parts and that after the border is secured new policies can be developed for dealing with immigrants who have entered the country illegally. He is not in favor of deporting undocumented immigrants en masse, as some of his rivals propose.  
Campaigning in South Carolina on Thursday, Mr. Rubio suggested that there was little meaningful distinction between his position and Mr. Cruz's.
"Laughably false," Rick Tyler, Mr. Cruz's spokesman, wrote on Twitter.
Mr. Cruz's comments come as he has been running close with Mr. Rubio in many polls and as they are increasingly competing for attention from conservative voters. At an event in New Hampshire on Wednesday night, Mr. Cruz suggested that picking a nominee who favors "amnesty" would damage his party's prospects in a general election.
"In my view, if Republicans nominate for president a candidate who supports amnesty, we will have given up one of the major distinctions with Hillary Clinton and we will lose the general election," he said. "That is a path to losing."
In spite of his tough talk on immigration, some Republicans think that it is Mr. Cruz whose actions do not match his words. Rick Santorum, the former senator from Pennsylvania, said on Thursday that Mr. Cruz's support for expanding the H1-B visa program for skilled workers without reforms would harm American workers. 
"Cruz tough on immigration?" Mr. Santorum's campaign said in an email. "Not so fast!" 
 Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via            Facebook,            Twitter and            the First Draft newsletter. 

Load-Date: November 18, 2015


End of Document
Immigration Agency On Brink of Insolvency As Applications Dive
The New York Times
May 18, 2020 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 1233 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has asked Congress for a lifeline amid the coronavirus pandemic that has caused applications to plummet and brought it to the brink of insolvency.
LOS ANGELES -- A precipitous drop in applications for green cards, citizenship and other programs has threatened the solvency of the federal agency that administers the country's lawful immigration system, prompting it to seek a $1.2 billion cash infusion from Congress as well as fee hikes to stay afloat. 
  The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which relies on the fees that it charges applicants to fund its operations, said that it could run out of money by the summer because the coronavirus pandemic had resulted in far fewer people applying for visas and other benefits.
  ''Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, U.S.C.I.S. has seen a dramatic decrease in revenue,'' said a spokesman for the agency, noting that its receipts could plummet by more than 60 percent by the close of the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30.
  Without the $1.2 billion injection from Congress, the agency, he said, would be unable to fund its operations in a matter of months. The agency plans to impose a 10 percent ''surcharge'' on applications, on top of previously proposed increases, that it is expecting to implement in the coming months.
  Critics blamed the Trump administration's stringent policies, which have caused backlogs, red tape and application denials to skyrocket, for dissuading an untold number of people from applying for visas and other immigration benefits.
  ''This administration is asking taxpayers to bail out an agency as a result of the very policies it put in place which have caused revenue loss,'' said Melissa Rodgers, the director of programs at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco.
  ''With extreme vetting, they are making every single application take longer to review, and processing fewer,'' said Ms. Rodgers, who oversees a program to promote citizenship among legal immigrants. ''Word gets out that it's not worth applying.''
  Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, an immigration hard-liner who is acting deputy secretary for the Department of Homeland Security and at the helm of the agency, has stressed upholding immigration laws over granting visas and citizenship as the agency's mission. ''We are not a benefit agency, we are a vetting agency,'' he has said.
  Last summer, Mr. Cuccinelli announced a ''public charge'' rule that denied immigrants green cards if they were deemed likely to use government benefit programs like food stamps and subsidized housing, a move that is believed to have deterred many people from applying. The reason: Applying for legal permanent residency in itself could be considered a negative factor by immigration officers when determining whether a person could become a public charge.
  Some critics said that the agency was ill-prepared for the economic shock from the coronavirus pandemic because of policies that had rendered its adjudication process less efficient while bloating its payroll.
  Since President Trump took office, the agency, for example, has bolstered resources devoted to fraud detection as well as added new requirements for in-person interviews for hundreds of thousands of employment- and marriage-based green card applicants.
  It also has been returning large numbers of visa applications with ''requests for further evidence'' of eligibility, which adjudicators must then review again. Extensions for H-1B visas, issued to skilled workers already in the United States, are now reviewed from scratch, as if the person is a first-time applicant.
  ''This administration has made every single application much more expensive and time-consuming to adjudicate,'' said Doug Rand, who worked on immigration policy in the Obama administration.
  In fiscal year 2016, the agency had 15,828 positions, including full-time and contract workers. Three years later, that number had climbed to almost 18,866, a 19 percent increase.
  ''If they had kept the same staff levels and not put in place these policies, would they still have run out of cash -- maybe not,'' said Mr. Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps people apply for green cards and citizenship.
  As in previous years, Citizenship and Immigration Services in fiscal 2020 had counted on fees paid by applicants to cover the lion's share of its expenditures: 97 percent of its $4.8 billion budget.
  But after applications took a nosedive, the agency, the spokesman said, was seeking ''a one-time emergency request for funding to ensure we can carry out our mission of administering our nation's lawful immigration system, safeguarding its integrity and protecting the American people.''
  The agency already had been trying to limit spending to paying salaries and critical expenses to avert a financial crisis, he said, and would have to take further ''drastic actions,'' which he did not specify, to keep operating. Those could include staff reductions that would affect the adjudication of citizenship, green cards, asylum and work visas.
  The agency has not released data that attests to the decrease in applications. But an officer at the agency, speaking on condition of anonymity because the person was not authorized to talk to the news media, said that the staff had been notified recently that the agency was ''severely strapped for cash due to the low number of new applications being filed,'' adding that overtime, travel and purchases had been scrapped.
  Ana Maria Schwartz, an immigration lawyer in Houston, said that half as many clients had retained her to apply for green cards, citizenship and other immigration benefits between March 15 and May 15 compared with the same period in 2019. ''That's a seismic shift, even for my tiny firm,'' she said.
  In November last year, the agency's leadership proposed steep increases in fees to file for legal immigration and naturalization. For the first time, the agency would also charge those fleeing persecution and seeking protection in the United States.
  Mr. Cuccinelli, the agency's chief, said that the fee hikes would help cover the agency's deficits.
  Immigrant advocates balked at the justification, saying that the goal was to reduce the number of immigrants who become citizens before the 2020 presidential election and, more broadly, cut legal immigration by making fees prohibitive for low-income people.
  The fee assessed on petitions for naturalization would jump more than 60 percent, to $1,170 from $725, for most applicants. The government would also begin charging asylum seekers $50 for applications and $490 for work permits, which would make the United States one of just four countries to charge people for asylum.
  The government also announced its intention to increase the cost of renewals for hundreds of thousands of participants of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, also known as DACA. They would be required to pay $765, rather than $495.
  Thus far, the fees have remained unchanged. The government has issued three public notices about them in the Federal Register, attracting more than 40,000 public comments that it is mandated to review and consider before announcing a final rule.
  ''The administration turned the fee changes into a hyper ideological policy vehicle that slowed them down,'' Mr. Rand said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/17/us/immigration-agency-uscis-budget.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: A 2019 naturalization ceremony in Los Angeles. The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services is facing a 60 percent revenue drop. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ETIENNE LAURENT/EPA-EFE/SHUTTERSTOCK)               

Load-Date: May 18, 2020


End of Document
Letters on Immigration; Nicholas Kristof
The New York Times 
(Nicholas Kristof)
April 16, 2006 Sunday 08:58 EST


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1051 words
Byline: NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF
Highlight: Here&#8217;s some of the commentary from my column about immigration. Sylvie from Saratoga writes: &#8220;Blaming immigrants for keeping minimum wages down is a little bit of a short cut. As Bill Maher mentioned in this week&#8217;s Real Time, it is not the immigrants who keep minimum wages down, it is Congress who hasn&#8217;t increased the [&#8230;] 
Body


Here’s some of the commentary from my column about immigration. Sylvie from Saratoga writes: “Blaming immigrants for keeping minimum wages down is a little bit of a short cut. As Bill Maher mentioned in this week’s Real Time, it is not the immigrants who keep minimum wages down, it is Congress who hasn’t increased the minimum wage in years. If the minimum wage goes too high for some of us to be able to afford domestic help, so be it. We’ll go back to our brooms, buckets and lawnmower, or we’ll re-arrange our priorities.”
Lynn from New York writes: “You mention that your friend Elmer had a union job for 26/hour.  Who built the unions?  Immigrants.  Once immigrants began to be forced to live in the shadows, they couldn’t protect themselves enable the wages of all workers to go down.  Bring them into the light and they will fight alongside Elmer for fair wages, better working conditions, and better management.  BTW was his union job really snatched by an immigrant, or did it go overseas?”
Eli from Newton, MA writes: “Immigrants do drive down wages for the poor, but they also make life less expensive for those who are already well off. In my affluent neighborhood they mow the lawns, wash the windows, and clean the houses. Without them we would have to pay a fair wage for these services.”
Dave from Plano, TX writes:  “Based on personal experience, I would claim that it should apply as well to higher education workers.  I and several of my friends are over 45 I’m 61 engineers and scientists who have been laid off and cannot find further employment.  Part of this is due to the technical bust, part due to outsourcing overseas, part due to the bias against experienced thus older workers but a great deal is also due to our former employers preferring to hire cheaper recent graduates, most of who are foreign nationals, most commonly from the Far and Middle East.”
Timothy from San Jose writes:  “Low wages has little to do with immigrant workers but legal minimum wage. Federal minimum wage is only 5.15. In some places, a simple Burger King Value Meal is 5.65, more than minimum wage. When the GOP in Congress sees it fit to raise minimum wage for hard working Americans, we can then talk about immigrants bringing down the wages. Pay me 10 an hour picking fruits and vegetables, I will work in the field 16 hours a day. Pay me 5.15 an hour, I will rather go work somewhere else.” 
Pravin from Monroe, CT writes: “A son of mine, age 25, has a Computer Science degree BS from Penn State with a GPA of 3.35, and MS in Computer Science from USC with a GPA of 3.38. He has so far been unable to find a job here in USA. How can he find a job here, when we have so many H1-B visa immigrants coming here for relatively low paying jobs in Computer Science. Thanks a lot for your compassionate advocacy on behalf of H1-B visa, while thousands of American youngsters, like my son, with a very good education in Computer Science are languishing with very little hope of finding a job in USA. Some Globalization!” 
Ruth from White Plains writes: “As an American with  a Ph.D. in  immunology I find it ironic that you have changed your mind about the guest worker program because  of  growing evidence that low-wage immigration hurts America’s own poor and yet you would encourage an increased influx  of biologists and computer programmers.  Have you asked a biologist or computer scientist just how well they are doing these days?   We are facing a national crisis in science and engineering.  Right now we have what amounts to a glut of biological scientists  mostly in the form of immigrants. Many Ph.D.s have found themselves unable to make a decent living, stuck in successive low-paying post-doctoral positions years after the completion of their doctorate because there is a logjam at this level.   The situation has created a stunning sense of entitlement to free labor on the part of laboratory investigators.  Post-docs are subject to long hours for minimal pay and abusive behavior by their superiors.  The pathetic wages and long training period have created a dearth of interest among Americans in these vital fields.  These same conditions will eventually drive foreign nationals back to their country of origin.  Who will replace them when they are gone?  Restricting access from abroad has forced salaries and benefits up over the past few years. Only by making the sciences more lucrative will  more Americans will step up to the plate and undergo the rigorous training necessary to become the next generation of scientists and engineers.” 
Greg from Davis, California writes: “It seems illogical to have any limit at all on H1-B visas.  The program helps virtually all Americans as well as helping the immigrants.  If politics forced me to choose between skilled and unskilled immigrants, then of course I would choose skilled immigrants. But are H1-B visas really linked to low-skill guest work in that way?  If the real choice is between helping America’s poor and helping Mexico’s poor, then I don’t see why Americans have any moral priority.  The poor in Mexico are much poorer, and on average more than one Mexican worker replaces each American worker.  All that I will grant is that the American poor vote here and deserve their political fair share.  But that is different from moral priority.”
Khurrum from Bristol writes:  “You are a hypocrite. You go to other countries to show your ‘compassion’ without knowing the local realities. But when it comes to your own country  you want to reduce immigration. How come, from the seventeenth to the early twentieth century people could come into America without asking the native americans? Does this have to do with the color of one’s skin? The whole concept of western ‘legality’ is a hypocrisy.”
On balance, I didn’t find the emails on low-wage immigration very persuasive; I’ll stick to my guns there. But I did find the emails — and conversations with various techies — troubling on the subject of the H1-B visa issue. I hadn’t realized how many educated American techies were having trouble finding work because of people brought in on H1-B’s. So maybe I was too quick to suggest increasing the number of H1-B’s, too hasty in asserting that such immigration is necessarily good for America. I’ll have to research that issue more.

Load-Date: August 23, 2017


End of Document
The Biden administration lets a Trump-era ban on some foreign work visas expire.
The New York Times 
March 31, 2021 Wednesday 13:47 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 386 words
Byline: Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Highlight: The change affects computer programmers and engineers who enter the United States on H-1B visas, students on work-study programs and seasonal workers in the hospitality industry.
Body


The change affects computer programmers and engineers who enter the United States on H-1B visas, students on work-study programs and seasonal workers in the hospitality industry.
President Biden will let a ban on certain temporary foreign work visas expire on Wednesday, according to two administration officials, reopening a labor pool that was cut off by his predecessor during the coronavirus pandemic.
Former President Donald J. Trump blocked visas for a variety of jobs in a sweeping order last June, including those for computer programmers and engineers who enter the United States on H-1B visas, students on work-study programs and seasonal workers in the hospitality industry.
The Trump administration said at the time that the ban on temporary work visas, as well as a separate block on green cards, was necessary to protect employment opportunities for Americans who lost their jobs because of the economic toll of the pandemic. But numerous studies have shown that immigrants benefit the economy. Business leaders openly criticized the orders as blocking critically needed employees willing to work jobs that Americans are not willing to do or capable of doing.
After business associations filed a lawsuit against the order on foreign workers, a federal judge in California in October lifted the ban on a large number of the work visas. 
The ruling at the time only applied to members of organizations that sued the administration, including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, National Association of Manufacturers, National Retail Federation, Intrax Inc., which sponsors cultural exchanges, and TechNet, a technology industry group.
Mr. Biden had already revoked Mr. Trump’s ban on new green cards, saying it did not “advance the interests of the United States.” Even during the pandemic, Mr. Biden said the restrictions harmed the nation by “preventing certain family members of United States citizens and lawful permanent residents from joining their families here. It also harms industries in the United States that utilize talent from around the world.”
PHOTO: An I.T. management consultant worked from New Delhi in June after President Donald J. Trump’s executive order suspending H-1B visas prevented him from returning to the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Manish Swarup/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: March 31, 2021


End of Document
Native of Nowhere
The New York Times
August 19, 2012 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Sunday Review Desk; Pg. 4; OPINION
Length: 1013 words
Byline: By ATOSSA ARAXIA ABRAHAMIAN
A journalist at Reuters and an editor at The New Inquiry.
Body


I ENTERED the green card lottery in the fall of 2010. It was a surprisingly simple form, composed mostly of questions on contact information, but a box that read ''Country Claimed'' gave me pause. Most applicants write in wherever they were born, but for me it was a bit more complicated; I could not, in good faith, claim any country as my own.I was born in Canada on July 19, 1986. My Iranian-born parents (of Armenian and Russian extraction) were living in Geneva at the time, but Switzerland grants citizenship only to the children of naturalized citizens. My parents, who both worked for the United Nations, didn't know if they would live there long enough to meet the residency requirements. I was destined to inherit an Iranian passport, and they knew all too well the lifetime of travel and work restrictions that would entail.
So they came up with a third-country solution. My mother would fly to Vancouver, British Columbia, wearing an oversize raincoat just weeks before her due date. She would give birth at a local hospital, stay with her brother, who lived there, until my paperwork was processed, and return to Geneva with a Canadian baby in tow. It worked so well that she repeated the process four years later with my brother.
My mother was finally naturalized when I was 8, so I was able to become a Swiss citizen after all. But my papers were, once again, misleading. Growing up, I spoke four languages at home -- Armenian with my father, Russian with my mother and English and French with baby sitters -- and attended international schools in which no one cared where you were from unless it was during the World Cup. I lived in Switzerland, but for all intents and purposes, I grew up on international soil.
When I went to college in New York, I was invited to Armenian events on the basis of my last name and Iranian ones on account of my first name, and I didn't think too much about where I came from. I was busy making friends and falling in love with the city. I spent summers working here, and it was the first place I'd ever lived that felt like home to me. Having spent my entire (albeit short) adult life here, I couldn't imagine leaving. So when I graduated, I found myself in need of a work visa.
There are several types of visas under which foreigners can work here, from seasonal farm work programs to O visas for ''extraordinary aliens'' -- Nobel Prize winners, celebrities and occasionally writers. For someone like me, just starting out in a career, this one was a long shot. The most common visa among college graduates is the H1-B. But the application process takes months, and the employer is required to shell out thousands of dollars in legal fees to pay for sponsorship. The foreigner's legal status in the country also depends on maintaining his or her employment.
When I graduated, right before the Great Recession, no one was sponsoring. I asked a lawyer if there was anything I could do to stay. He took my $100 consultation fee and asked if I had a boyfriend I could marry.
I left. But I had no idea where to go. I felt like a foreigner in Geneva, and most of my friends had left. I'd spent no time in Canada. I had nothing in Iran. I tried out Russia for size, but lasted barely six weeks (life advice: don't go to Russia if you're depressed). Eventually, I found a job at an international organization in Paris and spent the year Skyping with my New York friends, listening to WNYC reruns on my laptop and applying to graduate schools back in the United States.
Had I not had the good fortune and the funds to go back to school, I don't know where in the world I'd be. In 2010, I was able to return to New York for a master's program in journalism, and I spent that year working harder than I ever had before. I would have to make up for my nationality with labor and talent, a school counselor told me. When I interviewed for jobs, I felt like a leper. My international classmates joked that coming clean about a limited work permit at a job interview was like telling someone you had herpes on a first date.
In the meantime, I entered the green card -- also known as the ''diversity'' -- lottery. They call it a lottery for good reason; the odds of winning are minute. But I'd marked the deadline in my calendar the year before, and it seemed like a waste to let it pass. I didn't have the right-size photograph to attach to my application, so my boyfriend snapped a picture of me standing against a dusty white wall in our kitchen. It was 7 a.m., and head-on, I looked like a sleepy convict. I wrote down my phone number and address, and under ''Country Claimed,'' settled on Switzerland.
Last summer, when I found out I'd won, I couldn't believe it could be that simple. I called three lawyers to make sure it was real. They said it was.
It wasn't.
Two painful months later, I received a letter from the United States Embassy in Bern. It informed me that I was disqualified from the lottery because I'd claimed the wrong country of origin. Although I had Swiss citizenship, I was not a Swiss native, because I was born in Canada. Canadians typically aren't eligible for the lottery, but if I'd claimed Iran, where my parents were born, I wouldn't have had any trouble. I appealed and complained, but nothing could be done. My mother's trip in the summer of 1986 came back to bite me. The punch line, of course, was that I was too diverse for the diversity lottery. Even I can't tell you where I'm from.
I used to think of immigration as a problem for the migrant poor, not something that affected college-educated global citizens. I now know that getting a work permit is a complicated and often heartbreaking process, no matter who you are. Thanks to months of pitching articles to whoever would let me write them -- not to mention a good lawyer -- I finally obtained an O visa this year. I don't have to get married, to a man or a job, to have a career in the United States. But I was able to stay only because I had the time, resources and support to make it work. For most people, the odds are stacked against them from beginning to end.

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/08/19/opinion/sunday/home-is-where-the-green-card-is.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY ALEXANDER GLANDIEN)

Load-Date: October 1, 2012


End of Document
New Mask Rules Are Tricky for Business
The New York Times 
May 14, 2021 Friday 21:04 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1974 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Jason Karaian, Sarah Kessler, Lauren Hirsch and Ephrat Livni
Highlight: Companies are navigating conflicting guidance on pandemic precautions.
Body


Companies are navigating conflicting guidance on pandemic precautions.
Want this newsletter delivered directly to your inbox? Sign up here.
Now what?
The C.D.C. surprised health experts, political leaders and others yesterday when it announced that vaccinated people could go maskless in most places, including indoors. The agency’s advice doesn’t override local and state rules, though at least seven states adopted its mask guidelines. Others, like New York, said they would study the new guidance before deciding whether to adopt it. That puts businesses in a tricky spot.
Companies with frontline workers aren’t sure what to do. Retailers like Macy’s and the Gap said they were reviewing the new guidance, while Home Depot has not changed its rules requiring customers and workers to wear masks in its stores. Airlines and other transportation companies didn’t need to react, because federal guidelines still require masks for their industry.
Unions are unhappy about it. “Millions of Americans are doing the right thing and getting vaccinated, but essential workers are still forced to play mask police for shoppers who are unvaccinated and refuse to follow local Covid safety measures,” the president of the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, Marc Perrone, said in a statement. “Are they now supposed to become the vaccination police?”
H.R. departments have yet another headache. Companies coming up with protocols for a return to the office haven’t prepared for the C.D.C.’s sharp turnabout, Douglas Brayley, an employment lawyer at Ropes &amp; Gray, told DealBook. Companies need to abide by local guidelines, but the change in federal guidance raises questions. How do large companies establish a common policy when local public health agencies may not agree? How to handle employees who are still uncertain about safety when protocols shift? How will companies find out whether employees are vaccinated, and thus determine if they need to wear a mask?
And what about the Yankees? Eight fully vaccinated members of the baseball team tested positive for the virus. Some may interpret it as a lesson for businesses when workplaces loosen their protocols for things like masking, even if a majority of employees are vaccinated. “For a little bit there, we were getting pretty comfortable, because that’s what the rules called for. Now, we’ll tighten it back up and hopefully everyone stays safe,” the Yankees pitcher Jameson Taillon told The Times. Others argue that the Yankees’ frequent testing makes asymptomatic cases more likely to be caught, and given that only one of the eight has shown symptoms, it’s a sign that the vaccines are effective.
What are the rules where you are? See reopening plans and mask mandates for all 50 states.
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
Colonial Pipeline paid a $5 million ransom to hackers. The payment, made in Bitcoin, came shortly after the company shut down its network — and, as a result, the pipeline that supplies almost half of the East Coast’s fuel — in response to a ransomware attack. In other hacking news, Ireland’s health system operator shut down today because of a ransomware attack, and a unit of Toshiba said that it had been targeted by DarkSide, the group blamed for the Colonial infiltration.
McDonald’s is raising its wages, sort of. After moves by other fast-food chains, the company will increase pay at its 650 company-owned restaurants to an average of $13 per hour. But about 95 percent of McDonald’s restaurants in the U.S. are independently owned and will not be affected by the move.
A major teachers’ union called for schools to reopen. Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, which has 1.7 million members, said of the next academic year, “There is no doubt: Schools must be open. In person. Five days a week.” Teachers’ unions have sought strict virus mitigation measures that some say have slowed reopening timelines.
Delta will require new hires to be vaccinated, making it one of the first major corporations to enact such a provision. The airline’s C.E.O., Ed Bastian, told CNN that the requirement wouldn’t extend to current employees, but he said that he expected up to 80 percent to get shots.
DoorDash tripled its revenue in the first quarter. Demand for food delivery does not seem to be dropping as restaurants reopen dining rooms. “The negative impact that we were expecting in consumer behavior was smaller than we were anticipating,” the company’s C.F.O., Prabir Adarkar, told The Wall Street Journal.
Crypto’s first earnings call
The crypto exchange Coinbase yesterday held its first earnings call since going public. Its bumper profit for the first quarter largely matched expectations set in its filings ahead of its I.P.O. last month, so the numbers didn’t raise many pressing questions from investors, who were able to submit queries online and vote for their favorites to put to management.
“When will users be able to trade Doge?” Of more than 100 shareholder questions, one about Dogecoin, the high-flying crypto token based on a meme, was, inevitably, the most popular and so it was asked first. “We plan to list Doge in six to eight weeks,” said Coinbase’s C.E.O., Brian Armstrong, noting that the company was looking to expand its assets and aimed to list new products faster.
Coinbase says it won’t be too hasty. Armstrong noted that “certain products” that the exchange’s competitors allow users to trade make Coinbase “uncomfortable,” whereas “from the earliest days,” the company embraced regulation. Indeed, Coinbase representatives just met with regulators in Washington, Armstrong said, providing no specifics.
    • The company’s C.F.O., Alesia Haas, said that Coinbase was “bullish on the global market” and eager to expand internationally but that it needed licenses and bank partnerships, which take time.
Armstrong loves an internet reference. The company’s co-founder referred to this period in the crypto industry as similar to the internet’s infancy at least three times and at one point likened Coinbase to Google. The exchange welcomes competition, he said, just as “in the early days of the internet, Google wanted more websites out there.” But Coinbase isn’t looking to compete with rivals on fees, so if users had dreams of trading for free, as on the Robinhood app, they were dashed. “We do not believe in fee-less crypto trading,” Haas said.
“The fortune of Bill Gates and Melinda French Gates exceeds the size of Morocco’s annual economy, combines the value of Ford, Twitter and Marriott International and is triple the endowment of Harvard. While few know how their wealth will be divided in the divorce, one thing is clear: breaking it up can’t be easy.”
— The Times digs into the Gates family fortune, estimated to be worth at least $124 billion, which includes a stake in the Four Seasons hotel chain, huge tracts of farmland, a beachfront mansion in Southern California and one of Leonardo da Vinci’s notebooks.
In the papers
Some of the academic research that caught our eye this week, summarized in one sentence:
    • The gap in earnings between similarly qualified women and men is explained by both “glass ceilings” and “sticky floors.” (Gabriele Ciminelli, Cyrille Schwellnus and Balazs Stadler)
    • Bigger banks mostly benefit bankers. (Kilian Huber)
    • Companies with in-house M.&amp;A. specialists make more successful acquisitions than those that rely on outside experts. (Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu and René M. Stulz)
‘To our clients’ — Marty Lipton’s letters
Martin Lipton is one of the most consequential figures in modern corporate finance. Throughout the 89-year-old’s career as a high-powered M.&amp;A. lawyer, he has chronicled the ups and downs of deal making in thoughtful and widely followed notes to clients, known as “Marty Memos.” The notes, which span poison pills, shareholder primacy and the purpose of companies, are now available in a digital archive.
The back story: Leo Strine, former chief justice of the Delaware Supreme Court and now at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, helped create the archive. “It has taken several years to do the coding of the memos, to draft a narrative that situates ML’s work in historical context, and that also, critically, provides links to the key cases, regulatory developments and scholars and advocates involved in the policy debates in which ML participated,” Strine said in an email. He worked on it with teams at Wachtell and Penn Law, where he teaches. An in-depth essay that serves as a guide to the archive, “Lipton and His Impact,” is the place to start.
Here are two of our favorite letters. One comes from the 1980s takeover era, when junk bonds drove Wall Street and the poison pill was invented by Lipton in response, and the other from more recently, 2018, in which Lipton frames his early thinking on anti-takeover measures in the context of focusing on all stakeholders, not just shareholders:
    • “Our Nation is blindly rushing to the precipice.” In his Oct. 28, 1988, memo, “Is This the End of Takeovers,” Lipton warned that “abusive takeover tactics” were saddling American companies with too much debt and forcing them to focus on short-term market results. “As with tulip bulbs, South Sea bubbles, pyramid investment trusts, Florida land, REITs, LDC loans, Texas banks and all the other financial market frenzies of the past, the denouement will be a crash,” he wrote, urging rules to rein in investors who “show no restraint and no regard for the public good.”
    • “It promotes inequality and strikes at the very heart of our society.” In his April 10, 2018, memo, “The Purpose of the Corporation,” Lipton took aim at Milton Friedman’s mantra that companies should serve shareholders above all, which he said led to the damaging short-termism that he had fought against in takeover battles throughout his career. Noting “important new support for counterbalancing shareholder primacy and promoting long-term sustainable investment” at firms like BlackRock (and later the Business Roundtable, among others) he lent his voice to a burgeoning movement.
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
    • The rail operator Kansas City Southern said it had accepted Canadian National’s $33.6 billion takeover bid, upending a previous deal agreed with Canadian Pacific. (Reuters)
    • The activist short-seller Carson Block sent the insurer Lemonade a salty letter about alleged security flaws in its site, dropping the F-bomb in the opening sentence. (TechCrunch)
    • The “SPAC King” Chamath Palihapitiya isn’t worried about the blank-check boom turning to bust. (Bloomberg Businessweek)
Politics and policy
    • Amazon, Apple, Google and other tech companies filed an amicus brief in a court case in support of spouses of H-1B visa holders’ right to work legally in the U.S. And in an op-ed, the Bridgewater C.E.O., David McCormick, calls for the U.S. to raise the cap on visas for highly skilled foreign workers. (Google, National Review)
    • “Beneath Joe Biden’s Folksy Demeanor, a Short Fuse and an Obsession With Details” (NYT)
Tech
    • Alibaba reported its first quarterly loss since going public, after paying a big antitrust penalty that China levied on the e-commerce giant. (NYT)
    • The I.R.S. and Justice Department have reportedly sought information about illicit activity on Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange. (Bloomberg)
    • An IBM executive said that the computer chip shortage could last another two years. (BBC)
Best of the rest
    • Tom Montag, Bank of America’s No. 2 executive, runs its markets and corporate banking division with favoritism and an iron fist, employees say. (NYT)
    • “How the superrich soaked up Covid cash.” (FT)
    • A conversation with a Dogecoin millionaire. (NYT)
We’d like your feedback! Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: The new guidance comes with caveats. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Whitten Sabbatini for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 14, 2021


End of Document
Trump to Propose Government Reorganization, Targeting Safety Net Programs
The New York Times 
June 20, 2018 Wednesday 15:09 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 962 words
Byline: Glenn Thrush and Erica L. Green
Highlight: Many aid programs would be shunted into a giant new department, where they would be easier to cut or contain, and the Education and Labor Departments could merge.
Body


WASHINGTON — President Trump plans to propose a reorganization of the federal government as early as Thursday that includes a possible merger of the Education and Labor Departments, coupled with a reshuffling of other domestic agencies to make them easier to cut or revamp, according to administration officials briefed on the proposal.
The plan, which will most likely face significant opposition in Congress from Democrats and some Republicans, includes relocating many social safety net programs into a new megadepartment, which would replace the Department of Health and Human Services and possibly include the word “welfare” in its title.
Mr. Trump and his budget director, Mick Mulvaney, the architect of the plan, have sought to redefine as welfare subsistence benefit programs like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP, and housing aid. It is part of a rebranding effort, championed by conservative think tanks and House Republicans, to link them to unpopular direct-cash assistance programs that have traditionally been called welfare.
“They have been using the word welfare because it is pejorative,” said Elaine Waxman, a senior fellow in the Income and Benefits Policy Center at the Urban Institute, a nonpartisan Washington think tank. “The programs you can call welfare are actually very small in comparison to SNAP, which is an income support necessary to help families, workers and millions of kids.”
At the heart of the plan is expected to be an attempt to shift SNAP, which serves more than 42 million poor and working-class Americans, to the new agency from the Agriculture Department. Conservative think tanks, including the Heritage Foundation and Koch-related entities, have long sought to de-link food aid from agriculture in hopes of cutting costs.
Senate Republicans, who have already rejected a more modest Trump administration attempt to increase work requirements for SNAP recipients, are unlikely to sign off on the shift, which was first reported by Politico.
As recently as earlier this month, Mr. Mulvaney was also considering merging the Labor and Education Departments, either in the new welfare agency or in a new stand-alone department, according to a person with knowledge of his plans.
Calls to the White House and its budget office were not immediately returned.
The recommendations also include a number of less contentious proposals to streamline the government.
Mr. Mulvaney’s proposal is, in part, a back-to-the-future bureaucratic move. From 1953 to 1979, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare housed most of the nation’s social welfare and economic support programs. It was abolished by Congress under President Jimmy Carter, and split into the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Education, in recognition that no single department could manage all of the old department’s functions.
Another proposal included in a draft circulated to officials last week is an attempt to move the $3 billion Community Development Block Grant Program to the Department of Commerce from the Department of Housing and Urban Development, an official said.
This year, Mr. Mulvaney zeroed out funding for the grant program, which provides a broad and flexible funding pool for an array of community development, only to have Senate Republicans restore the cuts.
An adviser to a senior Senate Republican said the move to the Commerce Department was an attempt to strangle the program by removing it from career HUD officials who were more sympathetic to the demands of impoverished communities than Commerce Department officials.
Conservatives have been agitating to remove development programs from HUD for years. In 2006, aides to President George W. Bush unsuccessfully pushed to shift 18 programs to the Commerce Department.
Under Mr. Trump’s plan, HUD would gain control over the Agriculture Department’s rural housing program. A proposal to shift veterans’ housing to HUD was considered but rejected, according to an administration official with knowledge of the plan.
The Education Department has been eyeing several programs run by the Labor Department that it believes it would run more effectively, according to an extensive proposal drafted by Education Department officials last fall, and obtained by The New York Times in March.
Among the proposals in that plan was for the Education Department to reroute funding from the Labor Department’s program for adult and dislocated workers to invest in federal financial aid grants for the unemployed to use at short-term job training programs. The Education Department also proposed to take over some administration of an overhauled H1-B visa program for skilled workers to enter the United States, allowing it to use visa fees to bolster science, technology, engineering and math education.
The proposed merger of the Education and Labor Departments was first reported by Education Week.
Mr. Mulvaney and White House officials have closely guarded details of their plan, sharing them with political appointees but not career staff members at cabinet departments.
Administration officials said the blueprint for the plan was a 2017 list of reorganization recommendations produced by the conservative Heritage Foundation.
The group’s wish list includes the elimination of a handful of well-known federal programs, including the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the Export-Import Bank. It was not clear if Mr. Mulvaney had adopted those suggestions. But he is expected to propose far-reaching overhauls to the consumer bureau, which he runs as a second job.
PHOTO: Mick Mulvaney, the White House budget director, was the architect of the plan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tom Brenner/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: June 22, 2018


End of Document
Undoing Trump's Immigration Policies
The New York Times
October 11, 2020 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 1757 words
Byline: By The Editorial Board
Body


This administration has attacked every aspect of the immigration system -- and it won't be easy to undo.
It was a kind gesture to some 6,000 Filipinos who, in their youth, had fought with American armed forces in World War II and had been granted U.S. citizenship decades later. In 2016, when the veterans were in their 80s and 90s, the Obama administration agreed to allow some of their relatives in the Philippines to come to the United States before they completed the long wait for formal admission. 
  Last August, the Trump administration announced it was ending the program.
  This gratuitous swipe at a group of old veterans is a measure of how meticulously the Trump administration has pursued the destruction of immigration in America. Through administrative orders, strict enforcement and mere threat, the White House has attacked virtually every aspect of immigration, legal and illegal.
  This transformation of the American immigration system has been perhaps the administration's boldest accomplishment, overseen with single-minded focus by Stephen Miller, a top adviser to President Trump with an affinity for white nationalism.
  A report this summer from the Migration Policy Institute outlined over 400 actions on immigration that had been enacted by a sprawling array of federal departments in the Trump era.
  The effects are clear. Between 2016 and 2019, annual net immigration into the United States fell by almost half, to about 600,000 people per year -- a level not seen since the 1980s -- according to an analysis by William H. Frey of the Brookings Institution. (Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, that number has certainly decreased even more.)
  The 2016-19 drop ''is clearly a result of Trump's restrictive immigration measures,'' Mr. Frey told the editorial board, ''including immigrant bans from selected countries, greater limits on refugees, and generating fear among other potential immigrant groups over this administration's unwelcoming policies.''
  Along with more obscure actions, like ending that Filipino veterans program, the administration has been methodical in ensuring that its most widely criticized efforts succeed.
  In the spring of 2018, as thousands of Central American families crossed the southern U.S. border to seek asylum, the Justice Department ordered the arrest of anyone entering the country without authorization. This forced the separation of hundreds of families, even the removal of infants from nursing mothers.
  To scare people from bringing their families over the border, Jeff Sessions, the attorney general at the time, said, ''We need to take away children.'' It made no difference how young they were.
  National and international outrage over this cruelty led the administration to rescind that family separation policy. So it changed tack, shutting out asylum seekers through minute attention to administrative detail, bare knuckle diplomacy and ignoring legality.
  Border control officials said they would accept asylum applications only from people who arrived at approved border crossings, even though the law says anyone can apply for asylum once in the United States. At those crossings, asylum seekers were forced to wait for days, even weeks, in long lines just for a chance to approach the border to ask for protection. The White House packed the immigration appeals board with Trump appointees, with predictable results: Rejections increased.
  Mr. Trump also used the threat of tariffs to get Mexico to crack down on undocumented Central American immigrants and to allow frustrated asylum seekers to wait on the Mexican side of the border while their cases meandered through U.S. immigration courts.
  After Mr. Trump suspended aid to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras in March, Guatemala and Honduras agreed to accept asylum seekers who had passed through those countries on their way north, so they could either apply for asylum there or go home. (A federal appeals court blocked this arrangement, but that's effectively moot during the pandemic, since the administration has all but shut down the border under a 1944 public health law.)
  The scope of the administration's actions has been far broader than Mr. Trump implied it would be when he campaigned. He promised to bar ''rapists'' from Mexico, create ''a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States'' and save America from homicidal undocumented immigrants.
  Once in office, it was not just criminals and terrorists who drew his attention. It was also people seeking protection from the horrors of their home countries, undocumented immigrants trying to support their families and foreigners striving for a better life in the United States.
  Mr. Trump eventually achieved a version of his Muslim ban when the Supreme Court approved of severe restrictions on entry for residents of 13 countries, the majority of them with mostly Muslim populations. While the White House said one reason the ban was needed was lax security in those countries, it also has drastically scaled back the refugee program, which involves stringent vetting by American and United Nations officials. In Barack Obama's last year as president, the ceiling for refugee admissions was 110,000. For the current fiscal year, it's 15,000. Mr. Trump has made these desperate people campaign punching bags. ''Are you having a good time with your refugees?'' he said with smirk to a roaring crowd in Minnesota recently. (In fact, when a poll asked Minnesotans whether they approved of having refugees resettled in their community, 59 percent said yes, and 29 percent said no.)
  Despite Mr. Trump's promises to protect Americans from killer immigrants, Immigration and Customs Enforcement is now more than twice as likely to pick up immigrants with no criminal record beyond immigration violations, compared with the number before he took office. After being labeled the ''deporter in chief,'' Mr. Obama ordered ICE to concentrate enforcement on unauthorized immigrants who had committed crimes. Within weeks of his own inauguration, Mr. Trump eliminated any deportation priorities and made all undocumented immigrants fair game for ICE. With many cities resisting ICE's more stringent demands for cooperation, the agency has also found it easier to just pick up anyone with an existing deportation warrant.
  ''I understand when you're a criminal and you do bad things, you shouldn't be in the country,'' Helen Beristain, who voted for Mr. Trump, said when her husband, Roberto, owner of a restaurant in Granger, Ind., was ordered to be deported to Mexico in March 2017 after 20 years in the United States. But, she said, when ''you support and you help and you pay taxes and you give jobs to people, you should be able to stay.''
  Not anymore.
  While Mr. Trump promised a crackdown on illegal immigration during his presidency, he has also eagerly pursued reductions in authorized immigration.
  The administration had threatened to furlough 70 percent of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services employees, blaming the pandemic, but some of those employees said the real problem was restrictive policies and delays in visa applications that have sharply reduced revenue from the processing fees that fund the agency. At the same time, applications for permanent residency have declined since the administration announced it would adopt a rule that would prevent those considered likely to receive public benefits from becoming permanent residents. Among recent green-card recipients, 69 percent had at least one of the characteristics that would be weighed, according to the Migration Policy Institute.
  Ken Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, recently announced that the number of H-1B visas for skilled workers would be cut by one-third because of tighter criteria for who can get them. Critics said this would make American companies shift more work abroad.
  Mr. Trump also has ended ''temporary protected status'' for 400,000 people from El Salvador, Haiti, Sudan and elsewhere who have legally lived and worked in the United States for decades after being provided a haven from war or natural disaster.
  If Democrats were to take control of Congress and the White House next year, it would be fairly simple to undo some of the damage Mr. Trump has done to the nation's immigration system. The protections that Mr. Trump overturned for the Dreamers -- the thousands of people who were brought to the United States without authorization when they were young -- could be written into law, with public support. The travel ban could be overturned, and more refugees could be admitted. ICE could be directed to once again concentrate on deporting criminals. Resources could be shifted to smarter border security measures that don't rely on a physical wall.
  But rolling back other measures will be difficult.
  ''There's so much change that has happened in the last four years, there's no way a new administration could reverse things in four or even eight years,'' said Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute who was a co-author of the group's July report.
  Beyond that, there could be political challenges to undoing President Trump's clamps on the border if that would invite new caravans of asylum seekers. Would Democrats reverse the public charge rule and leave themselves open to accusations of coddling newcomers?
  After undoing the cruelest and most pointless of the president's changes to the immigration system, a new administration would need to make difficult decisions about controlling the border, assessing the role that skills and family ties should play in admitting immigrants, enforcing employment laws for unauthorized immigrants and creating a pathway to citizenship for millions of those workers and their families.
  But rejecting, by law and action, the Trump administration's racism, cruelty and xenophobia would reaffirm that America is a nation of immigrants who help revitalize the country -- an ideal that most Americans support.
  With a pandemic and an economic crisis to address, immigration may not seem like a priority. Yet if it is not addressed, the immigration system Mr. Trump has erected may be in operation for years to come.
  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/10/opinion/sunday/trump-immigration-child-separations.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAATA VIA PBS ERIC GAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)               

Load-Date: October 11, 2020


End of Document
Use of Work Visas by Technology Companies Is Under Fire - Correction Appended
The New York Times


 Correction Appended

Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section D; ; Section D; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 1366 words
Byline: By JERI CLAUSING 

By JERI CLAUSING 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 19
Body


As the information technology industry lobbies Congress to let more high-skilled foreign workers enter the country, new immigration figures indicate that the companies applying for the most visas are using them for the kind of jobs that critics say many Americans could easily be trained to perform.
Figures recently given to Congress by the Immigration and Naturalization Service show that the 10 companies using the most visas last year all provide contract labor and services -- jobs like computer and software installation and maintenance that critics contend do not necessarily require college-level math and science degrees.
The designation H1-B is used for work visas intended for hard-to-fill jobs. Many technology companies say they need to import more workers under the H1-B program because of a shortage of technically proficient domestic workers to fill crucial electrical engineering and product development jobs -- positions that often require master's or even doctorate degrees.
And yet, the company that imported the most foreign labor last year under the H1-B program is the Mastech Systems Corporation, a Pittsburgh company that received visas for 1,733 employees -- or about 80 percent of its domestic work force -- to bring in software programmers with only bachelor's degrees.
"This is not brain surgery," Representative Ron Klink, a Pennsylvania Democrat, said of the jobs being filled by foreign workers at companies like Mastech. "These jobs do require some skill and intellect. But American workers can be trained to take these jobs."
Mr. Klink, a member of the House Commerce Committee, requested a recent General Accounting Office review that questioned the extent of the shortage of technology workers.
He and other critics want Congress to hold the line on the number of visas rather than adopt a proposal by Senator Spencer Abraham, a Michigan Republican, that would raise the number of H1-B visas to 95,000 from 65,000. American industry, they argue, is exaggerating the dearth of qualified labor market to import foreign workers who are willing to work for lower pay and who take jobs from Americans.
Supporters of the Abraham bill, which is scheduled for a Senate vote early next month, say the current ceiling will be reached in May, four months before the end of the Federal fiscal year and leaving many crucial technology projects at risk.
No comparable House legislation has yet been introduced. But the House Judiciary Committee's subcommittee on immigration is holding a hearing on Tuesday. And the chairman, Lamar Smith, a Texas Republican, said he hoped to have a bill offered within a week and passed by the full House by the end of the month.
Industry lobbyists say the shortage of high-tech workers is so acute that failing to raise the cap could threaten one of the most vital parts of the nation's booming economy. Companies unable to fill crucial positions in this country, they say, will have no choice but to send more sophisticated technology projects overseas.
The American information technology industry has 346,000 job openings -- more than enough to go around for foreign workers and Americans alike, said Harris Miller, president of the Information Technology Association of America, a Washington trade group.
Complicating the debate are some seemingly contradictory trends, as some key parts of the industry -- including personal computer makers and chip companies -- are grappling with cyclical softening of their markets.
Two weeks ago, for example, the Intel Corporation played a lead role in releasing an industry study that contends there is a dire shortage of skilled technology workers. By last week, the company was announcing plans to cut some 3,000 jobs, mainly through attrition, in response to weakening demand for its microprocessors.
But the kinds of jobs going dark and the kinds going begging are not of the same skill level, according to Tracy Koon, an Intel spokeswoman. The company is always on the lookout for the type of highly skilled employees who receive most of its H1-B visas. At Intel, about 3 percent of a work force of 67,000 people have been hired via H1-B visas, and nearly 80 percent of the immigrants hold master's degrees or doctorates, Ms. Koon said.
Two other Silicon Valley advocates for the Senate bill, including the National Semiconductor Corporation and Varian Associates Inc., have frozen their work forces at current levels.
Varian Associates, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., is a maker of laboratory instruments, medical equipment and semiconductor manufacturing equipment. It has only 30 H1-B visa holders among its 7,000 employees and is not currently seeking to add any new high-skill positions. Nevertheless, Varian wants the immigration cap raised.
"We don't know when the crunch is going to come; it's so cyclical," said Ernest M. Felago, Varian's vice president of human resources. "Our only point is that it's another source of labor, so why dry it up?"
National Semiconductor, also a chip maker, said that 55 of the 450 technical people it has hired this year required H1-B visas. Even though the company has imposed a temporary hiring freeze, National Semiconductor, like Varian, wants the visa limit raised to be assured of having access to the best talent from where ever and whenever necessary.
"We would probably support taking the lid off altogether, but that's pretty radical at this point," said Tom Wulf, director of staffing for National Semiconductor.
A problem with even the current caps, according to companies which seek the highest-skilled foreign workers, is that too many of the H1-B visas are being used to fill jobs that do not require searching overseas for candidates.
"They should be hiring double-E people and people in product development," Mr. Wulf said, using an industry abbreviation for electrical engineers. "Otherwise," he said, they shouldn't be allowed to use the visas."
But Mastech, for one, makes no apologies for using the visas or for bringing in such a high proportion of immigrant labor. Mastech began as a high-tech personnel service but has expanded into helping companies design, install and update office computer systems.
"The whole market has grown so fast and the talent keeps declining," said Chuck Rusdill, investor relations director for Mastech. He said the company has been forced to dip into the foreign labor pool for even bachelor-degree holders, not to pay lower wages but because of the dwindling number of American computer science graduates.
Mastech said that most of its H1-B workers arrive with a bachelor's degree in computer science and three to five years of work experience. But Mr. Klink said that many of the jobs at Mastech and companies like it do not require math or science degrees. Programming, he contended is a skill that many underemployed Americans can easily be trained to do.
During the 1993 and 1994 votes on free-trade treaties, "we were being told that as we entered the new information age, our workers were going to be training for new information technology jobs," Mr. Klink said. "Now, only four years later, we're being told we don't have enough people, our people aren't trainable."
As the debate rages, even basic data are being questioned about the extent of the job opportunites in information technology. In addition to the the Information Technology Association of America study that found 346,000 job vacancies, the Commerce Department has estimated that the information technology industry will need an additional 1.3 million workers over the next decade.
But the recent General Accounting Office review questioned the validity of those numbers and the methods used for calculating them.
And while the industry points to figures showing wages in information technology are as much as 64 percent higher than the national average, critics say a rather modest wage growth in the field does not bear out claims of a labor crisis.
Norm Matloff, a computer science professor at the University of California-Davis, said that Norm Matloff said that Bureau of Labor Statistics indicate salaries for computer programmers rose 7 percent last year -- not a rate that would indicate employers are desperate for new labor, he said.
Correction

An article in Business Day on April 20 about technology companies' hiring of foreign workers misstated the name of one company. It is the Mastech Corporation, not Mastech Systems. The article also misspelled the surname of the company's investor relations director. He is Chuck Rudisill, not Rusdill.

Correction-Date: April 29, 1998, Wednesday

Graphic

 
Chart: "Who Uses High-Skill Visas"
Across the country, thousands of foreigners with special work visas, called H1-B visas, are working for technology companies that say they need the foreign labor to fill skilled jobs that cannot be filled by Americans. Some critics, though, contend that the workers are not necessarily more skilled, just less expensive. Chart lists companies with the largest number of these workers. (Source: Immigration and Naturalization Service)(pg. D10)      

Load-Date: April 20, 1998


End of Document
Trump’s Overhaul of Immigration Is Worse Than You Think
The New York Times 
October 10, 2020 Saturday 15:29 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; sunday
Length: 1752 words
Byline: The Editorial Board
Highlight: This administration has attacked every aspect of the immigration system — and it won’t be easy to undo.
Body


This administration has attacked every aspect of the immigration system — and it won’t be easy to undo.
It was a kind gesture to some 6,000 Filipinos who, in their youth, had fought with American armed forces in World War II and had been granted U.S. citizenship decades later. In 2016, when the veterans were in their 80s and 90s, the Obama administration agreed to allow some of their relatives in the Philippines to come to the United States before they completed the long wait for formal admission.
Last August, the Trump administration announced it was ending the program.
This gratuitous swipe at a group of old veterans is a measure of how meticulously the Trump administration has pursued the destruction of immigration in America. Through administrative orders, strict enforcement and mere threat, the White House has attacked virtually every aspect of immigration, legal and illegal.
This transformation of the American immigration system has been perhaps the administration’s boldest accomplishment, overseen with single-minded focus by Stephen Miller, a top adviser to President Trump with an affinity for white nationalism.
A report this summer from the Migration Policy Institute outlined over 400 actions on immigration that had been enacted by a sprawling array of federal departments in the Trump era.
The effects are clear. Between 2016 and 2019, annual net immigration into the United States fell by almost half, to about 600,000 people per year — a level not seen since the 1980s — according to an analysis by William H. Frey of the Brookings Institution. (Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, that number has certainly decreased even more.)
The 2016-19 drop “is clearly a result of Trump’s restrictive immigration measures,” Mr. Frey told the editorial board, “including immigrant bans from selected countries, greater limits on refugees, and generating fear among other potential immigrant groups over this administration’s unwelcoming policies.”
Along with more obscure actions, like ending that Filipino veterans program, the administration has been methodical in ensuring that its most widely criticized efforts succeed.
In the spring of 2018, as thousands of Central American families crossed the southern U.S. border to seek asylum, the Justice Department ordered the arrest of anyone entering the country without authorization. This forced the separation of hundreds of families, even the removal of infants from nursing mothers.
To scare people from bringing their families over the border, Jeff Sessions, the attorney general at the time, said, “We need to take away children.” It made no difference how young they were.
National and international outrage over this cruelty led the administration to rescind that family separation policy. So it changed tack, shutting out asylum seekers through minute attention to administrative detail, bare knuckle diplomacy and ignoring legality.
Border control officials said they would accept asylum applications only from people who arrived at approved border crossings, even though the law says anyone can apply for asylum once in the United States. At those crossings, asylum seekers were forced to wait for days, even weeks, in long lines just for a chance to approach the border to ask for protection. The White House packed the immigration appeals board with Trump appointees, with predictable results: Rejections increased.
Mr. Trump also used the threat of tariffs to get Mexico to crack down on undocumented Central American immigrants and to allow frustrated asylum seekers to wait on the Mexican side of the border while their cases meandered through U.S. immigration courts.
After Mr. Trump suspended aid to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras in March, Guatemala and Honduras agreed to accept asylum seekers who had passed through those countries on their way north, so they could either apply for asylum there or go home. (A federal appeals court blocked this arrangement, but that’s effectively moot during the pandemic, since the administration has all but shut down the border under a 1944 public health law.)
The scope of the administration’s actions has been far broader than Mr. Trump implied it would be when he campaigned. He promised to bar “rapists” from Mexico, create “a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States” and save America from homicidal undocumented immigrants.
Once in office, it was not just criminals and terrorists who drew his attention. It was also people seeking protection from the horrors of their home countries, undocumented immigrants trying to support their families and foreigners striving for a better life in the United States.
Mr. Trump eventually achieved a version of his Muslim ban when the Supreme Court approved of severe restrictions on entry for residents of 13 countries, the majority of them with mostly Muslim populations. While the White House said one reason the ban was needed was lax security in those countries, it also has drastically scaled back the refugee program, which involves stringent vetting by American and United Nations officials. In Barack Obama’s last year as president, the ceiling for refugee admissions was 110,000. For the current fiscal year, it’s 15,000. Mr. Trump has made these desperate people campaign punching bags. “Are you having a good time with your refugees?” he said with smirk to a roaring crowd in Minnesota recently. (In fact, when a poll asked Minnesotans whether they approved of having refugees resettled in their community, 59 percent said yes, and 29 percent said no.)
Despite Mr. Trump’s promises to protect Americans from killer immigrants, Immigration and Customs Enforcement is now more than twice as likely to pick up immigrants with no criminal record beyond immigration violations, compared with the number before he took office. After being labeled the “deporter in chief,” Mr. Obama ordered ICE to concentrate enforcement on unauthorized immigrants who had committed crimes. Within weeks of his own inauguration, Mr. Trump eliminated any deportation priorities and made all undocumented immigrants fair game for ICE. With many cities resisting ICE’s more stringent demands for cooperation, the agency has also found it easier to just pick up anyone with an existing deportation warrant.
“I understand when you’re a criminal and you do bad things, you shouldn’t be in the country,” Helen Beristain, who voted for Mr. Trump, said when her husband, Roberto, owner of a restaurant in Granger, Ind., was ordered to be deported to Mexico in March 2017 after 20 years in the United States. But, she said, when “you support and you help and you pay taxes and you give jobs to people, you should be able to stay.”
Not anymore.
While Mr. Trump promised a crackdown on illegal immigration during his presidency, he has also eagerly pursued reductions in authorized immigration.
The administration had threatened to furlough 70 percent of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services employees, blaming the pandemic, but some of those employees said the real problem was restrictive policies and delays in visa applications that have sharply reduced revenue from the processing fees that fund the agency. At the same time, applications for permanent residency have declined since the administration announced it would adopt a rule that would prevent those considered likely to receive public benefits from becoming permanent residents. Among recent green-card recipients, 69 percent had at least one of the characteristics that would be weighed, according to the Migration Policy Institute.
Ken Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, recently announced that the number of H-1B visas for skilled workers would be cut by one-third because of tighter criteria for who can get them. Critics said this would make American companies shift more work abroad.
Mr. Trump also has ended “temporary protected status” for 400,000 people from El Salvador, Haiti, Sudan and elsewhere who have legally lived and worked in the United States for decades after being provided a haven from war or natural disaster.
If Democrats were to take control of Congress and the White House next year, it would be fairly simple to undo some of the damage Mr. Trump has done to the nation’s immigration system. The protections that Mr. Trump overturned for the Dreamers — the thousands of people who were brought to the United States without authorization when they were young — could be written into law, with public support. The travel ban could be overturned, and more refugees could be admitted. ICE could be directed to once again concentrate on deporting criminals. Resources could be shifted to smarter border security measures that don’t rely on a physical wall.
But rolling back other measures will be difficult.
“There’s so much change that has happened in the last four years, there’s no way a new administration could reverse things in four or even eight years,” said Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute who was a co-author of the group’s July report.
Beyond that, there could be political challenges to undoing President Trump’s clamps on the border if that would invite new caravans of asylum seekers. Would Democrats reverse the public charge rule and leave themselves open to accusations of coddling newcomers?
After undoing the cruelest and most pointless of the president’s changes to the immigration system, a new administration would need to make difficult decisions about controlling the border, assessing the role that skills and family ties should play in admitting immigrants, enforcing employment laws for unauthorized immigrants and creating a pathway to citizenship for millions of those workers and their families.
But rejecting, by law and action, the Trump administration’s racism, cruelty and xenophobia would reaffirm that America is a nation of immigrants who help revitalize the country — an ideal that most Americans support.
With a pandemic and an economic crisis to address, immigration may not seem like a priority. Yet if it is not addressed, the immigration system Mr. Trump has erected may be in operation for years to come.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAATA VIA PBS ERIC GAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Load-Date: May 13, 2023


End of Document
Reorganization Focused on the Safety Net
The New York Times
June 21, 2018 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 959 words
Byline: By GLENN THRUSH and ERICA L. GREEN
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Trump plans to propose a reorganization of the federal government as early as Thursday that includes a possible merger of the Education and Labor Departments, coupled with a reshuffling of other domestic agencies to make them easier to cut or revamp, according to administration officials briefed on the proposal.
The plan, which will most likely face significant opposition in Congress from Democrats and some Republicans, includes relocating many social safety net programs into a new megadepartment, which would replace the Department of Health and Human Services and possibly include the word ''welfare'' in its title. 
  Mr. Trump and his budget director, Mick Mulvaney, the architect of the plan, have sought to redefine as welfare subsistence benefit programs like the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP, and housing aid. It is part of a rebranding effort, championed by conservative think tanks and House Republicans, to link them to unpopular direct-cash assistance programs that have traditionally been called welfare.
  ''They have been using the word welfare because it is pejorative,'' said Elaine Waxman, a senior fellow in the Income and Benefits Policy Center at the Urban Institute, a nonpartisan Washington think tank. ''The programs you can call welfare are actually very small in comparison to SNAP, which is an income support necessary to help families, workers and millions of kids.''
  At the heart of the plan is expected to be an attempt to shift SNAP, which serves more than 42 million poor and working-class Americans, to the new agency from the Agriculture Department. Conservative think tanks, including the Heritage Foundation and Koch-related entities, have long sought to de-link food aid from agriculture in hopes of cutting costs.
  Senate Republicans, who have already rejected a more modest Trump administration attempt to increase work requirements for SNAP recipients, are unlikely to sign off on the shift, which was first reported by Politico.
  As recently as earlier this month, Mr. Mulvaney was also considering merging the Labor and Education Departments, either in the new welfare agency or in a new stand-alone department, according to a person with knowledge of his plans.
  Calls to the White House and its budget office were not immediately returned.
  The recommendations also include a number of less contentious proposals to streamline the government.
  Mr. Mulvaney's proposal is, in part, a back-to-the-future bureaucratic move. From 1953 to 1979, the Department of Health, Education and Welfare housed most of the nation's social welfare and economic support programs. It was abolished by Congress under President Jimmy Carter, and split into the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Education, in recognition that no single department could manage all of the old department's functions.
  Another proposal included in a draft circulated to officials last week is an attempt to move the $3 billion Community Development Block Grant Program to the Department of Commerce from the Department of Housing and Urban Development, an official said.
  This year, Mr. Mulvaney zeroed out funding for the grant program, which provides a broad and flexible funding pool for an array of community development, only to have Senate Republicans restore the cuts.
  An adviser to a senior Senate Republican said the move to the Commerce Department was an attempt to strangle the program by removing it from career HUD officials who were more sympathetic to the demands of impoverished communities than Commerce Department officials.
  Conservatives have been agitating to remove development programs from HUD for years. In 2006, aides to President George W. Bush unsuccessfully pushed to shift 18 programs to the Commerce Department.
  Under Mr. Trump's plan, HUD would gain control over the Agriculture Department's rural housing program. A proposal to shift veterans' housing to HUD was considered but rejected, according to an administration official with knowledge of the plan.
  The Education Department has been eyeing several programs run by the Labor Department that it believes it would run more effectively, according to an extensive proposal drafted by Education Department officials last fall, and obtained by The New York Times in March.
  Among the proposals in that plan was for the Education Department to reroute funding from the Labor Department's program for adult and dislocated workers to invest in federal financial aid grants for the unemployed to use at short-term job training programs. The Education Department also proposed to take over some administration of an overhauled H1-B visa program for skilled workers to enter the United States, allowing it to use visa fees to bolster science, technology, engineering and math education.
  The proposed merger of the Education and Labor Departments was first reported by Education Week.
  Mr. Mulvaney and White House officials have closely guarded details of their plan, sharing them with political appointees but not career staff members at cabinet departments.
  Administration officials said the blueprint for the plan was a 2017 list of reorganization recommendations produced by the conservative Heritage Foundation.
  The group's wish list includes the elimination of a handful of well-known federal programs, including the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the Export-Import Bank. It was not clear if Mr. Mulvaney had adopted those suggestions. But he is expected to propose far-reaching overhauls to the consumer bureau, which he runs as a second job.
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/20/us/politics/trump-welfare-department-reorganization.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mick Mulvaney, the White House budget director. His idea is to overhaul several cabinet departments. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: June 21, 2018


End of Document
The Activist Investor Done With Finance; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 10:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1702 words
Highlight: Jeff Ubben is leaving the hedge fund he founded for a new venture focused on “inclusive capitalism.” He thinks traditional finance is played out.
Body


Want this delivered to your inbox each day? Sign up here.
Jeff Ubben’s plan to end finance as usual
One of America’s top activist investors said that he’s leaving the $16 billion hedge fund, ValueAct, that he has turned into a major force in corporate boardrooms. His reason is, perhaps, even bigger news.
Mr. Ubben is a force in shareholder activism, who has made companies like Microsoft change strategy to improve returns for investors. But unlike others in the field, he largely avoids splashy public fights — winning praise from defenders of corporate boards like Marty Lipton.
He’s leaving to start a new hedge fund, Inclusive Capital Partners, with co-founders like the investor Lynn Forester de Rothschild, who’s focused on — you guessed it — “inclusive capitalism.” The new firm is focused on environmental and social impact investments. (Mr. Ubben will still manage ValueAct’s $1 billion impact fund as well … for now. More on that below.)
 Definitions can be squishy, but assets tied to socially responsible investment are generally estimated at around $12 trillion in the U.S., out of $30 trillion worldwide.
Mr. Ubben thinks traditional corporate finance is played out. He told Andrew that corporate America thinks too much about the short term, a trend he admitted he helped drive. Traditional activist investing to force a C.E.O. change, shareholder payout or sale of a company won’t accomplish much anymore.
 For good measure, he told The Financial Times: “Finance is, like, done. Everybody’s bought everybody else with low-cost debt. Everybody’s maximized their margin. They’ve bought all their shares back ... There’s nothing there. Every industry has about three players. Elizabeth Warren is right.”
Mr. Ubben’s focus now is a different sort of activist investing, with an eye on big issues like the environment. Impact-focused activism, particularly at older corporate names, can drive bigger profits than traditional activism: “The legacy companies are valued like they’re going out of business and they have the work force, they have the geographies and intellectual property and all of that,” he told Andrew.
 The hedge fund mogul conceded that he’ll need to find “courageous C.E.O.s and boards,” and added, “I think we’re going to have to fire our shareholders. We’re going to have to find new shareholders, shareholders that want to be focused on the long term.”
 He also doesn’t think that investment firms — apparently like, um, ValueAct — can run both traditional funds and impact ones. “I don’t think these two strategies peacefully coexist,” he told the FT.
The Justice Department faces a harsh spotlight
A hearing held by the House Judiciary Committee today is expected to examine whether the Justice Department has let politics seep into enforcement actions — including antitrust cases.
Expect a lot of questions about Roger Stone, the Trump adviser who was convicted last year of witness tampering and lying to the authorities in connection with Robert Mueller’s investigation. A former prosecutor, Aaron Zelinsky, plans to testify that he believes senior law enforcement officials intervened to seek a more lenient prison sentence.
But pay close attention to testimony from John Elias, a career official in the department’s antitrust division, who alleges that under Attorney General Bill Barr his group was asked to pursue cases for political reasons:
 The department purportedly investigated 10 takeovers in the marijuana industry because Mr. Barr “did not like the nature of their underlying business,” according to Mr. Elias’s opening statement. The department’s antitrust chief, Makan Delrahim, reportedly conceded as much to staff last September.
 Mr. Elias also accuses the department of acting on political motives in its review of California’s emissions deal with four big carmakers.
The hearing could raise questions about antitrust investigations in tech. A bipartisan group of state attorneys general have been investigating Silicon Valley titans like Google. But concerns that Justice Department leaders may have ulterior motives — such as beliefs that the companies have an anti-conservative bias — won’t help those cases.
Companies brace for the visa ban
President Trump’s order suspending several types of work visas brought swift corporate condemnation, but it’ll take a while to bite, immigration experts say.
“The immediate impact of the suspension is mostly symbolic,” a policy analyst told The Times’s Gillian Friedman. Consulates aren’t interviewing for most green cards or temporary work visas because of the pandemic. The effects will become clearer when they reopen.
More business leaders are speaking out, with tech executives the most prominent.
Apple’s Tim Cook: “Like Apple, this nation of immigrants has always found strength in our diversity, and hope in the enduring promise of the American Dream. There is no new prosperity without both. Deeply disappointed by this proclamation.”
Microsoft’s Brad Smith: “Now is not the time to cut our nation off from the world’s talent or create uncertainty and anxiety. Immigrants play a vital role at our company and support our country’s critical infrastructure. They are contributing to this country at a time when we need them most.”
Tesla’s Elon Musk: “Very much disagree with this action. In my experience, these skillsets are net job creators. Visa reform makes sense, but this is too broad.”
The suspension sparked outrage in India, where three-quarters of H-1B visa holders come from. Hemant Mohapatra, a partner at Lightspeed Ventures who returned to India in 2018 after more than a decade working on an H-1B visa for Google, Andreesen Horowitz and others, called the ban a “personal betrayal.” He pointed to a post he wrote shortly after his move to help others decide “when it is the right time to head home.”
Here’s what’s happening
A “disturbing surge” suggests that the virus isn’t under control. America’s top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci, told House lawmakers yesterday that the next few weeks would be crucial in dealing with a spike in cases in states like Arizona, Florida and Texas.
Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez won her Democratic primary for the New York seat that she won in 2018. She defeated Michelle Caruso-Cabrera, a former CNBC anchor backed by top Wall Street executives. “Their money couldn’t buy a movement,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez tweeted.
There’s tech, and there’s everything else. Records set by the Nasdaq highlight how the performance of big tech stocks has diverged sharply from the rest of the market. At this point, the tech-heavy Nasdaq’s advantage over the Dow and S&amp;P 500 is the biggest since the early 1980s, according to The Wall Street Journal.
Some companies are giving executives big bonuses before filing for bankruptcy. The payments, often in cash instead of stock, often aren’t tied to performance and can be tricky for courts to claw back.
Baseball will return. Major League Baseball and its players’ union resolved their differences over a shortened 60-game season, and play will begin — with no fans in the stands — on July 23 or July 24.
The productivity pandemic
Many companies say that their employees are much more efficient working from home, reports The Times’s David Gelles. But as lockdowns drag on, can that last? And if so, at what cost?
Processes that managers took for granted seem less essential now, from long meetings to regular status updates. And that — along with the disappearance of commutes and office-based distractions — means workers can get more done, a host of companies told David. (Home-based distractions are another matter, of course.)
But there is a downside. Managers are worried about the effects of isolation, decaying social capital and lack of camaraderie. Mental health is a particular concern, David tells us, and he dug into his notebook for some extra material about it, based on his reporting:
To combat the risk of burnout, many employers are offering virtual mental health offerings to remote workers.
“Everyone is so focused on the protection of the virus,” said Douglas Merritt, the C.E.O. of the software company Splunk. “But health includes mental health, emotional health, physical health, financial health.” Splunk is among the companies that have started offering daily meditation and mindfulness sessions to remote workers.
Early in the crisis, Salesforce also started a daily mental health call, and was encouraging employees to develop a daily meditation, mindfulness or prayer practice. “We’re in a much more stressful environment than ever before,” Salesforce’s C.E.O., Marc Benioff, said in late March. “We have to take care of that.”
The speed read
Deals
 Dell is reportedly exploring options for its $50 billion holding in the software company VMware, including spinning off the stake to shareholders. (WSJ)
 Amazon will create a $2 billion fund to invest in clean-energy start-ups that could help it become net carbon zero by 2040. (TechCrunch)
 The mall operators Simon and Brookfield Property Partners are reportedly exploring a bid for J.C. Penney, to help out their shopping centers. (WSJ)
Politics and policy
 The Trump administration is considering tariffs on Canadian aluminum, risking a trade war before the new North American free-trade pact goes into effect. (NYT)
 The E.U. may block American travelers as a coronavirus risk. (NYT)
Tech
 Amazon employees are pressing the company to address what they say is systemic racial inequality. (NYT)
 Stacy Brown-Philpot of TaskRabbit, one of Silicon Valley’s few black C.E.O.s, is stepping down. (NYT)
 Palantir appointed Alexandra Wolfe Schiff to its board ahead of a planned I.P.O. The former Wall Street Journal reporter (and daughter of the author Tom Wolfe) is the first woman to serve as a director at the data-mining company. (Bloomberg)
Best of the rest
 Plexiglass supplies are running low, because of all those new virus-proofing barriers. (WSJ)
 “The City of London Has a Slavery Problem” (Bloomberg)
 WeWork’s private jet could now be yours for a mere $50 million. (Business Insider)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Jeff Ubben (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ann Johansson for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
How Corporate America Views President Biden
The New York Times 
January 22, 2021 Friday 14:57 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1384 words
Byline: David Gelles
Highlight: Big business broke with Republicans in the final days of the Trump administration. That doesn’t mean executives are fully ready to embrace President Biden.
Body


Big business broke with Republicans in the final days of the Trump administration. That doesn’t mean executives are fully ready to embrace President Biden.
In the waning days of the Trump administration, the schism between big business and the Republican Party burst into the open.
While corporate America notched real gains over the last four years, including lower taxes and a looser regulatory environment, President Donald J. Trump routinely upset major chief executives. The Jan. 6 riot at the Capitol and the refusal of Mr. Trump and many congressional Republicans to recognize the election result was the breaking point, culminating in many large companies condemning Mr. Trump and cutting off support for his allies in Congress.
But just because big business is at odds with the Republican Party doesn’t mean it’s ready to embrace every aspect of the Democratic agenda. With President Biden seeking to undo much of Mr. Trump’s legacy, including some initiatives championed by big business, chief executives are approaching the new administration with a mix of optimism and apprehension.
At the most fundamental level, many executives appear grateful to move on from the Trump administration, which routinely surprised companies with abrupt changes to trade policy, immigration rules and more.
“Business hates uncertainty, and we’ve had chaotic uncertainty now for some time,” said Andrew Liveris, who stepped down as chief executive of DowDuPont in 2018 and is now a board member at IBM. “Trying to navigate through it as a company has been very tough.”
But the prospect of higher corporate taxes and new regulations that might curtail profits is unlikely to sit well with a business community struggling to recover from the pandemic. “The rubber will hit the road when we get around to things like taxes and climate tariffs,” Mr. Liveris said.
Mr. Biden began putting his policy agenda to work on Inauguration Day, signing 17 executive orders and actions in the Oval Office.
One recommitted the United States to the Paris climate accord, a move that was met with praise from business leaders, many of whom objected to Mr. Trump’s withdrawal from the pact in 2017. On Twitter, the Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates cheered the move, saying that “the United States also has the opportunity to lead the world in avoiding a climate disaster.”
Other orders shielded “Dreamers” from deportation and named an official response coordinator for the pandemic.
Sundar Pichai, the chief executive of Alphabet, applauded on Twitter the “quick action on Covid relief, the Paris Climate Accord, and immigration reform,” and said his company looked forward “to working with the new administration to help the US recover from the pandemic + grow our economy.”
But at least one early move by Mr. Biden — his revoking of a permit for the Keystone XL pipeline — was met with swift condemnation from some business leaders.
Jay Timmons of the National Association of Manufacturers, a group that just weeks ago called on the cabinet to consider removing Mr. Trump from office, criticized the move, arguing that the pipeline would have created 10,000 union jobs.
The Chamber of Commerce, another pro-business group that took an increasingly hard line with Mr. Trump in the last weeks of his presidency, also opposed the move, calling it “a politically motivated decision that is not grounded in science.”
“It will harm consumers and put thousands of Americans in the building trades out of work,” said Marty Durbin, an executive at the chamber.
More skirmishes may be on the horizon. Mr. Biden has signaled that he is open to raising taxes on corporations.
“I’m sure there will be conflict on the tax issue for corporations,” said Richard A. Gephardt, a Democrat and former House majority leader.
The prospect of higher individual taxes is also likely to face pushback from wealthy executives. In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo recently floated a tax increase on high earners. Should the federal income tax rate go up, too, it could result in an effective tax rate of more than 60 percent for some well-paid New Yorkers.
“That’s pretty onerous,” said Kathy Wylde, chief executive of the Partnership for New York City, a trade group that represents many large employers.
Ms. Wylde added that potential changes to taxes on real estate, which Mr. Trump cut, could also be a cause for concern among executives. “There’s probably nervousness in the real estate community,” she said.
But an increase in the corporate tax rate is a price companies may be willing to pay in exchange for an administration with more predictable stances on critical issues like trade and tariffs.
“They may like the Biden administration more on trade than they did Trump, because he jerked things around so much,” Mr. Gephardt said.
For the moment, there is a palpable sense of relief in board rooms across the country, with executives exhaling after four years during which Mr. Trump’s unpredictable outbursts led to abrupt changes in policies, and sometimes targeted companies.
“The markets are relieved to be on the other side of all the tumult and uncertainty that was Donald Trump,” said Brad Karp, chairman of the law firm Paul, Weiss. “You woke up in the morning and saw the president imposing tariffs, or closing borders, or retaliating against a company. Business needs predictability and certainty.”
And as Mr. Biden works to get the coronavirus under control, companies large and small will be rooting for the new administration. The pandemic has decimated the economy, sapping businesses of sales and leading to mass unemployment. Measures the Biden administration is considering, including a new stimulus package and a large government infrastructure program, could help bolster an economic recovery.
“Getting Covid under control will be good for business,” Mr. Karp said. “A stimulus plan will be good for the economic recovery. Infrastructure spending will be good for the economy.”
Immigration is another issue where big companies have cause for optimism. Mr. Trump curtailed immigration and put caps on the H1-B visa program, which allows foreigners to work in the United States, a shift that caused headaches for many companies.
“America-first policies don’t work for global business,” Ms. Wylde said. “Those will not be missed.”
Mr. Biden signed an executive order mandating the wearing of masks on federal property. By contrast, Mr. Trump politicized mask wearing, further disillusioning business leaders who watched, dismayed, as arguments about masks erupted in their stores.
“Trump lost a lot of the business community on the mask stuff,” Ms. Wylde said. “Without a mask mandate, the enforcement agents became the business. That was a major issue for retailers.”
Already, some executives who spoke approvingly of Mr. Trump’s policies are welcoming the Biden administration. Nick Pinchuk, the chief executive of Snap-on, a tool company based in Kenosha, Wis., said he was hopeful that the federal government would support efforts to bolster the working class, such as retraining efforts and investments in education.
“It remains to be seen, but it looks like this administration could prioritize those things,” Mr. Pinchuk said. While not all of his employees were pleased with the election result, he said, they largely disapproved of Mr. Trump’s meddling with the democratic process and seemed willing to give Mr. Biden a chance.
“The business world wants the Biden administration to be successful,” said Blair Effron, a co-founder of Centerview Partners, an advisory firm that works with many large companies. “People understand the urgency of the moment for this country, politically, economically, healthwise and socially.”
PHOTOS: President Biden, at the White House on Wednesday, intends to undo much of the Trump era, including some initiatives championed by corporate America. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES); There will probably be pushback on some Democratic plans. For example, income taxes in New York, top, could be a worry for high earners if federal and state taxes rise. On the other hand, businesses are welcoming more certainty; under former Presient Donald J. Trump, companies were routinely surprised with abrupt changes to trade policy. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN TAGGART FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)

Load-Date: July 9, 2021


End of Document
Pakistani Doctor, Arrested in Minneapolis, Is Accused of Plan to Join ISIS
The New York Times 
March 19, 2020 Thursday 11:40 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 478 words
Byline: Neil Vigdor
Highlight: Muhammad Masood, 28, a doctor, said he wanted to “fight on the front line as well as help the wounded brothers,” according to the F.B.I.
Body


Muhammad Masood, 28, a doctor, said he wanted to “fight on the front line as well as help the wounded brothers,” according to the F.B.I.
A Pakistani doctor who the F.B.I. said was intent on joining the Islamic State, either on the battlefield in Syria or as a “lone wolf” in the United States, was arrested on Thursday before boarding a flight at Minneapolis-St. Paul Airport.
The doctor, Muhammad Masood, 28, had been en route to Los Angeles to try to travel to the Middle East by cargo ship, the authorities said. He had initially bought a plane ticket from Chicago to Jordan, but officials said the flight was canceled because of the coronavirus outbreak.
Mr. Masood, who most recently worked as a research coordinator at a medical clinic in Rochester, Minn., was charged with one count of attempting to provide material support to a designated foreign terrorist organization. 
The charge carries a penalty of up to 20 years in prison.
Mr. Masood spent the past two years in the United States on a temporary visa, known as a H-1B, that is issued to skilled workers from abroad, a criminal affidavit said.
Law enforcement officials said they began their investigation of Mr. Masood in January, after he posted on an encrypted social media platform asking for help making “hijrah,” the Arabic word for migration. The Federal Bureau of Investigation said the word was widely used by those seeking to join ISIS. 
Mr. Masood then used the same social media platform to correspond with two informants about his plans, according to the affidavit.
He told one, “I want to fight on the front line as well as help the wounded brothers,” Carson Green, an F.B.I. special agent, wrote in the affidavit. 
Mr. Masood was kept in custody after a brief appearance in U.S. District Court in Minneapolis on Thursday. 
Manny Atwal, an assistant federal public defender who accompanied Mr. Masood in court, said in an email on Thursday that he could not comment on the case.
In a message exchange, Mr. Masood told one of the informants that, as a doctor, “I want to help mujahedeen on the ground,” Mr. Green wrote in the affidavit. Mr. Masood also told the informant that he sometimes wanted to carry out a terrorist attack in the United States because not many fighters could “reach here to attack,” the affidavit said. 
“Masood further explained that he will need weapons training when he joins ISIS, and he discussed the use of small drones that can be purchased online and turned into ‘istishhaddi’ (meaning martyr or suicide) drones for use in Syria or in America,” Mr. Green wrote. 
Mr. Masood is due back in court on Tuesday.
PHOTO: A faded flag of the Islamic State in Raqqa, Syria, in 2018. A Pakistani doctor was trying to travel to the Middle East by cargo ship to join the terrorist group, the authorities said.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ivor Prickett for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: March 20, 2020


End of Document
Executives Eye Biden With Hope And Doubt
The New York Times
January 23, 2021 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1297 words
Byline: By David Gelles
Body


Big business broke with Republicans in the final days of the Trump administration. That doesn't mean executives are fully ready to embrace President Biden.
In the waning days of the Trump administration, the schism between big business and the Republican Party burst into the open. 
  While corporate America notched real gains over the last four years, including lower taxes and a looser regulatory environment, President Donald J. Trump routinely upset major chief executives. The Jan. 6 riot at the Capitol and the refusal of Mr. Trump and many congressional Republicans to recognize the election result was the breaking point, culminating in many large companies condemning Mr. Trump and cutting off support for his allies in Congress.
  But just because big business is at odds with the Republican Party doesn't mean it's ready to embrace every aspect of the Democratic agenda. With President Biden seeking to undo much of Mr. Trump's legacy, including some initiatives championed by big business, chief executives are approaching the new administration with a mix of optimism and apprehension.
  At the most fundamental level, many executives appear grateful to move on from the Trump administration, which routinely surprised companies with abrupt changes to trade policy, immigration rules and more.
  ''Business hates uncertainty, and we've had chaotic uncertainty now for some time,'' said Andrew Liveris, who stepped down as chief executive of DowDuPont in 2018 and is now a board member at IBM. ''Trying to navigate through it as a company has been very tough.''
  But the prospect of higher corporate taxes and new regulations that might curtail profits is unlikely to sit well with a business community struggling to recover from the pandemic. ''The rubber will hit the road when we get around to things like taxes and climate tariffs,'' Mr. Liveris said.
  Mr. Biden began putting his policy agenda to work on Inauguration Day, signing 17 executive orders and actions in the Oval Office.
  One recommitted the United States to the Paris climate accord, a move that was met with praise from business leaders, many of whom objected to Mr. Trump's withdrawal from the pact in 2017. On Twitter, the Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates cheered the move, saying that ''the United States also has the opportunity to lead the world in avoiding a climate disaster.''
  Other orders shielded ''Dreamers'' from deportation and named an official response coordinator for the pandemic.
  Sundar Pichai, the chief executive of Alphabet, applauded on Twitter the ''quick action on Covid relief, the Paris Climate Accord, and immigration reform,'' and said his company looked forward ''to working with the new administration to help the US recover from the pandemic + grow our economy.''
  But at least one early move by Mr. Biden -- his revoking of a permit for the Keystone XL pipeline -- was met with swift condemnation from some business leaders.
  Jay Timmons of the National Association of Manufacturers, a group that just weeks ago called on the cabinet to consider removing Mr. Trump from office, criticized the move, arguing that the pipeline would have created 10,000 union jobs.
  The Chamber of Commerce, another pro-business group that took an increasingly hard line with Mr. Trump in the last weeks of his presidency, also opposed the move, calling it ''a politically motivated decision that is not grounded in science.''
  ''It will harm consumers and put thousands of Americans in the building trades out of work,'' said Marty Durbin, an executive at the chamber.
  More skirmishes may be on the horizon. Mr. Biden has signaled that he is open to raising taxes on corporations.
  ''I'm sure there will be conflict on the tax issue for corporations,'' said Richard A. Gephardt, a Democrat and former House majority leader.
  The prospect of higher individual taxes is also likely to face pushback from wealthy executives. In New York, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo recently floated a tax increase on high earners. Should the federal income tax rate go up, too, it could result in an effective tax rate of more than 60 percent for some well-paid New Yorkers.
  ''That's pretty onerous,'' said Kathy Wylde, chief executive of the Partnership for New York City, a trade group that represents many large employers.
  Ms. Wylde added that potential changes to taxes on real estate, which Mr. Trump cut, could also be a cause for concern among executives. ''There's probably nervousness in the real estate community,'' she said.
  But an increase in the corporate tax rate is a price companies may be willing to pay in exchange for an administration with more predictable stances on critical issues like trade and tariffs.
  ''They may like the Biden administration more on trade than they did Trump, because he jerked things around so much,'' Mr. Gephardt said.
  For the moment, there is a palpable sense of relief in board rooms across the country, with executives exhaling after four years during which Mr. Trump's unpredictable outbursts led to abrupt changes in policies, and sometimes targeted companies.
  ''The markets are relieved to be on the other side of all the tumult and uncertainty that was Donald Trump,'' said Brad Karp, chairman of the law firm Paul, Weiss. ''You woke up in the morning and saw the president imposing tariffs, or closing borders, or retaliating against a company. Business needs predictability and certainty.''
  And as Mr. Biden works to get the coronavirus under control, companies large and small will be rooting for the new administration. The pandemic has decimated the economy, sapping businesses of sales and leading to mass unemployment. Measures the Biden administration is considering, including a new stimulus package and a large government infrastructure program, could help bolster an economic recovery.
  ''Getting Covid under control will be good for business,'' Mr. Karp said. ''A stimulus plan will be good for the economic recovery. Infrastructure spending will be good for the economy.''
  Immigration is another issue where big companies have cause for optimism. Mr. Trump curtailed immigration and put caps on the H1-B visa program, which allows foreigners to work in the United States, a shift that caused headaches for many companies.
  ''America-first policies don't work for global business,'' Ms. Wylde said. ''Those will not be missed.''
  Mr. Biden signed an executive order mandating the wearing of masks on federal property. By contrast, Mr. Trump politicized mask wearing, further disillusioning business leaders who watched, dismayed, as arguments about masks erupted in their stores.
  ''Trump lost a lot of the business community on the mask stuff,'' Ms. Wylde said. ''Without a mask mandate, the enforcement agents became the business. That was a major issue for retailers.''
  Already, some executives who spoke approvingly of Mr. Trump's policies are welcoming the Biden administration. Nick Pinchuk, the chief executive of Snap-on, a tool company based in Kenosha, Wis., said he was hopeful that the federal government would support efforts to bolster the working class, such as retraining efforts and investments in education.
  ''It remains to be seen, but it looks like this administration could prioritize those things,'' Mr. Pinchuk said. While not all of his employees were pleased with the election result, he said, they largely disapproved of Mr. Trump's meddling with the democratic process and seemed willing to give Mr. Biden a chance.
  ''The business world wants the Biden administration to be successful,'' said Blair Effron, a co-founder of Centerview Partners, an advisory firm that works with many large companies. ''People understand the urgency of the moment for this country, politically, economically, healthwise and socially.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/22/business/corporate-america-biden-administration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: President Biden, at the White House on Wednesday, intends to undo much of the Trump era, including some initiatives championed by corporate America. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
There will probably be pushback on some Democratic plans. For example, income taxes in New York, top, could be a worry for high earners if federal and state taxes rise. On the other hand, businesses are welcoming more certainty
under former Presient Donald J. Trump, companies were routinely surprised with abrupt changes to trade policy. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN TAGGART FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)               

Load-Date: January 23, 2021


End of Document
Foreign Visas, Virus, Seattle: Your Monday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 17:43 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1261 words
Byline: Victoria Shannon and Hiroko Masuike
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) 
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. President Trump will sign an order barring hundreds of thousands of foreign workers from the U.S.
The temporary suspension of work visas, including the H-1B program for high-skilled workers, is described by the administration as part of a broad effort to limit entry into the country during the economic downturn caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
The order is opposed by a swath of businesses — including high-tech companies in Silicon Valley and manufacturers — whose leaders say it will block their ability to recruit workers for jobs that Americans are not willing or capable of performing. Above, Mr. Trump at a White House meeting with governors last week.  
So far, lawmakers and governors have mostly pushed for policies that will ensure Americans can go back to the jobs they held before the pandemic. But some cities and states are looking toward a simpler solution: hire workers directly. 
The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.
2. The W.H.O. chief said that more than 183,000 new coronavirus cases worldwide were reported in the past 24-hour period, “easily the most in a single day so far.”
Increased testing is not driving the global surge in cases, according to the director of the W.H.O. Health Emergencies Program. Above, testing at a fire station in Tolleson, Ariz.
The U.S., with 4.3 percent of the world’s population, accounted for 20 percent of all the new infections worldwide, according to New York Times data.
New cases continued to surge over the weekend in 22 states, especially in the West and the South. Two more White House staff members tested positive for the virus after attending the president’s campaign rally in Tulsa, Okla., on Saturday. The workers joined six other members of the campaign’s advance team who tested positive before the event.
In New York City, offices were allowed to open and as many as 300,000 people were expected to return to work in person.
3. A night of gunfire in Seattle’s protester-led “autonomous zone” sent another person to the hospital with serious injuries.
On Saturday, shootings left a 19-year-old man dead and another in critical condition.
The zone was declared this month in the wake of clashes between protesters and the police after the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody in Minneapolis.
The sustained outcry over his death has compelled many white Americans to acknowledge anti-black racism in the U.S. Though it is hard to know how deep or wide their response is, some whites admit how little they grasp the experience of being black in America.
From our Opinion pages, charts document just how vast the inequality is between whites and blacks in America.
4. A scaled-back hajj.
Saudi Arabia announced that the hajj, the annual pilgrimage that draws millions of Muslims, will be limited to Saudis and pilgrims already inside the country.
In 2019, 2.49 million pilgrims took part in the hajj, and 1.86 million of them came from abroad. Above, last year’s hajj.
The reduced numbers could strike a big financial blow to a kingdom already reeling from low oil prices and an economic slowdown caused by the coronavirus lockdown.
In Europe, Sweden’s Scandinavian neighbors have all closed their borders to Swedes, fearing the country’s lax approach to combating the coronavirus.
5. Joe Biden is winnowing his list of vice-presidential candidates.
The former vice president says he wants a running mate who is ready to assume the presidency, who shares his priorities and with whom he is “simpatico.” He is aiming to announce his choice by Aug. 1.
We list the 12 women we know to be under consideration and explain why each might be chosen, or might not be.
6. Federal authorities are investigating the noose found in Bubba Wallace’s NASCAR garage.
Officials said they were reviewing whether there had been violations of federal law. The Alabama garage was fitted with surveillance cameras, potentially offering crucial clues.
The episode at the Talladega Superspeedway came less than two weeks after NASCAR, at Mr. Wallace’s urging, banned the Confederate battle flag from its races and properties. Above, Mr. Wallace before today’s NASCAR Cup Series race.
“This will not break me,” Mr. Wallace, the only black driver in NASCAR’s top racing series, said in a statement. “I will not give in, nor will I back down.”
7. The statue of Theodore Roosevelt flanked by a Native American and an African is coming down in New York City amid the nationwide conversation about racism.
For many, the bronze statue outside the American Museum of Natural History symbolized a legacy of colonial expansion and racial discrimination. The museum’s president said the decision was based on the statue and not on Roosevelt, whom the museum continues to honor as “a pioneering conservationist.”
And the Eskimo Pie, the chocolate-covered ice cream treat, will soon be renamed. “We are committed to being a part of the solution on racial equality, and recognize the term is inappropriate,” a spokeswoman for the manufacturer said.
8. The Golden Globes move to February.
Since 1973, the Globes have taken place in January, in part to set the pace for the Academy Awards — or at least to try.
Next year’s event was rescheduled to Feb. 28, the date that the Oscars abandoned last week in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. (The Oscars were rescheduled for April 25.) Tina Fey and Amy Poehler will host the Globes at the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills, Calif. Above, the duo hosting the awards in 2015. 
In sports, the P.G.A. Championship, once scheduled for May 14 to 17, will proceed without spectators from Aug. 6 to 9 in San Francisco, its original location. The U.S. Open had already been moved to Sept. 17, and the Masters had been postponed to Nov. 12.
9. A come-from-behind victor in the supercomputer wars.
China and the U.S., long locked in a contest to develop the world’s most powerful computers, were just bested by a massive Japanese machine.
A supercomputer called Fugaku, which is in Kobe and run by the government-sponsored institute Riken, took first place in a speed ranking. IBM computers scored second and third, while systems in China moved to the fourth and fifth spots. Above, Fugaku.  
The room-size systems are used for complex military and scientific tasks, including breaking codes, modeling climate change and simulating new designs for cars, weapons, aircraft and drugs. Fugaku is already being used to help study, diagnose and treat Covid-19.
10. And finally, blame the pandemic for extra sharp swings in the price of cheese.
Consumers started buying way more cheese in March and April, but demand from restaurants and schools fell. The resulting swings in supply and demand led to the most price volatility ever in the wholesale cheese market.
This month, as restaurants slowly reopened, the return of demand is pushing cheese prices up and suppliers are trying to ramp up. On Friday, the benchmark cheese price, which affects everything from mozzarella to Parmesan, hit a record high.
Have a mild evening.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Charter Schools Tied to Turkey Grow in Texas
The New York Times
June 7, 2011 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 4477 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE SAUL
Body


TDM Contracting was only a month old when it won its first job, an $8.2 million contract to build the Harmony School of Innovation, a publicly financed charter school that opened last fall in San Antonio.
It was one of six big charter school contracts TDM and another upstart company have shared since January 2009, a total of $50 million in construction business. Other companies scrambling for work in a poor economy wondered: How had they qualified for such big jobs so fast?
The secret lay in the meteoric rise and financial clout of the Cosmos Foundation, a charter school operator founded a decade ago by a group of professors and businessmen from Turkey. Operating under the name Harmony Schools, Cosmos has moved quickly to become the largest charter school operator in Texas, with 33 schools receiving more than $100 million a year in taxpayer funds.
While educating schoolchildren across Texas, the group has also nurtured a close-knit network of businesses and organizations run by Turkish immigrants. The businesses include not just big contractors like TDM but also a growing assemblage of smaller vendors selling school lunches, uniforms, after-school programs, Web design, teacher training and even special education assessments.
Some of the schools' operators and founders, and many of their suppliers, are followers of Fethullah Gulen, a charismatic Turkish preacher of a moderate brand of Islam whose devotees have built a worldwide religious, social and nationalistic movement in his name. Gulen followers have been involved in starting similar schools around the country -- there are about 120 in all, mostly in urban centers in 25 states, one of the largest collections of charter schools in America.
The growth of these ''Turkish schools,'' as they are often called, has come with a measure of backlash, not all of it untainted by xenophobia. Nationwide, the primary focus of complaints has been on hundreds of teachers and administrators imported from Turkey: in Ohio and Illinois, the federal Department of Labor is investigating union accusations that the schools have abused a special visa program in bringing in their expatriate employees.
But an examination by The New York Times of the Harmony Schools in Texas casts light on a different area: the way they spend public money. And it raises questions about whether, ultimately, the schools are using taxpayer dollars to benefit the Gulen movement -- by giving business to Gulen followers, or through financial arrangements with local foundations that promote Gulen teachings and Turkish culture.
Harmony Schools officials say they scrupulously avoid teaching about religion, and they deny any official connection to the Gulen movement. The say their goal in starting charter schools -- publicly financed schools that operate independently from public school districts -- has been to foster educational achievement, especially in science and math, where American students so often falter.
''It's basically a mission of our organization,'' said Soner Tarim, the superintendent of the 33 Texas schools.
The schools, Dr. Tarim said, follow all competitive bidding rules, and do not play favorites in awarding contracts. In many cases, Turkish-owned companies have in fact been the low bidders.
Even so, records show that virtually all recent construction and renovation work has been done by Turkish-owned contractors. Several established local companies said they had lost out even after bidding several hundred thousand dollars lower.
''It kind of boils my blood a little bit, all the money that was spent, when I know it could have been done for less,'' said Deborah Jones, an owner of daj Construction, one of four lower bidders who failed to win a recent contract for a school renovation in the Austin area.
Harmony's history underscores the vast latitude that many charter school systems have been granted to spend public funds. While the degree of oversight varies widely from state to state, the rush to approve charter schools has meant that some barely monitor charter school operations.
In Washington, concern is growing. A number of charter schools across the country have been accused of a range of improprieties in recent years, from self-dealing on contracts to grade-changing schemes and inflating attendance records to increase financing.
Last year, the inspector general's office in the federal Education Department cited these complaints in a memo alerting the agency of ''our concern about vulnerabilities in the oversight of charter schools.''
The Texas Education Agency has a total of nine people overseeing more than 500 charter school campuses. ''They don't have the capacity at the state level to do the job,'' said Greg Richmond, president of the National Association of Charter School Authorizers. Even so, the state's education commissioner, Robert Scott, last year took the unusual step of granting Harmony permission to open new schools outside the normal approval process.
Officials at the education agency said staffing was sufficient to oversee charter schools. They would not discuss Harmony's contracts, but a check of the agency's past audits -- largely desk reviews of financial statements submitted by the schools -- did not find any alarms raised about Harmony contracting.
In April, however, the agency notified Harmony of an unreleased preliminary audit questioning more than $540,000 in inadequately documented expenses, the vast majority involving federal grant money. Neither the agency nor Harmony would disclose details of the findings.
Starting Out
The charter school movement did not begin in Texas, but the state embraced it with ideological fervor in the late 1990s as a pet project of the governor at the time, George W. Bush. The schools' independence from local school boards and union contracts, the theory went, would free them to become seedbeds of educational achievement in a landscape of underperforming failure.
While Texas charter schools must meet core curriculum standards, they may emphasize some subjects over others, as Harmony does with math, science and technology. They do not have to hew to standard public school calendars or hours. They may -- and some do -- pay teachers less than the standard state-mandated salaries. (In exchange for this flexibility, the schools get less state money than regular schools, with various calculations showing an annual difference of between $1,000 and $2,000 per pupil.)
David Bradley, a member of the Texas Board of Education, served on the panel that reviewed the early charter proposals. ''The only requirement was that you expressed an interest,'' he said, adding, ''The first time Harmony came forth, they had a great application, and they were great people.''
One of those people was Yetkin Yildirim, who had arrived from Turkey in 1996 to attend the University of Texas in Austin. He also worked as a volunteer tutor in local high schools. The idea for the Harmony schools was born, he said, when he and friends -- including Dr. Tarim -- saw how much less rigorous the American high schools were in teaching science and math.
''Then we realized that something can be done,'' said Dr. Yildirim, now a University of Texas professor specializing in asphalt technology. They spent a year writing their proposal, and in 2000 the group opened its first school, in Houston.
The schools represented the expansion of a mission that had already created hundreds of schools -- and a number of universities -- in Turkey and around the world. According to social scientists who have studied them, these schools have been the primary vehicle for the aspirations of the Gulen movement, a loose network of several million followers of Mr. Gulen, who preaches the need to embrace modernity in a peace-loving, ecumenical version of Islam. At the center of his philosophy is the concept of ''hizmet'' -- public service.
The movement is also influential in Turkish politics and controls substantial commercial holdings, including a bank, Asya; one of Turkey's largest daily newspapers, Zaman; and an American cable television network, Ebru-TV, based in New Jersey.
Mr. Gulen, 70, considers his teachings a bulwark against Islamic extremism. Yet he and the movement that bears his name have been surrounded by controversy in Turkey. He came to this country in 1999 while under pressure from secular Turkish authorities who accused him of promoting an Islamic state. He was charged, though the case was thrown out. More recently, the arrests of Turkish journalists critical of the Gulen movement have led to accusations of retaliation by followers in the current government, which has a more religious leaning.
Mr. Gulen now lives in a Pennsylvania retreat owned by a foundation. In an interview there last year with The International Herald Tribune, he said he had not benefited financially from the movement. His only possessions, he said, were a blanket, some bed sheets and a few prized books.
Still, at least for the schools, America has been a land of opportunity. The creation story has been enacted across the country -- Turkish immigrants, often scientists or professors, founding charter schools run by boards of mostly Turkish-born men. Today the United States has more Gulen-inspired schools than any country but Turkey, according to a presentation by Joshua Hendrick, a professor at Loyola University Maryland whose 2009 dissertation explored the movement.
In Texas, Harmony now educates more than 16,000 children. Eight schools have opened in the last year alone.
Dr. Yildirim said that while he had been influenced by Mr. Gulen -- he writes and speaks about his teachings -- his primary motivation in starting the schools was to give back to the community.
''My life changed here. I'm so thankful for that,'' he said. ''I believe some people born in this country are taking some things for granted.''
At first, Harmony Schools used a mix of local American and Turkish immigrant contractors. But as it has grown, especially in the rush of new schools, Harmony has increasingly relied on its Turkish network.
In response to questions, Harmony provided a list showing that local American contractors had been awarded 13 construction and renovation jobs over the years. But a review of contracts since January 2009 -- 35 contracts and $82 million worth of work -- found that all but 3 jobs totaling about $1.5 million went to Turkish-owned businesses.
TDM, builder of the new San Antonio school, is one of several companies that stand out -- for the size of their contracts, their seemingly overnight success or both. One of TDM's owners, records and interviews show, is Kemal Oksuz, president of the Turquoise Council for Americans and Eurasians, an umbrella group over several foundations established by Gulen followers. Since TDM was formed in November 2009, its work has involved only Harmony Schools and a job at the Turquoise Council headquarters, according to a company accountant.
Another TDM principal is a civil engineer, Osman Ozguc.
''Please don't think that I'm a new guy, inexperienced in this area,'' Mr. Ozguc said when asked about the San Antonio project, explaining that he had 26 years of construction experience, mostly on large projects in Turkey. ''I provided all the requirements asked in the bid. And when we got the job, we delivered in a very short time period, and with a very economical result.'' He did acknowledge that change orders had added about $1 million to the cost.
Mr. Ozguc said he formed TDM after a split from Solidarity, another Houston company that has done major ground-up construction jobs for Harmony in the past two years. Records show that Solidarity is run by Levent Ulusal, a civil engineer with a prior connection to Harmony: he was a school business manager until March 2009, when he joined Solidarity.
Since Texas charter schools do not get separate public money for facilities, Harmony's construction program is financed by bonds that will be paid off over time using regular public payments to the schools, bond documents show. The group has issued more than $200 million in bonds since 2007, making it the state's largest charter school bond issuer.
With public money in play, Texas law requires charter schools to award contracts to the bidder that offers the ''best value.'' Lowest is not necessarily best, with the schools given leeway. But the criteria for choosing the best bidder must be clear.
Last year, local contractors questioned the fairness of bidding on two Harmony renovation jobs in the Austin area. On one job, in the suburb of Pflugerville, the low bidder, at $1.17 million, was a well-known Texas company, Harvey-Cleary. The job went to Atlas Texas Construction and Trading, even though its bid was several hundred thousand dollars higher. Atlas, with offices in Texas and Turkey, shows up on a list of Gulen-affiliated companies in a 2006 cable from the American Consul General in Istanbul, Deborah K. Jones, that was released by WikiLeaks.
A vice president of Harvey-Cleary said Harmony never explained its decision.
The same day Atlas won the Pflugerville contract, it got a job at another Austin-area Harmony school, even though four bidders came in lower.
Harmony Schools asked two architects to analyze the disputed Austin jobs. Both architects had previously worked for Harmony Schools; both concluded that the jobs should have been awarded to Atlas.
Atlas has an eclectic business portfolio: for several years, it has also supplied breakfast and lunch at many Harmony schools. The contract is worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Two other bidders submitted formal catering proposals. One was Preferred Meal Systems, a national company that undercut Atlas's price by 78 cents a day, a substantial margin given that the two meals are often supplied for about $4.
Jim Drumm, the regional vice president for Preferred Meal, said that when the company learned that its bid was lower than the winner's, ''We attempted, without success, to recontact Harmony Schools to learn why our proposal was rejected.''
Dr. Tarim said Preferred Meal was turned down because its food is heated in special company-installed ovens. With no kitchens in the schools, he said, there is no room for ovens.
Inside the Schools
Recently Dr. Tarim led a tour of one of Harmony's big renovation jobs -- the new home of the Harmony Science Academy, the chain's marquee Houston high school. The academy, one of 11 Harmony schools in Houston, was recently rated among the city's top 10 high schools by Children at Risk, an advocacy group. The campus used to be an ITT business center, and even now, the low-slung buildings communicate office park more than high school. There is also a new building, constructed by TDM, housing a gym and the Cosmos Foundation's headquarters.
This being Texas, the academy is conspicuous for the absence of a football field. But in many ways, the Harmony Schools seem much like standard public schools, albeit of the strict, testing-oriented sort in vogue today.
Students wear uniforms, and anything that detracts from uniform appearance -- even hoop earrings or highlighted hair -- is frowned upon. One teacher described a disciplinary system in which students receive points for behavioral infractions as minor as tilting back in a chair.
The students, as at most Gulen-inspired schools, represent a racial and ethnic cross-section of the community. Many are children of immigrants drawn by the upwardly mobile allure of careers in technology and health care. Beginning in fourth grade, all students must complete science projects.
In a physics class, students demonstrated a homemade hovercraft -- a simple plywood disc fitted with a chair. Rigged to a leaf blower, the contraption levitated inches above the ground, even with someone in the chair.
The project illustrates principles of physics, but the larger point, said the teacher, Levent Sakar, is developing an excitement about science.
''Once a student does a project like that, they will never forget it,'' he said.
Still, the bottom line is measurable achievement. And so the Harmony schools place a heavy emphasis on preparing for state assessment tests, with four practice tests annually, according to schedules on school Web sites. Each practice test occupies the better part of a week, and students who fail get mandatory tutoring, some of it on Saturdays.
Judging school quality, of course, is an imprecise business. But by the measure that Harmony and most charter schools have embraced -- scores on the state tests -- the Harmony schools seem to be succeeding. Last year, 16 of the schools were deemed ''exemplary,'' the highest rating, while seven were rated ''recognized,'' and the other two ''academically acceptable.'' The eight new schools have not yet been rated.
The Harmony schools advertise themselves as college preparatory schools with every graduate accepted to college, and a bulletin board in the hallway at the science academy displays pictures of this year's senior class, along with their college acceptances. But Harmony's ''100 percent'' acceptance rate actually represents only a small census, since most of the schools do not have senior classes and many students transfer earlier on. Statewide, 154 students graduated this year, the largest class yet.
And while the schools' combined math and English SAT scores -- an average of 1026 -- were 37 points above the statewide average last year, they fell short of the 1100 on those two parts that the state regards as predicting ''college readiness.''
Dr. Tarim, who came from Turkey and studied aquatic ecology at Texas A&M, objects to common references to the schools as Turkish. Still, even if they are American charter schools first and foremost, the schools do have an undeniable Turkish flavor.
Many of the furnishings are imported from Turkey -- at a San Antonio school, the entryway features a turquoise arch, and the lobby ceiling is decorated with images of the sun and a star and crescent moon. Harmony advertises that its teachers ''are recruited from around the world,'' but most of its foreign teachers are Turkish men, and all but a handful of the 33 principals are men from Turkey. In addition to the standard foreign languages, the schools offer instruction in Turkish. They encourage students and teachers, even parents, to join subsidized trips to Turkey.
What they avoid, as publicly financed schools, is religious instruction. And amid jabs from critics -- educators, disaffected parents and bloggers -- about their Turkishness and ties to a Muslim group, the schools take great pains to separate themselves from the Gulen movement. They are not ''Gulen schools,'' they insist, and have no affiliation with any movement.
''I'm not a follower of anybody,'' Dr. Tarim said in an interview. Records show, however, that when applying to the State of Texas to form Harmony schools, he was a consultant to Virginia International University in Fairfax, one of the private universities that lawyers for Mr. Gulen say were originally inspired by his teachings.
At a forum on the schools last December in Houston, Dr. Hendrick, the Maryland professor, argued that such denials had only deepened the ambiguity and helped fuel suspicion. ''Why do leaders deny affiliation when affiliation is clear?'' he asked.
Ultimately, some scholars say, the schools are about more than just teaching schoolchildren.
Hakan Yavuz, a Turkish-born assistant professor at the University of Utah's Middle East Center, says he does not oppose the movement, though he is critical of what he calls its male domination and lack of transparency. In his view, the schools are the foundation for the movement's attempts to grow in the United States.
''The main purpose right now is to show the positive side of Islam and to make Americans sympathize with Islam,'' Dr. Yavuz said.
Teachers and Visas
Around the country, the most persistent controversy involving the schools -- and the one most covered in the news -- centers on the hundreds of Turkish teachers and administrators working on special visas.
The schools say they bring in foreign teachers because of a shortage of Americans qualified to teach math and science. Of the 1,500 employees at the Texas Harmony schools this year, Dr. Tarim said, 292 were on the special ''H-1B'' visas, meant for highly skilled foreign workers who fill a need unmet by the American workforce.
But some teachers and their unions, as well as immigration experts, have questioned how earnestly the schools worked to recruit American workers. They say loopholes have made it easy to bring in workers with relatively ordinary skills who substitute for American workers.
''I think they have a preference for these H-1B workers,'' said Dr. Ronil Hira, a professor at the Rochester Institute of Technology who has studied the visa program. ''It may be a preference for a variety of reasons -- lower wages or a network where they've got family or friends and connections and this is a stepping stone for them to get a green card.''
The American jobs, often offered to educators at Gulen schools around the world or graduates of Gulen universities, also provide a way for the movement to expand its ranks in this country, Dr. Yavuz said.
American consular employees reviewing visas have questioned the credentials of some teachers as they sought to enter the country. ''Most applicants had no prior teaching experience, and the schools were listed as related to'' Mr. Gulen, a consular employee wrote in a 2009 cable. It did not say which schools had hired the teachers. Some with dubious credentials were denied visas.
In February, a Chicago charter school union affiliated with the American Federation of Teachers complained to the federal Department of Labor, alleging that the Chicago Math and Science Academy and Concept Schools, a group that operates 25 schools in the Midwest, had abused the visa system by ''routinely assigning these teachers duties or class load that seemingly do not take into account the laws governing H1-B visa holders.''
The Labor Department had already been investigating at least one Concept school. The investigation appeared to have been triggered by a complaint in July 2008 by Mustafa Emanet, a network systems administrator and teacher at a middle school in Cleveland. By law, imported teachers must be paid ''prevailing wage.'' Mr. Emanet alleged that while his visa reflected his promised salary, $44,000, he was actually paid $28,000 his first year.
A Labor Department spokesman said the investigation was ongoing.
Expanding the Network
The heart of the movement's Texas operations is the Turquoise Center, a Houston complex that houses several foundations established by Gulen followers. Their activities show how the movement has integrated itself into life in Texas, often by dint of the foundations' connections to the Harmony Schools.
The Turquoise Center opened in 2008, financed partly through donations from Gulen followers, who on average tithe 10 percent of their income, experts say. The money, Dr. Hendrick wrote in his dissertation, goes ''to pay for a student's scholarship, to provide start-up capital for a new school, to send a group of influential Americans on a two-week trip to Turkey or to sponsor an academic conference devoted to Fethullah Gulen.''
Dozens of Texans -- from state lawmakers to congressional staff members to university professors -- have taken trips to Turkey partly financed by the foundations.
One group, the Raindrop Foundation, helped pay for State Senator Leticia Van de Putte's travel to Istanbul last year, according to a recent campaign report. In January, she co-sponsored a Senate resolution commending Mr. Gulen for ''his ongoing and inspirational contributions to promoting global peace and understanding.''
In an interview, Ms. Van de Putte described the trip as a working visit.
The Raindrop Foundation says its mission is to promote Turkish culture in America. It sponsors cooking classes, traditional Turkish dinners and performances of the Whirling Dervishes, a dance group associated with Sufi Muslim tradition. It also organizes an annual Turkish Language Olympiad where 6,000 students, many from Harmony schools, compete in Turkish language, poetry, dance and singing contests.
The 2011 singing winner was a Hispanic girl from a Harmony school in northwest Houston.
The Raindrop Foundation's president, Mehmet Okumus, is a former Harmony school principal, and some of the foundation's income -- $770,000 a year, he said -- comes through arrangements with the schools. Two Raindrop Foundation units, Zenith Learning and Merit Learning, operate after-school programs, test preparation programs and summer camps at the schools. Parents pay Zenith up to $200 a week to leave their children after school. Of that, Harmony collects 25 cents per child per day, according to Dr. Tarim.
Another group at the Turquoise Center, the Institute of Interfaith Dialog, sponsors lectures on interfaith relations and finances the Gulen Institute at the University of Houston, which sponsors graduate scholarships in social work and pays for graduate students to study in Turkey.
The Institute of Interfaith Dialog -- founded by Mr. Gulen himself, according to court documents -- does not appear to have business dealings with Harmony. But its president, Yuksel Alp Aslandogan, does. Indeed, in 2002, he purchased the former Austin church that became Harmony's second school.
Dr. Aslandogan, a former computer science professor at the University of Texas at Arlington, paid $1.375 million for the building, then leased it to Harmony. Last year, he said in an e-mail, Harmony bought it for $1.7 million. He described his original purchase as ''an investment opportunity toward a good cause'' but declined to say how much he made off the deal, emphasizing that he had to pay taxes and make repairs.
Dr. Aslandogan has other connections to Harmony. He is chief executive of the Texas Gulf Foundation, a nonprofit that provides an array of services to the schools.
The foundation, in fact, grew out of Harmony: its owners and operators originally worked for the schools, according to a statement from Harmony, but left to form Texas Gulf, which they believed would ''provide Harmony and other Texas schools with quality services at lower costs.'' Until recently, Texas Gulf had offices at a Harmony campus.
Since 2007, Harmony says, it has paid Texas Gulf $525,000 for services that include an online professional development program for teachers and administrators, an assessment tool for students and special education assessments.
Dr. Aslandogan reflected on his role in Texas' Turkish community in a PBS program on the Gulen movement broadcast in January. He said he donates ''beyond the expected level in my income'' and added: ''I believe that all these actions -- charitable donations, volunteerism -- are pleasing to God. That's why I am doing all this.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: FETHULLAH GULEN: Turkish Muslim preacher whose followers have started hundreds of schools worldwide (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Levent Sakar tested a homemade hovercraft in his physics class at Harmony Science Academy High School. The larger point of the project was developing excitement about science for his students, he said. (A20)
 Soner Tarim, Harmony's superintendent, said the schools are separate from the Gulen movement, a Turkish religious group whose followers helped finance the Turquoise Center, right, a community center in Houston. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL STRAVATO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21) GRAPHIC: The Harmony Schools Network: In the past decade, Harmony has become the largest charter school operator in Texas. Social scientists say its schools are part of a global network inspired by Fethullah Gulen, a preacher who promotes public service and a moderate form of Islam. As the Harmony school system grows, it provides contracts to a network of Turkish-owned businesses, many of them also owned by Gulen followers. (A20)            

Load-Date: June 7, 2011


End of Document
Biden Is Expected to Expand U.S.-India Relations While Stressing Human Rights
The New York Times 
December 24, 2020 Thursday 22:36 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1371 words
Byline: Pranshu Verma and Jeffrey Gettleman
Highlight: Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India’s relationship with Washington changes in a Biden administration.
Body


Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India’s relationship with Washington changes in a Biden administration.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration has significantly invested in its relationship with India over the past four years, seeing the country as a crucial partner in counterbalancing the rise of China.
Military cooperation and a personal friendship between President Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India — both domineering nationalists — have pushed New Delhi and Washington closer.
Now, as President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. is set to move into the White House, American diplomats, Indian officials and security experts are resetting their expectations for relations between the world’s two largest democracies.
On one hand, experts said, Mr. Biden’s administration will most likely pay more attention to India’s contentious domestic developments, where Mr. Modi’s right-wing party has been steadily consolidating power and becoming overtly hostile toward Muslim minorities. Mr. Trump has largely turned a blind eye.
Others believe that the United States cannot afford to drastically alter its policy toward New Delhi because the United States needs its help to counter China and increasingly values India as a military and trade partner.
“The real opening between the United States and India began under President Clinton, it accelerated under President Bush, it continued under President Obama, and it’s accelerating again under our president, President Trump,” Stephen Biegun, the deputy secretary of state, said in October. “One of the constants in U.S.-India relations has been that every presidential administration here in the United States has left the relationship in even better shape than the one it inherited.”
Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India’s relationship with Washington morphs in a Biden administration.
“We need India for various reasons,” saidAshley J. Tellis, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington. “Most important of which is balancing Chinese power in Asia.”
This year, 20 Indian soldiers were killed in the worst border clash between India and China in decades. As relations between New Delhi and Beijing soured, India strengthened its commitment to a multilateral partnership with the United States, India, Japan and Australia — known as the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, or Quad.
China has castigated this forum as an Asian version of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, one that is directly aimed at counterbalancing its interests. India, leery of formal alliances and upsetting trade relations with Beijing, was initially hesitant to fully engage.
Mr. Biden, who once spoke optimistically of China’s emergence “as a great power,” has become increasingly tough on Beijing, and some analysts said his administration would most likely use the Quad as a way to ensure that the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific region does not tilt too far toward China.
“They’ll keep the Quad going,” said Richard Fontaine, the chief executive of the Center for a New American Security, adding that the partnership had gone from largely being considered “a meeting in search of an agenda to something real that is doing things.”
But some Indian officials are concerned that the next administration will not be as tough on China as the current one and that Mr. Biden will adopt a more nuanced and less favorable position toward India, analysts said.
“If he’s seen as pursuing a softer approach with China, it will make New Delhi have second thoughts about a soft alliance,” said Brahma Chellaney, a professor of strategic studies at the Center for Policy Research, a think tank in New Delhi.
Mr. Biden’s administration will inherit a growing military relationship with India. In recent months, the United States and India have shared more intelligence and conducted more coordinated military training exercises. The military cooperation is closest among the navies of the two countries; Kenneth J. Braithwaite, the Navy secretary, visited India last week.
The United States has been trying to increase arms sales to India, but the country’s history of buying weapons from nations such as France, Israel and Russia, has complicated that effort. American officials are concerned about providing equipment to India if there is a risk that members of the Russian military or other foreign agents would then have access to it. American and Indian officials signed an agreement to share real-time geographical data through satellite images when Secretary of State Mike Pompeo visited India in October.
Despite the warming ties, though, Indian officials also worry that Mr. Biden might be less critical of Pakistan, the country’s archrival, than Mr. Trump has been. Mr. Biden may even reach out to Islamabad for support as the United States draws down troops in Afghanistan. Early in his presidency, Mr. Trump suspended military aid to Pakistan, accusing it of supporting terrorists and giving the United States “nothing but lies and deceit.”
In contrast, Mr. Trump has said little about the increasing hostility toward Muslims in India and the divisive politics of Mr. Modi’s Hindu nationalist party. The Trump administration has kept largely quiet about Mr. Modi’s crackdown on Kashmir last year and the passage of a new, blatantly anti-Muslim citizenship law. And Mr. Modi’s recent pro-market agricultural policies have fueled a farmer rebellion that has snarled daily life in the capital and stirred up more anti-government feeling.
Both Mr. Biden — who is considered a strong friend of India since his days as a senator, when he worked to approve the country’s landmark civil nuclear agreement in 2008 — and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris are likely to be more critical of India’s human rights record, both in private and in public, experts said.
Ms. Harris, whose mother was Indian and who has remained close to that side of her family, has already indicated that she is concerned about Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim area that has long been a flash point between India and Pakistan.
Mr. Biden’s campaign documents specifically called on the Indian government to “take all necessary steps to restore rights for all the people” in Kashmir. His campaign added that he was also “disappointed” in Mr. Modi’s citizenship law.
Some activists in the United States want the Biden administration to go even further and warn Indian officials that discontent over some of its current policies could imperil how strong a partner India might be for the United States.
“Human rights first is equally important,” said Simran Noor, the chairwoman of South Asian Americans Leading Together, an advocacy group in the United States. “The impacts of not addressing it now could lead to a lot worse conditions in the future.”
Another challenging issue is visas. Mr. Trump this year suspended H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a major setback for American technology companies, which employ many Indians, and the wider Indian diaspora in the United States.
The two countries have also struggled to sign a comprehensive trade agreement, with talks hung up over imports of American dairy products and medical devices such as coronary stents. After two decades of India loosening its trade restrictions, Western officials say the country has been tightening them over the past two years, embracing Mr. Modi’s push for a “self-reliant India.”
And many of Mr. Biden’s priorities — including climate change — will most likely require India’s cooperation, ensuring that New Delhi remains front of mind for Mr. Biden’s chief diplomats.
“There is no relationship today between any two countries that is as important as the relationship between the U.S. and India,” said Nisha D. Biswal, Mr. Obama’s assistant secretary of state for South and Central Asian affairs. “Neither of us can go it alone.”
Pranshu Verma reported from Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mumbai, India.
Pranshu Verma reported from Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mumbai, India. 
PHOTO: The Biden administration is likely to focus on domestic issues in India, where policies fueled a farmer rebellion. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANINDITO MUKHERJEE/GETTY IMAGES)

Load-Date: December 24, 2020


End of Document
National Briefing  Washington: Door Shuts On Visa Applicants
The New York Times
February 18, 2004 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 62 words
Byline: AP
Body


The federal government will not accept more applications for a visa program that provides skilled foreign labor to United States companies, the office of Citizenship and Immigration Services said. Less than five months into the fiscal year there are already enough applications to fill all 65,000 slots for H1-B visas, said Chris Bentley, a spokesman for the agency.         

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 18, 2004


End of Document
With 'Dreamers' on Docket, a Visa Proposal Is Revived
The New York Times
March 6, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1025 words
Byline: By Maggie Haberman and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Body


The president's son-in-law is hoping that a looming ruling will spur interest in his proposal, which is similar to one he tried to push last year.
WASHINGTON -- Jared Kushner, President Trump's son-in-law and senior adviser, is trying to revive a broad overhaul of the nation's immigration system, anticipating that a looming Supreme Court ruling on an Obama-era program that protects young, undocumented immigrants could give the nettlesome issue new life. 
  Mr. Trump and Mr. Kushner met with Republican senators at the White House on Thursday to discuss a range of immigration issues, including construction of the president's long-desired border wall, crossings at the border, potential immigration legislation and the case before the Supreme Court. That case could decide the fate of immigrants brought to the country illegally as children, then protected by President Barack Obama's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, or DACA.
  White House aides have also briefed Senate Republican leaders and business groups in recent weeks.
  The proposal is nearly identical to one that Mr. Kushner tried to push last year, with little open support from business leaders and none from Democrats.
  It would decrease the number of family-based immigration visas and increase employment-based visas, according to people briefed on the plan. The White House has insisted it would streamline the process and make it easier for H-1B high-skilled worker visas to be obtained. But some activists say that it would most likely toughen the standards for applying for asylum, and that a new application process would make securing H-1B visas more difficult, not easier.
  That could effectively reduce the number of legal immigrants at a time when even the White House's acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, is privately saying the economy is ''desperate'' for more immigrants.
  So far, immigration hawks and many business groups, long covetous of more H-1B visas, have remained cool to Mr. Kushner's suggestions, and it is unclear whether the plan is anything more than a framework to point to after the Supreme Court rules on the legality of Mr. Trump's ending of DACA, which he declared over in September 2017.
  The court is expected to rule no later than June, meaning that as he seeks re-election, Mr. Trump could have to decide whether to start deporting young immigrants who have known no other home than the United States. Such immigrants, known as Dreamers, have long been the sympathetic face of Democratic efforts to loosen immigration restrictions.
  Matthew T. Albence, the acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said in January that the agency would move forward with deporting Dreamers if the court rescinded the law. But Chad Wolf, the acting secretary of homeland security, told the Senate Homeland Security Committee on Wednesday that it was ''very hard to say a blanket yes or a blanket no'' on whether DACA recipients would be deported.
  After Thursday's White House meeting, Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who attended, said the main message was that if Mr. Trump ''wins in court with DACA, we're not going to let these people have their lives ruined, but we also want to address why we have these problems.''
  Administration officials have indicated that some form of Mr. Kushner's plan would be the president's offer after the Supreme Court rules. But the plan notably does not address how to handle the hundreds of thousands of Dreamers who would face deportation if the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump's administration lawfully lifted their protections.
  Instead, Mr. Kushner has focused on the structure of legal immigration and immigration law enforcement. The immigration plan would create a new director position to oversee the Department of Homeland Security's three immigration-related agencies: ICE, Customs and Border Protection, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  In preliminary meetings with homeland security representatives, the officials expressed concern over what the plan would mean for agencies within the department that are not focused on deportations, such as port officers and special agents with Homeland Security Investigations, according to an official familiar with the briefings.
  With unemployment low and business demand for skilled workers high, the plan's focus seems curious, analysts said. Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute, said raising costs on employment visas and establishing a more cumbersome approval process with the Labor Department would send ''a strong signal against employment-based immigrants.''
  ''So it's extremely surprising to hear that they'll be making it more difficult for companies to recruit the best and brightest in the world,'' Ms. Pierce said.
  Trump administration policies have already restricted the flow of legal immigration. Mr. Trump in October cut the refugee cap to 18,000 slots, the lowest in the history of the United States. His travel ban, extended last month to a total of 13 countries, as well as increased vetting and additional interviews for immigration visas, has also restricted the ability of foreigners to work in the United States and relatives to reunite with their families.
  The number of visas issued to foreigners abroad looking to immigrate to the United States has declined by about 25 percent, to 462,422 in the 2019 fiscal year from 617,752 in 2016.
  While Mr. Trump's policies have diminished the flow of immigrants to the United States, he prefers to emphasize his border crackdown and the construction of a wall on the southwestern border.
  But after nine months of declining border crossings, Mark A. Morgan, the acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, said on Thursday that immigration authorities took 37,119 migrants into custody at the border in February, up from 36,660 the month before.
  That is still far less than the 76,545 migrants taken into custody in February 2019, a fact that White House officials highlighted during the meeting on Thursday.
  Zach Montague contributed reporting.Zach Montague contributed reporting.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/05/us/politics/immigration-kushner-trump-dreamers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: A Supreme Court ruling could decide the fate of immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: March 6, 2020


End of Document
THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TECHNOLOGY FACTOR;
In Silicon Valley, Candidates Seek Both Money and 'Cool'
The New York Times
October 3, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 1752 words
Byline: By LESLIE WAYNE 

By LESLIE WAYNE 
Dateline: PALO ALTO, Calif.
Body


By many political calculations, Silicon Valley should be Al Gore country. After all, the vice president has championed high-technology issues, and eight years of a strong economy has created an unimaginable level of wealth here. Moreover, this academic region is a magnet for young college graduates who often gravitate to Democrats.
While Mr. Gore leads the race in California, Gov. George W. Bush is giving him a run for his money in Silicon Valley. Mr. Bush is outpacing the vice president in contributions here by a 2-to-1 margin, raising $2.1 million to Mr. Gore's $1 million, while remaining neck and neck with him in soft-dollar contributions. And Mr. Bush's list of supporters in the computer-related industry is as gold-plated as Mr. Gore's.
This heated race represents a new twist on traditional politics. As Silicon Valley emerges as a political factor in the presidential race for the first time, both candidates are investing time and energy here not only to win votes and dollars, but to win something more intangible but equally valuable: being identified as a candidate of the future and being linked with the forward thinking of the high-technology world.
"Silicon Valley represents the crosscurrent of money and cool," said Gregory W. Slayton, chief executive of ClickAction Inc., an Internet marketing firm, and chairman of Silicon Valley Bush-2000. "And that's where all politicians want to be."
And they are. Late last month, for instance, Mr. Bush came to Silicon Valley to campaign at a local school and attend a $1 million fund-raiser at the home of Carol A. Bartz, chief executive of Autodesk Inc., a software company.
A week earlier, Mr. Gore was here for a $3 million fund-raiser at the house in Atherton of Eric Schmidt, chairman and chief executive of Novell Inc. Elton John flew in from London to entertain the 300 guests.
The same day Mr. Gore was here, an advertisement in a local newspaper, The San Jose Mercury News, listed 300 high-technology executives backing Mr. Bush, including officials at Cisco Systems, Dell Computer, Texas Instruments, Microsoft, Intel -- many of whom also participated in a telephone conference call that day with reporters to extol Mr. Bush.
What is remarkable about this flurry of activity is that it comes as polls show Mr. Gore comfortably ahead of Mr. Bush in California -- especially in the San Francisco area, including Silicon Valley.
A poll in mid-September by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California had Mr. Gore leading by eight percentage points. It also showed Mr. Gore with 57 percent in the Bay Area, which combines heavily Democratic San Francisco and more-divided Silicon Valley, to Mr. Bush's 28 percent.
With numbers as lopsided as this, conventional wisdom would dictate that neither candidates should waste time here. But conventional wisdom does not apply in Silicon Valley, which many see as a harbinger of American politics -- more about issues than parties and more sensitive to the endorsements of corporate "opinion makers" than the words of ward bosses and party leaders.
Even more importantly, Silicon Valley is seen as the spot where trends begin.
"We don't have to have 100 percent of the high-tech leaders," said Joe Andrew, chairman of the Democratic National Committee. "This is not a numbers game, but an image game. High-tech leaders are like celebrities. They are validators, and that validation is important."
The Bush camp agreed. "Everyone wants to associate with the future," said Margita Thompson, the Bush campaign's adviser on high technology. "Silicon Valley is a way of thinking, a way of challenging things and a forward-looking mentality. Governor Bush wants to capture that."
While this effort may not be evident from Mr. Bush's national advertising, it is taking place in a more subtle effort. The Bush campaign set up a office in Redwood City, Calif., and has an e-mail campaign directed at high-technology leaders, especially chief executives.
Many trace the area's new political involvement to the government's case against the Microsoft Corporation. But others say the political wake-up call here really came in 1996, when California voters took up Proposition 211, a ballot initiative that would have made it easier to bring class-action lawsuits against corporations -- especially Internet companies, whose share prices can fluctuate wildly, causing angry shareholders to sue.
Silicon Valley companies and executives raised $40 million to defeat the measure, and later founded TechNet, a bipartisan political action committee made up of more 190 executives. The 2000 election is the first to feel the impact: Silicon Valley has raised $22.1 million for the current campaign, giving $11.9 million to Republicans and $10 million to Democrats, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, a Washington nonprofit group that monitors campaign finance.
These donations put the high technology industry on par with such other big donors as the energy, insurance, pharmaceutical and banking industries. But this money, remarkably, came on the scene almost overnight and is more than double the $9 million the industry gave in 1996 and in 1998.
While Mr. Bush leads in direct donations, overall donations to both parties and candidates -- soft and hard dollars -- split evenly in the Bay Area. San Jose and San Francisco residents contributed $19.3 million overall, giving $10.5 million to Democrats and $8.6 million to Republicans. Moreover, executives of computer-related companies are writing six-digit campaign checks, and one Zip code alone, 94027 in Atherton, accounted for $2.1 million, $1 million to Republicans, $877,025 to Democrats and the rest to political action committees.
"For years we stuck our head in the sand," said Kim Polese, chairwoman of Marimba, a software company, and a Gore supporter. "But we've changed. People in the Valley have clicked into politics."
As the valley clicks into politics, it is doing so consistent with its highly competitive culture.
Silicon Valley is the bastion of fierce entrepreneurship -- a place where thousands of entrepreneurs have escaped the rigidities of big corporations and struck out alone. And this creates opportunities for Mr. Bush and obstacles for Mr. Gore.
For all of his well-known forays into Silicon Valley through the years, Mr. Gore is seen by Republican executives as being close to two institutions despised by Silicon Valley, unions and trial lawyers, and as being emblematic of the type of big government involvement in business the valley abhors. Mr. Gore's troubles contrast with the success President Clinton had attracting Silicon Valley Republicans in 1996.
"The underlying interest in Silicon Valley is in leaving business alone," said Tom Riley, president of WebState Inc., an online training company, and a Bush supporter.
"For the most part," Mr. Riley said, "the success of Silicon Valley has been because people are left on their own with a minimum of interference, red tape and bureaucracy. People here look at Gore and see a bureaucrat, a politician and someone from Washington."
Gore supporters disagreed. Silicon Valley's boom, they said, relied heavily on government investment, policies and on federal research grants that helped many of today's best-known corporate names.
They said Mr. Gore has a demonstrated record of backing issues important to Silicon Valley: From programs that helped to create Web browsers and the Internet to backing overhaul of the telecommunications industry, from supporting more government funds for education and research to aiding small businesses market new technologies.
"Silicon Valley has abandoned the myth of the lone entrepreneur in the garage able to change the world," said John Doerr, a chairman of TechNet and a partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, a venture capital firm.
"We live in a highly networked and connected global economy and public policy matters," Mr. Doerr said. "Al Gore is really a leader in understanding how government should engage with technology."
On paper, the candidates are pretty similar. Both support free trade, increased funding for basic research, efforts to improve education, expanding the H1-B visa program to allow more high-tech foreign workers to emigrate here and Internet privacy protections.
But in offices and coffee cafes here, when talk turns to presidential politics, it is rarely about such specifics but rather about government -- friend or foe. The Bush campaign's involvement in this talk came from early groundwork by executives here who felt Mr. Gore was getting too much attention and made pilgrimages to Austin, Tex.
"There was a tremendous amount of frustration among Republicans here that all the gold and glory was going to the Democrats and the area was being portrayed as locked up for Gore," said Lezlee Westine, head of TechNet's Republican politics section. As early as 1999, Ms. Westine took executives to Austin, set up a Bush advisory board on technology and put advertisements in California newspapers urging him to run.
It didn't hurt, of course, that Texas has it's own high-tech area in Austin. "Every semiconductor company has an operation in Texas," said Floyd Kvamme, also a partner at the venture capital firm of Kleiner Perkins.
One refrain repeated by Bush supporters is government policies had little to do with eight years of economic well-being -- or even the creation of Silicon Valley. "I've worked in the valley since 1963," Mr. Kvamme said, "and I don't think government ever had a role in it."
James L. Barksdale, former president and chief executive of Netscape Communications and now head of Barksdale Group agreed. "One of the main drivers of the new economy has been the enormous explosion of tech companies," he said. "I don't know that the administration had any role in the good run in the economy."
To Democrats and Gore supporters, this is all collective amnesia.
Much of Silicon Valley's growth resulted from defense spending that paid for the development of computers, the semiconductor, high-performance transistors, the microprocessor, high-performance networks, the mouse and the Internet and which provided research dollars that turned Stanford University into a magnet.
"It's easy to get caught up with being successful here," said Justin Kitch, chief executive of Homestead.com, an Internet content company, and Gore backer. "It's hard to step back and say, 'Why am I so lucky?' Many don't want to attribute their success to any external factors. That's part of being an entrepreneur."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: "LEDGER: Silicon Valley's Emerging Influence"
As many entrepreneurs of the high-technology industry turn their focus toward politics, Silicon Valley is emerging as a significant force in this year's presidential race. Here is a look at contributions from computer-related companies nationwide:
 
Contributions* Figures in millions
 
Democrat
1996+ -- 4.2
1998+ -- 4.1
2000+ -- 11.9
 
Republican
1996+ -- 4.6
1998+ -- 5.3
2000+ -- 10.0
 
Major Contributors
 
Marc Andreessen, Chairman, Loudcloud
Democrat -- $354,500
Republican -- $25,000
 
John T. Chambers, CEO, Cisco Systems
Democrat -- 43,500
Republican -- 332,500
 
David J. Shimmon, Chairman, Kinetics Group
Democrat -- 351,000
Republican -- None
 
Thomas & Barbara Stephenson, Sequoia Capital
Democrat -- None
Republican -- 328,200
 
John Doerr, Venture Capitalist, Kleiner Perkins
Democrat -- 246,000
Republican -- 1,000
 
David Hayden, Founder, Critical Path
Democrat -- 158,000
Republican -- None
 
Howard M. Leach, Leach Capital Corp.
Democrat -- None
Republican -- 142,259
 
George Marcus, Chariman, Marcus & Millichap
Democrat -- 136,000
Republican -- None
 
Roger McNamee, Founder, Integral Capital Partners
Democrat -- 131,244
Republican -- None
 
Eric Schmidt, CEO, Novell
Democrat -- 118,600
Republican -- 6,000
 
William R. Hambrecht, Founder, WR Hambrecht & Co.
Democrat -- 118,500
Republican -- 1,000
 
*Includes individual contributions to candidates and soft dollar donations to the parties.
+Figures for 1996 and 1998 are for the two-year election cycle, and 2000 is through August.
 
(Source: Center for Responsive Politics)(pg. A24)
      

Load-Date: October 3, 2000


End of Document
Indian-Americans Overwhelmingly Support Joe Biden, New Poll Shows
The New York Times 
October 14, 2020 Wednesday 20:32 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1089 words
Byline: Emily Schmall
Highlight: Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-American voters — but she’s not the only reason they support the Democratic ticket.
Body


Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-American voters — but she’s not the only reason they support the Democratic ticket.
CHICAGO — A large majority of Indian-Americans plan to cast ballots for the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Kamala Harris, according to a survey released Wednesday, despite elaborate overtures by the Trump White House to win their support.
The survey, by the polling firm YouGov, found that 72 percent of Indian-American voters planned to vote for Mr. Biden, with just 22 percent planning to go for President Trump.
While Indian-Americans hold a wide variety of political views, the presence on the Democratic ticket of Ms. Harris, whose mother immigrated from Chennai, India, has had a galvanizing effect on a voting bloc that could help Mr. Biden in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan.
Their potential impact on the presidential election highlights the growing importance of Indian-Americans in U.S. politics: As the second-largest immigrant group in the country, Indian-Americans are gaining influence, making political donations, vocally supporting candidates and causes and, most notably, running for office, from the school board to Congress.
“We have arrived,” said Ramesh Kapur, a Democratic Party fund-raiser.
Mr. Kapur, 72, who owns a gas processing and distributing company in Medford, Mass., and supported Ms. Harris’s 2016 Senate race and her run for the 2020 presidential nomination, said that Indian-Americans donated $3.3 million to the Biden Victory Fund at a single fund-raising event in September.
But Ms. Harris isn’t the only reason many Indian-Americans support the Democratic ticket this year, Mr. Kapur said. They are also turned off by the president’s frequent attacks on immigrants and people of color, despite standing to gain from Mr. Trump’s economic policies.
“Even though they are supposedly saving taxes, to the Indian-American community, when you get the president of the United States saying to an elected official, ‘Go home,’ that scares the hell out of us,” he said, referring to Mr. Trump’s tweet in July 2019 about a group of four minority congresswomen.
While the approximately two million Indian-American voters make up less than 1 percent of the electorate, they are voters whom both parties seek to attract. The larger Indian-American population is twice as rich as the rest of the country as a whole, and two times as likely to hold a bachelor’s degree or higher.
And at the rate the community is growing — doubling in size every decade since the 1980s — they represent an increasingly formidable force in U.S. politics.
The apparently wide support among Indian-Americans for Mr. Biden comes despite high-profile efforts by Mr. Trump and the Republicans to win their votes.
A year ago, Mr. Trump drew 50,000 people to a rally in Houston with India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, an event that organizers called “Howdy, Modi.” The prime minister, a right-wing populist whose bellicose views on two of India’s rivals, Pakistan and China, helped win his party a landslide re-election in 2019, and who has generally received support from the Indian diaspora, lauded Mr. Trump’s name as “familiar to every person on the planet.” He returned the favor in February with an even larger spectacle for Mr. Trump in India.
The rallies did win Mr. Trump some support, said M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a nonpartisan group that promotes the interests of Indians in the United States.
“Trump has invested in India, has invested in Indian-Americans with the ‘Howdy, Modi’ visit and with going to India, and it has shown results,” Mr. Rangaswami said. “The question is: Will it outweigh the Kamala factor?”
Indeed, the survey reported that 45 percent of respondents said that Ms. Harris’s nomination had made them more likely to vote, and 49 percent said they were more enthusiastic about supporting Mr. Biden. It also showed that respondents cared more about health care, the economy and the environment than U.S.-India relations.
YouGov conducted the survey as part of a research project by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Trump has also lost some favor in India, where the news media criticized him for casting doubt on the integrity of Indian government coronavirus statistics during the presidential debate last month.
Mr. Rangaswami, who attended the Houston rally and is registered as an independent, said the audience appeared to consist largely of older Indian-Americans, who he said leaned conservative and most likely voted for Mr. Trump in 2016.
That Indian-American voters lean liberal over all is partly because a younger generation, born in the United States, is far less convinced by the conservative cultural mores brought by their parents and grandparents from India, Mr. Rangaswami said.
“There’s definitely that schism in the Indian-American community,” said Raj Bhutoria, 20, a junior at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif., who has dreamed of running for office since working as a volunteer on the successful 2016 campaign of Representative Ro Khanna, Democrat of California and an Indian-American.
Mr. Khanna’s victory and Ms. Harris’s nomination show that “now being Indian is no longer a barrier to run for office or get elected,” Mr. Bhutoria said.
Despite wishing that the Democratic nominees were more progressive on some issues, Mr. Bhutoria said he was supporting them — though with perhaps less gusto than his parents, Ajay and Vinita Bhutoria, Bay Area tech entrepreneurs in their 40s who, as avowed liberals, are somewhat of an exception for their generation. They have starred in three ads supporting the Biden-Harris campaign, set to Bollywood music and featuring slogans in a variety of Indian languages.
Mr. Bhutoria cited Mr. Trump’s trade disputes with India, pressure on countries not to trade with Iran — an important source of cheap oil for India — and the suspension of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a large number of which go to Indians.
“The ‘Howdy, Modi’ event was wonderful to look at, but they were only beautiful picture moments,” he said. “Trump has not done much for India or Indians-Americans.”
PHOTO: Senator Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-Americans, a voting bloc that could help the Democratic ticket in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hilary Swift for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: October 15, 2020


End of Document
DIARY
The New York Times
April 26, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Money and Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section 3; ; Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Money and Business/Financial Desk ; Column 3; 
Length: 1033 words
Byline: By Bill Wellman 

By Bill Wellman 
Body


DEALS
Consolidation Continues, As Do Consumer Worries
The Bank of New York joined the merger trend with an unsolicited $23.7 billion takeover offer for the Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh. Mellon, however, didn't want to play, and sued to stop the attempt. Still, the industry's consolidation fever is making citizens' advocates and some lawmakers nervous; they predict that the behemoth mergers will eventually mean higher checking-account and A.T.M. costs for many customers, especially those with low and moderate incomes. And they point to Federal Reserve studies indicating that when newly merged banks consolidate operations, the branch offices they close tend to be concentrated more heavily in poorer neighborhoods. . . . Airlines also got into the consolidation act, with American Airlines and US Airways announcing a marketing alliance. Delta and United were planning a similar deal, but suspended talks after pilots voiced concern over what the arrangement would mean for jobs.
 
INSURANCE
Managed Care's Higher Cost
For the first time since 1992, many employers are facing double-digit increases in the cost of health insurance next year, the highest inflation rate since the majority of employees moved into managed care. In early negotiations with employers about next year's rates, many insurers are seeking increases for 1999 that are far above this year's, when most premiums rose in single digits after four years of stability. Critics of managed care say the magnitude of the increases undercuts a basic appeal of that system: savings from lower costs.
 
VIAGRA
Impotence and Writer's Cramp
In only its second week on the market, Viagra, Pfizer's impotence drug, accounted for 79.2 percent of the new prescriptions written for the condition, causing the market shares of its competitors to plunge, according to I.M.S. America, a health care information company. With 36,263 new prescriptions for Viagra written in the week that ended on April 10, the introduction was one of the best ever for a drug. Some analysts estimated that prescriptions written last week might have totaled 40,000 a day.
 
WINDOWS
The Crash of 98
William H. Gates, the Microsoft chairman, was trying to put Windows 98 through its paces at the Spring Comdex computer show in Chicago last week when things sort of fell apart. First, he couldn't get his microphone to work. Then, gasp, Microsoft's latest operating system crashed. "I guess we still have some bugs to work out," Mr. Gates observed. "That must be why we're not shipping Windows 98 yet." Undaunted, Microsoft later reported earnings that surpassed analysts' expectations.
 
JAPAN
We Export, Therefore We Are
While Japan's slumping stock market and banking industry tell a story of a nation in crisis, many citizens paint a different picture. "People complain about the bad economy," says Mitsuo Okura, who lives in a small town 200 miles southwest of Tokyo. "But when I look around the house, I've got everything I want. I've got three cars, and most families around here have two or three as well. I've got a couple of televisions, and so do most people. I've got a washing machine, a refrigerator, and so do all my neighbors." All that despite the fact that his auto parts business is failling. In part, Mr. Okura can thank Japan's trade surplus for his good fortune; it jumped almost 57 percent in March from the period a year earlier. Another perspective: Japan had more than 17,000 business bankruptcy filings in 1997, but the United States had more than 54,000.
 
JOBS
Americans Hire Foreigners . . .
As the information technology industry lobbies Congress to let more highly skilled foreign workers enter the country, new immigration figures indicate that the companies applying for the most visas are using them for the kind of jobs that critics say many Americans could easily be trained to perform. The designation H1-B is used for work visas intended for hard-to-fill jobs. But the company that imported the most foreign labor under the program last year was Mastech Systems of Pittsburgh; it received visas for 1,733 employees -- or about 80 percent of its domestic work force -- to bring in software programmers with only bachelor's degrees. "This is not brain surgery," Representative Ron Klink, a Pennsylvania Democrat, said of the jobs being filled by foreign workers at companies like Mastech. "These jobs do require some skill and intellect. But American workers can be trained to take these jobs." By the way, United States jobless claims rose in mid-April.
 
MORE JOBS
. . . Foreigners Hire Americans
Foreign companies are creating jobs in the United States five times faster than American-owned companies, according to a study by a trade group. The Organization for International Investment, a Washington trade association for 60 foreign companies with American operations, found the largest concentration of such jobs in California, though Nevada was the leading state in job growth from these investments. The number of Americans working for subsidiaries of foreign corporations increased from 2.03 million in 1980 to 4.9 million in 1995, the latest year for which statistics are available, the trade association said.
 
EARTH DAY
Apathy Doesn't Pay
Though President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore took note of Earth Day by doing some repair work on the Appalachian Trail on Wednesday, they seem to be in the minority these days. "There's been a precipitous decline in the demand for environmental improvement," according to Grant Ferrier, publisher of The Environmental Business Journal in San Diego. "Environment is not in the top five public priority issues. From 1970 to about 1990, usually, environmental issues would come in the top three." Companies that help businesses comply with environmental regulations have felt the effects of the trend: Of 3,305 environmental service companies operating across the nation in 1994, one-fourth were out of business two years later, according to a survey by Environmental Information Ltd. of Minneapolis, which compiles a directory of such firms. The reasons included increased competition, cuts in government programs, fewer new regulations and a relaxation in the enforcement of rules already on the books.

Graphic

 
Photos: William H. Gates (Agence France-Presse); Mitsuo Okura (Nicholas D. Kristof/The New York Times); President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)
 
Chart ranks banks by value of assets. (Goldman, Sachs); Comparison of United States and Japanese econmic indicators. (Sources: ABI World; Teikoku Databank; The Economist)

Load-Date: April 26, 1998


End of Document
Indian-Americans Overwhelmingly Support Joe Biden, New Poll Shows
The New York Times
October 14, 2020 Wednesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk
Length: 1059 words
Byline: By Emily Schmall
Body


Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-American voters -- but she's not the only reason they support the Democratic ticket.
CHICAGO -- A large majority of Indian-Americans plan to cast ballots for the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Kamala Harris, according to a survey released Wednesday, despite elaborate overtures by the Trump White House to win their support. 
  The survey, by the polling firm YouGov, found that 72 percent of Indian-American voters planned to vote for Mr. Biden, with just 22 percent planning to go for President Trump.
  While Indian-Americans hold a wide variety of political views, the presence on the Democratic ticket of Ms. Harris, whose mother immigrated from Chennai, India, has had a galvanizing effect on a voting bloc that could help Mr. Biden in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan.
  Their potential impact on the presidential election highlights the growing importance of Indian-Americans in U.S. politics: As the second-largest immigrant group in the country, Indian-Americans are gaining influence, making political donations, vocally supporting candidates and causes and, most notably, running for office, from the school board to Congress.
  ''We have arrived,'' said Ramesh Kapur, a Democratic Party fund-raiser.
  Mr. Kapur, 72, who owns a gas processing and distributing company in Medford, Mass., and supported Ms. Harris's 2016 Senate race and her run for the 2020 presidential nomination, said that Indian-Americans donated $3.3 million to the Biden Victory Fund at a single fund-raising event he organized in September.
  But Ms. Harris isn't the only reason many Indian-Americans support the Democratic ticket this year, Mr. Kapur said. They are also turned off by the president's frequent attacks on immigrants and people of color, despite standing to gain from Mr. Trump's economic policies.
  ''Even though they are supposedly saving taxes, to the Indian-American community, when you get the president of the United States saying to an elected official, 'Go home,' that scares the hell out of us,'' he said, referring to Mr. Trump's tweet in July 2019 about a group of four minority congresswomen.
  While the approximately two million Indian-American voters comprise less than 1 percent of the electorate, they are voters who both parties seek to attract. The larger Indian-American population is twice as rich as the rest of the country as a whole, and two times as likely to hold a bachelor's degree or higher.
  And at the rate the community is growing -- doubling in size every decade since the 1980s -- they represent an increasingly formidable force in U.S. politics.
  The apparently wide support among Indian-Americans for Mr. Biden comes despite high-profile efforts by Mr. Trump and the Republicans to win their votes.
  A year ago, Mr. Trump drew 50,000 people to a rally in Houston with India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, an event that organizers called ''Howdy, Modi.'' The prime minister, a right-wing populist whose bellicose views on two of India's rivals, Pakistan and China, helped win his party a landslide re-election in 2019, and who has generally received support from the Indian diaspora, lauded Mr. Trump's name as ''familiar to every person on the planet.'' He returned the favor in February with an even larger spectacle for Mr. Trump in India.
  The rallies did win Mr. Trump some support, said M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a nonpartisan group that promotes the interests of Indians in the United States.
  ''Trump has invested in India, has invested in Indian-Americans with the 'Howdy, Modi' visit and with going to India, and it has shown results,'' Mr. Rangaswami said. ''The question is: Will it outweigh the Kamala factor?''
  Indeed, the survey reported that 45 percent of respondents said that Ms. Harris's nomination had made them more likely to vote, and 49 percent said they were more enthusiastic about supporting Mr. Biden. It also showed that respondents cared more about health care, the economy and the environment than U.S.-India relations.
  YouGov conducted the survey as part of a research project by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania.
  Mr. Trump has also lost some favor in India, where the news media criticized him for casting doubt on the integrity of Indian government coronavirus statistics during the presidential debate last month.
  Mr. Rangaswami, who attended the Houston rally and is registered as an independent, said the audience appeared to consist largely of older Indian-Americans, who he said leaned conservative and most likely voted for Mr. Trump in 2016.
  That Indian-American voters lean liberal over all is partly because a younger generation, born in the United States, is far less convinced by the conservative cultural mores brought by their parents and grandparents from India, Mr. Rangaswami said.
  ''There's definitely that schism in the Indian-American community,'' said Raj Bhutoria, 20, a junior at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif., who has dreamed of running for office since working as a volunteer on the successful 2016 campaign of Representative Ro Khanna, Democrat of California and an Indian-American.
  Mr. Khanna's victory and Ms. Harris's nomination show that ''now being Indian is no longer a barrier to run for office or get elected,'' Mr. Bhutoria said.
  Despite wishing that the Democratic nominees were more progressive on some issues, Mr. Bhutoria said he was supporting them -- though with perhaps less gusto than his parents, Ajay and Vinita Bhutoria, Bay Area tech entrepreneurs in their 40s who, as avowed liberals, are somewhat of an exception for their generation. They have starred in three ads supporting the Biden-Harris campaign, set to Bollywood music and featuring slogans in a variety of Indian languages.
  Mr. Bhutoria cited Mr. Trump's trade disputes with India, pressure on countries not to trade with Iran -- an important source of cheap oil for India -- and the suspension of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a large number of which go to Indians.
  ''The 'Howdy, Modi' event was wonderful to look at, but they were only beautiful picture moments,'' he said. ''Trump has not done much for India or Indians-Americans.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/14/us/politics/biden-harris-indian-americans.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Senator Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-Americans, a voting bloc that could help the Democratic ticket in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hilary Swift for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: October 14, 2020


End of Document
Non-Economic Factors Handicap the Economy
The New York Times
September 5, 2010 Sunday
National Edition


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Bay Area ; Pg. 25A
Length: 773 words
Byline: By JONATHAN WEBER
Jonathan Weber is the editor in chief of The Bay Citizen. jweber@baycitizen.org
Body


Jonathan Weber writes a column for The Bay Citizen.
San Francisco's chief economist, Ted Egan, gave a pretty downbeat assessment of the region's economic outlook last week at a San Francisco Chamber of Commerce conference, citing the lack of employment growth and the anemic housing market as the major problems. That comes as no surprise.
But the contradictions of this recession were underscored when Mr. Egan noted that venture capital investment soared in the second quarter, and that industries like digital media, biotechnology and green energy are healthy and growing.
So how could it be that the businesses that are generally seen as the key drivers of the local economy are doing well, but they haven't made a dent in unemployment, personal income, consumer spending and other measures of economic health?
In part it's because these industries are still small, despite their high glamour quotient, Mr. Egan said in an interview. But the key lies in the moribund housing market, and that in turn raises a lot of questions about our region's attitude toward population growth, quality of life and immigration.
In California more than anywhere else, real estate has always been the economy's secret sauce. Real estate speculation -- on the grand scale embodied in the great Los Angeles water grab that turned barren Southern California scrublands into prosperous farms and subdivisions, and on the small scale in which the modest Marin County house that Dad bought for $50,000 in 1960 is now worth a couple of million -- is a big factor in our historic prosperity.
In simple terms, California real estate has been such a good investment for such a long time because lots of people have been moving here, and they need to live somewhere. Most of the places that have had intensive real estate appreciation in recent decades -- many parts of California as well as Phoenix, Las Vegas and Florida -- are places with substantial in-migration. In many cases the speculation eventually got ahead of the population, but it was the belief in continued population growth that inflated the bubble.
People move to California for jobs, and certainly the postwar growth of the aerospace, technology and entertainment industries played a huge role in drawing people here. (And income growth from those businesses also drove real estate prices higher.)
But people move here for a lot of other reasons: the weather, new opportunities, political freedom, the raw energy of our great cities. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger mentioned in his talk at the same conference last week that he moved to California from Austria when he was 21 because he saw California as the land of opportunity.
A lot of Californians feel that the state is full-up, so to speak, and don't see the benefits of more population growth. Anti-immigrant sentiment, whether it's aimed at illegal border-crossers or professionals holding H1-B work visas or foreign students who would like to stay on after their visas expire, is partly a reflection of this feeling.
But new residents need all kinds of things, especially housing, and that supports prices. An International Monetary Fund study of global housing markets shows that every 0.25 percent increase in population growth leads to a 1 percent increase in housing prices.
Housing demand will increase even without immigration, as aging baby boomers and echo boomers create more ''empty nest'' households. Moreover, in some of the most attractive Bay Area communities, like San Francisco, the limited supply of housing will keep prices firm or rising (and real estate markets in these communities have indeed suffered much less than in other places).
But in much of the Bay Area, and especially on the fringes, there is plenty of supply, and thus increased demand is critical to a housing recovery.
Yet with immigration to the United States declining -- due to the weak economy, the crackdown on illegal immigration and post-Sept. 11 restrictions on who can enter the country -- and the decay of public services in California making the state less attractive relative to other parts of the country, it's not clear where that demand will come from.
Rising real estate prices have their downside, not least that they make it more expensive to do business. But as Mr. Egan said, toxic real estate loans are draining credit from the economy and dampening consumer confidence to such a degree that a housing recovery is critical to any broader economic recovery.
Whatever else you might think about immigration, or about the importance of spending money on quality-of-life infrastructure and services, they are ultimately the key to our economic health.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: September 5, 2010


End of Document
Candidates Lower Volume as Five Key Primaries Near
The New York Times
March 11, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1505 words
Byline: By JONATHAN MARTIN and PATRICK HEALY; Jonathan Martin reported from Miami, and Patrick Healy from New York.
Body


MIAMI --  After 11 adversarial debates, the two chief antagonists to Donald J. Trump on Thursday night largely abandoned their strategy of brutally attacking him, choosing instead to use their final face-off before next week's round of big Republican primaries to project gravitas and champion conservative positions on trade, jobs and Israel.
Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, whose candidacy is on the line in his state's primary on Tuesday, passed up easy chances to challenge Mr. Trump on immigration and foreign visas, and he stopped insulting the front-runner after his recent jabs backfired. Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who is running second to Mr. Trump in many states, stuck to policy at first but gradually turned tougher against Mr. Trump, eventually saying he would be a disaster as the Republican standard-bearer. 
  ''If we nominate Donald Trump, Hillary wins,'' Mr. Cruz said.
  But much of the debate was so subdued that Mr. Trump was prompted to say, ''So far, I cannot believe how civil it's been up here.'' 
  He was eventually challenged over his temperament, his harsh language about Islam, and recent violence at his campaign rallies, but he also talked more about policy than he has in past debates, saying, apparently for the first time, that he would consider sending up to 30,000 American ground troops to fight the Islamic State in the Middle East. 
  It was as if Mr. Trump's rivals had decided, after so many months, that there was no upside anymore in trying to beat him at his own game. Gone were the heated interruptions, the name-calling, and, most remarkably given Mr. Trump's advantage, the wave of attacks about his checkered business history. On Thursday night, his rivals moved on.
  The political stakes were higher than at any of the previous debates because this was one of the last high-profile, widely seen opportunities for Mr. Trump's rivals to sow doubts about his candidacy and to slow his march to the nomination. Mr. Trump is ahead in public opinion polls in Florida, Illinois and North Carolina; the race appears closer in Ohio, with some polls indicating that John Kasich, the governor there, has a small lead. Missouri also votes next week.
  The newly sober nature of the Republican race, for a night at least, was clear from the first exchanges over trade, a major issue in Ohio, as the four contenders largely agreed that trade deals were needed to protect American workers. Mr. Trump was challenged over hiring foreign workers for some of his businesses, which he both defended and minimized -- remarks that were less surprising than the fact that none of his rivals attacked him over it, as they did in a debate last week.
  Mr. Trump went unchallenged as he boasted that as a businessman, he was best positioned to negotiate trade deals in America's favor.
  ''Nobody else on this dais knows how to change it like I do, believe me,'' he said.
  He acknowledged that, despite his hard-line talk on immigration, he uses foreign workers at some of his businesses by exploiting the nation's immigration policies, particularly H1-B visas for foreign workers.
  ''I'm a businessman, and I have to do what I have to do,'' Mr. Trump said. He added that he ''shouldn't be allowed'' to have access to foreign labor, saying, ''It's very bad for workers, very unfair to our workers.'' He said he would suspend H1-B visas for at least one or two years.
  Mr. Rubio pointed to the need for United States businesses to be able to sell goods abroad. ''We have to have access to the hundreds of millions of people in the world today who can afford to buy things,'' he said.
  The greatest pressure was on Mr. Rubio, who is facing the prospect of a humiliating loss in his own state on Tuesday. After suggesting on Wednesday that he regretted lobbing juvenile insults at Mr. Trump last month, Mr. Rubio only occasionally disagreed with him in the debate. It was a signal that if his campaign is nearing the end, he intends to exit the race on a higher plane.
  In something of a valedictory, he told the story of an older supporter in the Miami area who despite recently undergoing surgery was holding a Rubio sign outside an early-polling center.
  ''That gentleman has not given up on me, and I am not going to give up on him,'' Mr. Rubio said.
  When Mr. Rubio did take Mr. Trump on, he did it sideways, acknowledging that Mr. Trump had tapped into a vein but warning that his style would have repercussions.
  ''I know that a lot of people find appeal in the things Donald says because he says what people wish they could say,'' Mr. Rubio said. ''The problem is presidents can't just say anything they want, because it has consequences here and around the world.''Mr. Trump's temperament, a subject of deep anxiety among Republican Party leaders, came under scrutiny: He was challenged over his statement on Wednesday that ''Islam hates us,'' but he kept his quick temper in check and responded with a minimum of defensiveness.
  On the same day that footage emerged of an individual at a Trump rally punching a protester, Mr. Trump said of the episode, ''I don't like it,'' adding that ''they have anger that's unbelievable.''
  ''There's also great love for the country,'' he said. ''It's a beautiful thing in many respects. But I certainly do not condone that at all.''
  Mr. Cruz seemed to mock his vague tough talk, saying at one point, ''The answer is not simply to yell 'China bad, Muslims bad.' '' But Mr. Trump, again, did not respond in kind.
  Mr. Trump had the air of a winner, noting that he was set to receive an endorsement on Friday from a former rival, the retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, and suggesting that more voters were taking part in the Republican primaries than ever because of him.
  ''They're voting out of enthusiasm; they're voting out of love,'' Mr. Trump said, a rejoinder to news reports about violence breaking out at his rallies. ''We are going to beat the Democrats, we are going to beat Hillary or whoever it may be, and we're going to beat them soundly.''
  The debate spotlight fell in a new way on Mr. Kasich, who has emerged as a major obstacle to Mr. Trump's sweeping next Tuesday's primaries.
  While the two men barely sparred, Mr. Kasich did look for subtle opportunities to present himself as a strong, conservative executive with experience balancing budgets and tackling foreign policy challenges. When Mr. Trump tried to defend his remarks calling the Chinese government ''strong'' when it violently ended the democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in 1989, Mr. Kasich forcefully differed.
  ''I think that the Chinese government butchered those kids,'' he said, ''and when that guy stood in front of -- that young man stood in front of that tank, we ought to build a statue of him over here when he faced down the Chinese government.''
  Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz, who have been fierce adversaries for months and are now facing off in Florida, where they both have family roots, had moments where they teamed up against Mr. Trump. They were especially hard on him over Israel, challenging him over his comments that he would be a ''neutral guy'' in negotiating the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians.
  While Mr. Cruz spoke fiercely on Israel's behalf, perhaps mindful of Jewish voters in Florida, Mr. Rubio was more polite toward Mr. Trump, suggesting that perhaps he misunderstood that being neutral could undercut Israel's interests and security.
  Mr. Trump insisted that Israel would be an ''absolute priority'' for him but that his focus would be to broker a historic peace deal between Israelis and Palestinians and to be an arbiter at the negotiating table.
  ''Very, very pro-Israel, nobody is more pro-Israel, but I would like to give it a shot,'' he said.
  Mr. Trump's commanding victories on Tuesday in Mississippi and Michigan underscored the durability of his candidacy and gave him a lift after he suffered a pair of losses and closer-than-expected victories last weekend. But he netted only 15 more delegates on Tuesday than Mr. Cruz.
  With less invective flying around, Mr. Trump talked more about policy than he has in past debates. He said he would do ''everything within my power'' not to harm the financial stability of Social Security. He excoriated Common Core standards and said he would minimize federal influence over education. And, demonstrating once again how he is obliterating the old rules of Republican politics, he proclaimed, days before a Florida primary, that he generally agreed with President Obama that the embargo on Cuba should end.
  ''After 50 years, it's enough time, folks,'' he said.
  Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz heatedly denounced what they described as appeasement of the Castro government, drawing applause from the pro-embargo local Republican audience. But Mr. Trump was unmoved.
  ''I'd make a deal'' with Havana, he said, ''but it's got to be a great deal.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/us/politics/republican-debate.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: From left, Senator Marco Rubio, Donald J. Trump, Senator Ted Cruz and Gov. John Kasich just before the start of the debate Thursday night at the University of Miami in Coral Gables, Fla. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A17)       

Load-Date: March 11, 2016


End of Document
Outsourcers Are Criticized On Visa Use
The New York Times
April 1, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 688 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Major outsourcing companies from India have been the biggest recipients of visas in recent years under a program intended to allow American companies to bring highly skilled foreign workers temporarily to the United States, an immigration scholar testified Thursday before a House of Representatives judiciary panel.
Loopholes in the visa program have made it easy for the outsourcers ''to bring in cheaper foreign workers, with ordinary skills, who directly substitute for, rather than complement, workers in America,'' the scholar, Ronil Hira, a professor at Rochester Institute of Technology who has studied the program, told the House Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement.
Four of the five biggest users of the program from 2007 to 2009 were Indian outsourcing companies: Infosys, Wipro, Mahindra Satyam and Tata, Mr. Hira said. Microsoft was the only company with headquarters in the United States among the top five users, he said. Among them, the Indian companies sent 22,766 workers to the United States on temporary visas during the two deepest years of the recession.
The hearing marked a new round in a rancorous tug of war over the visas, known as H-1B visas. Granted to foreign workers with at least a bachelor's degree to work in the United States for up to three years, they have been used by computer companies to bring in technology experts.
American companies are requesting an increase in the annual national limit of 65,000 temporary visas, saying it is too low and inflexible to meet their needs for engineers and scientists during unpredictable variations in the economy. But numerous cases have come to light of American workers who were ousted from jobs and replaced by workers from Indian outsourcing companies, often at lower wages.
As a measure of the frustration among American technology businesses and workers, a representative from an engineers' association urged lawmakers to set aside the H-1B debate entirely and to focus instead on providing permanent residence visas, known as green cards, to foreign students graduating with advanced degrees in science and mathematics from American universities.
''We are asking this subcommittee to change the subject, from H-1B to green cards,'' said the representative, Bruce Morrison of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. He urged the legislators to change the law quickly to make green cards available to students who will get their degrees in June.
His plea was supported in a letter from the Semiconductor Industry Association, which represents many large technology employers. Thousands of foreign students who get advanced science degrees in the United States do not remain because permanent work visas are not available.
Donald Neufeld, a Citizenship and Immigration Services official, testified that auditors had found fraud in about 7 percent of visa petitions, down from 21 percent in 2008. But Mr. Hira said that because of low wage requirements in the program, employers were using it to legally hire foreign workers at significantly lower pay than Americans.
Brendan Kavanagh, who runs a small technology consulting company in Miami Lakes, Fla., said that he had experienced the competition directly, after his contract with a major pharmaceutical company in Illinois was abruptly terminated last September. He was replaced by three Wipro employees on temporary visas, he said in an interview.
Mr. Kavanagh, who attended the hearing to press his case with lawmakers, said that he had been hired by the company to overhaul a major software system, and that many of the workers he managed were Indians with H-1B visas. ''They absolutely misrepresented their skills,'' he said. ''They are working with very critical software, and they don't understand the nature of it -- these are patients' lives.''
He said the time he took to train the temporary workers had slowed the project and led to disputes with the company, which finally terminated his contract. He said he could not name the company because of a contractual confidentiality clause.
''Employers are using these visas to give away our knowledge,'' Mr. Kavanagh said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 1, 2011


End of Document
Talk
The New York Times
July 28, 2019 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 3084 words
Byline: By DAVID MARCHESE
David Marchese is the magazine's Talk columnist.
Body


During his 25-year run as editor in chief of Vanity Fair, Graydon Carter was one of the rare editors to become famous in his own right: a nattily dressed icon with a distinctive swoop of gray hair who greeted the glitterati every year at the magazine's Oscar party, whose keen attention to social dynamics was such that he personally handled the seating arrangements at his hip Manhattan restaurant the Waverly Inn, and who, chiefly, of course, oversaw a very, very successful magazine. A magazine that, depending on the story -- or perhaps on whom you asked -- could either shine a flattering light (plush celebrity cover stories) or a harshly revealing one (deeply reported investigative articles).
Recently, though, Carter's editorial decision making came into question when the journalist Vicky Ward claimed that a well-sourced accusation of sexual misconduct was removed from an otherwise critical 2003 Vanity Fair profile she wrote about Jeffrey Epstein, the financier and, later, convicted sex offender. (Carter has said that Ward's reporting on this aspect of the article did not meet Vanity Fair's legal and editorial standards. Ward disputes this.) This controversy came just before the launch of Carter's post-Vanity Fair project, a subscription-based digital-news platform called Air Mail. 
  It's a complicated turn of events for a man, now 70, who told me, ''The only reasons you should go into journalism are to do good things, have a great time and make a bit of money. In that order.''
  One criticism of Vanity Fair during your tenure was that it could be too cozy with the powerful people it covered. Was that a fair criticism? I always told friends, ''Listen, I'm not going to go out of my way to destroy you, but if you get into a fistfight with your coequal at another company, that's a Vanity Fair story.''
  Were you ever conflicted about developing friendships with, say, Hollywood producers, who worked in a world that Vanity Fair covered? Or about the fact that, at times, you had a financial interest in that same world, like when you got a finder's fee for ''A Beautiful Mind?''^1 None of that felt too comfortable? I didn't think it was cozy. I thought it was pretty straightforward. The fact is, I told friends, ''if you stick your hand into the buzz saw, we'll report on that.'' The same thing went with our advertisers. We did a story when LVMH was in a big battle for Gucci. Nobody came out looking great in the story, and it was a very touchy subject given that some of our largest advertisers were involved. But Bryan Burrough did a great story and treated everyone fairly. That has been my overriding mantra: Treat people fairly.
  In the past, you worked directly with Mario Testino^2 and Ken Friedman,^3 who have since been subject to allegations of sexually inappropriate behavior. In retrospect, did you miss signs that you should have seen? We'll start with the photographer. Vanity Fair didn't shoot models. We shot established people. Mario Testino would shoot Princess Diana for us. So his behavior wasn't a factor as it perhaps was with models allegedly. With Ken, he was a great partner, he was a really good restaurateur, and I feel badly for him that this has happened and feel badly for the staff.
  So you weren't aware of any signs? Harvey Weinstein was my across-the-street neighbor for 10 years. You sort of guessed it with him. Not with these other people.
   As the editor in chief of Vanity Fair, you have the reputation of being kind of a power broker. Are you at all personally drawn to the notion of having power or status? If a big part of your ambition is to be powerful, you wouldn't have done a magazine like Spy,^4 which basically burned every bridge around us. And I didn't apply for the job at Vanity Fair, Si Newhouse^5 hired me for it. There were a lot of stories at Vanity Fair that involved friends, which caused rifts in our relationship. There was one we did on Jeffrey Wigand,^6 and one of the people involved in the story was John Scanlon,^7 who was a dear friend of mine. He did not come off particularly well, and we didn't talk for 18 months. But I just loved doing what I do. It had nothing whatsoever to do with perceived power. Because, believe me, as an editor, you don't have that much.
  Did you have to do any horse trading to get the famous people you wanted on the cover of Vanity Fair? Were there any discussions with publicists along the lines of, ''We're willing to put your up-and-coming star in a section of the magazine if you'll give us your bigger star for the cover?'' No. That may go on, but we were Vanity Fair and did not have to do any of that. We were fortunate to have a buyer's market.
  How do you think Vanity Fair has been doing since you left?^8 I'm not going to say anything.
  You could say something positive! It's going from strength to strength.
  It's clear that Vanity Fair, in its current iteration, is more focused on diversity than it was before, both in terms of subjects and staffing. Were you thinking about diversity during your time there? Definitely in terms of cover subjects and subject matter. Less so on the hiring. We basically just hired based on talent.
  Everyone says they hire based on talent. Isn't the deeper thing whether or not you're being open to new ideas about what kind of talent you might hire based on, and who might have it, and how it might manifest itself? As long as the writing is good, I'm open to anything. Obviously diversity is more of a concern now than it was, say, 15 years ago.
  Can you talk more about how Vanity Fair approached diversity in terms of cover subjects? For years the magazine tended to stick actors and actresses of color on the inside gatefold of its Hollywood special-issue covers. I think it wasn't until 2014 that black and white actors appeared alongside one another on one of those special issues' cover.^9 What accounts for that? I suppose the biggest criteria for putting those Hollywood covers together was the prominence of the actors. I think that there's been a rough period for minority actors in Hollywood. It's only been recently that they've been pushed into the forefront. The cover decision was based on popularity and success at that point.
  So that was the calculus, as opposed to any sense that a certain type of cover sold better? Over all, we tried to make the covers as wide-ranging and diverse as possible and, at the same time, to try to reflect what was going on in Hollywood at the time.
  I guess it's good that diversity changed in 2014. Yes.
  Vanity Fair obviously did lots of investigative reporting on rich and powerful people behaving nefariously, but it was also clearly intended to be an aspirational publication for its readers, and from what I understand Air Mail is intended to be that, too. How do you think the country is feeling about aspiration and affluence these days? America is an aspirational country, and up until recently when people who were living affluent lives were displayed in magazines, the country was fine with that, because readers had a chance at those lives. The financial crisis in 2008 changed the rules dramatically. The aspirational aspect of American culture has diminished because chances are, you can't achieve affluence the way you could've 25 or 30 years ago. It's much harder for people.
  Does that change how you approach your work? Of course it does. We didn't actually cover rich people that much at Vanity Fair. We covered people who were in positions of power who were doing great things or slightly nefarious things. But Air Mail's audience is not automatically an affluent audience. It's an audience with a catholic range of interests.
  When I went back and read profiles written about you over the years, an implicit question they raised for me was how you went from being the guy at Spy who used to throw stones at the rich and powerful to being the guy who hosted the Vanity Fair Oscar party^10 every year. I didn't find any clear answers. Did a part of you always want to be an insider rather than an outsider? I didn't really have an opinion one way or another there. From 1978 when I got to New York and for about the next 20 years, my principal goal was to keep a job. Because if I'd lost my job my H1 visa disappears. And I had four children I had to provide for. I never even thought of my work as a career. I thought of it as, I need this job, and I'm going to make this job as enjoyable as possible for me and my family and the people around me.
  Do you agree with the idea that Spy was a tonal progenitor of a lot of Internet writing? I disagree. The internet is filled with bile and snark and accusation. Spy was much subtler. We copied a bit of the writing style from Private Eye and 1940s-era Time. Very adjective-filled, dense, fact-filled writing. It wasn't this freewheeling spitball contest that the internet is now. It was probably much more elegant. There's some great and funny writing on the Internet, obviously, but I don't think there's any correlation with Spy.
  I read about this speech you used to give people about the seven rooms of status in New York.^11 What are the seven rooms exactly? I don't know because I'm probably only at room three. But a version of that is how at some parties there's a roped-off area where the better people are -- when you think you've made it, there's always something else. At Spy, I thought we knew everything. But by the end of Spy, I realized I didn't. There's always another room.
  What's an instance when you glimpsed a new room? If you bump into a few millionaires then see how billionaires live, it's a very different thing.
  Can you give me a story about a famous person acting like a pain in the ass at the Oscar party? There were lots of pains-in-the-ass. I remember Courtney Love came to me and said: ''Graydon, you've got to help me. I need my manager to come in. He's got my car keys, my wallet, and my drugs.'' I said: ''Look, I can't do that right now. I'm sort of busy here. Go and talk to Sara Marks, who organized the party.'' So she goes to Sara Marks and Sara won't let anybody in. In those days, we had cameras outside so you could see who was arriving. Courtney Love goes out and in front of all the cameras says, ''I've got an important announcement to make.'' All the cameras focus on her. Then she goes, ''Sara Marks is a [expletive].'' I admired her use of technology.
  Your mentioning Time magazine a second ago reminds me of something you wrote earlier this year in that essay you did for The Hollywood Reporter. You had this aside about working for Time beginning in '70s and having lunch with a famous Italian actress. I won't say who it was. She's still alive.
  Then it was probably either Sophia Loren or Gina Lollobrigida -- but the thing that piqued my interest was that you had a researcher there with you at lunch who was taking notes for you. Was that common? Yeah, somebody would be handling it for me. Time in those days was luxurious. They brought dinner trolleys around the office on Thursdays and on Friday nights with china and wine. There was a bar set up at the end of every corridor. They sent you home in a car service. A bunch of us rented houses out in Sag Harbor, and at 2 o'clock on a Saturday morning you would see all these yellow Checker cabs going over the hills heading towards Sag Harbor or Sagaponack. I remember there was one writer who was going up to the Berkshires. The cab driver said: ''Look, it's going to take us forever to get there. Do you like flying?'' So they go out to a private airport on Long Island and the driver's got a little Cessna, and they get in the Cessna and he turns it over and the battery's dead. So he wheels the Checker cab up and uses it to boost the Cessna. The expenses were just incredible. Those were the days.
  I still can't quite tell if the perspective that Spy used to have on the powerful, which was suffused with this real sense of ''look at these [expletives],'' was a perspective that you yourself ever really shared. First of all, the '80s were a fantastic time to have a satirical magazine in New York. You had a lot of money being made after a decade where there hadn't been a lot of money being made. So people were very showy. It was great. It was like Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade with millionaires. It was fun to cover them, and mine was a 36-year-old's sensibility. It was much more in my character then to shoot spitballs at my betters. As you get older, you realize that everybody has their own problems. There are a few sane people that are happy with their lives.
  So I have to ask you about the situation with Vicky Ward and the Jeffrey Epstein profile she wrote for Vanity Fair. She's saying that she had credible sources claiming sexual misconduct on the part of Jeffrey Epstein, that she had originally included those allegations in the profile, and that you had them removed. You've said that Ward did not have three on the record sources and that what she did have did not meet Vanity Fair's legal standards, therefore the allegations were cut. [Editor's note: Ward says she did have three on-the-record sources -- a mother and her two daughters -- at the time. The Guardian has since contacted the mother, who confirmed the three spoke to Ward in 2003, on the record.] But I'm having a hard time understanding why one credible account of sexual misconduct wouldn't have been enough to warrant inclusion or at least make you reconsider the profile? This is 20 years ago. I'm not going to get into the details, because I don't even remember the details. The fact is that editors make tough decisions every day, and at Vanity Fair we had an army of fact checkers and lawyers and other editors to help us make the right ones. It's easy for people to question those decisions 20 years on.
  But what I was asking about was this apparent in-house rule about needing to have three on-the-record sources. Can you explain the rationale behind that and how it was applied in this instance? We wanted people to go on the record. Whoever Vicky Ward talked to, they were unavailable to us. At the time this was the first or second major profile of Jeffrey Epstein. He was still a private citizen, and the libel bar is much higher on a private citizen than a public figure. We had great lawyers and a great fact-checking team and a great legal editor, and the accusations didn't make it into print.
  Doesn't the practice of requiring multiple on-the-record corroborating sources advantage somebody like Epstein in a situation like the one that's being cited? He only has to say ''no'' but the accusers have to --  I didn't invent the system. I just lived by the system.
  Was that system broken? In the instance of the whole #MeToo wave of accusations, the system probably held that back.
  Held back people's being able to come forward? Yes.
  Would you handle the Epstein story differently today? The rules of engagement have changed slightly.
  How? I think that the #MeToo movement has been a great window into activities that have been going on for a long, long time. But who knew this about Jeffrey Epstein at the time? You could suspect things. You could hear rumors. You can't get those things into print.
  So you're saying Vanity Fair's editorial decisions were being made in a different cultural climate? They were made by the structures of a magazine that had legal review and fact-checking and editing processes.
  Do you now have reason to reconsider those practices? All I can say is that the practices that we practiced back then were practiced pretty much across the entire legitimate magazine industry.
  Do you think you missed the much more important Epstein story? I kick myself over missing multiple stories. The fact is, that story was the toughest story done on him, probably over a 10-year period. He hated the story.
  Did the existence of even one seemingly credible accusation of sexual misconduct against Epstein make you consider further pursuing that aspect of the story? I don't think we saw any details. I don't think the facts were presented in a way that would have made it into print.
  So what you're arguing is that Vicky Ward is retroactively making the situation seem more clear-cut than it was at the time? I'll let you say that.
  Vicky Ward also says that Epstein visited you to discuss the profile, and after his visit, the sexual misconduct accusations were removed. Did that visit happen? Absolutely not true. Every once in a while an editor is brought into a story to help with access or to try to talk the subject into posing for a picture. She had asked me to speak to Epstein about going on the record. I did speak to him, and it was a cat-and-mouse game, and I don't think he ever did. Then as we were closing the story, I'd asked him to pose for photographs, and he showed up at the office one day and he was sitting in our lobby. I don't know how he got there. I asked him to pose for pictures, and he didn't do that either.
  So contrary to what Vicky Ward has also said, there was no deal that happened where you said you would take out the accusations if Epstein provided you with photos to accompany the profile? Never. I've never done that in 25 years at Vanity Fair.
  I know you're aware of the piece that a former Vanity Fair writer, Kim Masters, wrote for The Hollywood Reporter in which she suggested that you did personal face-saving favors for subjects of Vanity Fair articles by removing unflattering details. She talked about two people, one of whom I know in a cocktail-party situation and not well. The other person, I don't think I've ever met, and I've certainly never spoken on the phone to him.
  The two people you're talking about are Jake Bloom^12 and Mike Myers?^13 Yes.
  There's definitely a belief out there that wheel-greasing goes on between editors and subjects at a publication like Vanity Fair. Maybe I'm being cynical, but because some wheel-greasing in more unserious instances seems likely, it is easy to conflate that with what is supposed to have happened with the Epstein profile. Is that not what happened? I do not recall a single incident of what you call wheel-greasing in my 25 years there.
  You're telling me that neither wheel-greasing nor making editorial decisions based on personal considerations regarding subjects ever occurred at Vanity Fair? I can't remember a single one.
  Photograph by Mamadi Doumbouya
              This interview has been edited and condensed from three conversations.                  

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAMADI DOUMBOUYA) (MM13)
Carter at Vanity Fair's 2011 Oscar party in West Hollywood with, from left, Barry Diller, Anna Scott Carter, Mick Jagger and Fran Lebowitz. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER POLK/VF11, VIA GETTY IMAGES) (MM14)
 Carter with co-editor Kurt Andersen, left, at Spy magazine's Manhattan office in 1988. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARTY REICHENTHAL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (MM15)       

Load-Date: July 28, 2019


End of Document
Visa Shortage Spurs Vacancies, for Jobs, at a Tourist Getaway
The New York Times 
June 8, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1415 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: The tourism industry on Mackinac Island, Mich., and other regional industries that define the American summer are stuck in the middle of a struggle over jobs and who should be doing them.
Body


Mackinac Island has a permanent population of about 500 people and just as many horses, but no cars. From May to October, the picturesque Michigan getaway relies on about 3,000 workers to power its economic engine: summer tourism.
Historically, up to a third of those workers are foreigners, including Mexicans, Filipinos, Canadians and Jamaicans, who are hired on seasonal visas. But when many of the island’s business owners applied for those visas this year, they heard from the government that none were left.
So at the Iroquois Hotel, a Victorian property on the waterfront where rooms command up to $1,200 a night, the owner is trying to figure out how to maintain its high standards without 30 Jamaican housekeepers. Other hotels are contemplating closing off whole sections. Even those who own the ubiquitous horses are wondering if they will have enough workers.
“It’s urgent for us to get more visas to save the season,” Brad Chambers, who operates horse tours and taxis, said.
The island whose selling point is being stuck in time is now suffering because it is stuck in the middle of a modern-day struggle over jobs and who should be doing them. So, too, are a number of the regional industries that define the American summer but have increasingly relied on non-American workers, from vacation spots in Maine and Minnesota to Gulf Coast shrimpers and the salmon fisheries of Alaska.
The visas in question, known as H-2Bs, have an annual nationwide quota of 66,000, divided between winter and summer. But the summer allotment was exhausted quickly because Congress, concerned about the program’s impact on American workers, chose in December not to renew a provision that allowed workers who had H-2Bs in some previous years to work without being counted against the quota. That decision effectively sliced the number of visas by at least 50 percent.
Congress has also given the homeland security secretary, John F. Kelly, the authority to release more visas, and a bipartisan group of lawmakers urged him in a May 12 letter to do so swiftly.
Citing the importance of the $5.8 billion seafood industry to her state, Senator Lisa Murkowski, an Alaska Republican, told Mr. Kelly during a recent Senate hearing that a “short-term fix is urgently needed.”
Mr. Kelly responded, “For every senator or congressman who has your view, I have another who says, ‘Don’t you dare. This is about American jobs.’ ”
He added that he would probably release additional visas but did not specify when or how many. Even if he does, it would take two to four weeks for new workers to arrive because they must first pass an interview at an American consulate in their country of origin to obtain a visa.
President Trump — who uses H-2B workers in the winter at his Mar-a-Lago club in Palm Beach, Fla. — campaigned on a promise of reducing immigration and protecting American jobs. And while the H-2B, the offshoot of a temporary work visa created in 1952, has spawned less controversy than the H-1B visas for tech and other skilled workers, critics say the program displaces Americans just the same.
Unions, citing low wages, dispute employers’ assertions that they need the visas because domestic workers will not take the low-skilled jobs. In a 2015 report, the Labor Department’s inspector general expressed concern that employers were not trying hard enough to recruit Americans, as they are required to do before applying for the visas. The department has also documented cases of exploitation of foreign workers.
“Immigration flows are often driven by a desire to exploit a new foreign labor pool,” said Dan Stein, the president of Federation for American Immigration Reform, which advocates stricter immigration policies. “Nowhere is there more evidence of this than in the illegal and temporary foreign labor pools.”
Employers say that they would not use a program they regard as bureaucratic and expensive — they must pay fees for lawyers and for workers’ transportation to the United States — unless they had to. And they complain that they are falling victim to a dysfunctional immigration system, even as they do the right thing by hiring legal workers.
Simply put, the companies say, Americans are not very interested in menial, short-term work.
Eric Haugen, who runs a landscaping company in the Denver area, regularly posts ads in newspapers, on Craigslist and on street signs for positions that pay $14 to $25 an hour, with health care and benefits.
“We hire every single person who shows up” for an interview, he said. “We are lucky if one reports to work.”
Mr. Haugen has offered current workers $100 bonuses for referrals, to no avail. “The labor pool really doesn’t exist,” he said, which is why he turns to the H-2B program for part of the year. He has secured 32 visas for Mexican workers who arrived in April.
Making matters more difficult is the tight labor market. In Maine, where unemployment is 3 percent, innkeepers and other employers have been hit hard by the dearth of H-2B visas. Last month, Gov. Paul R. LePage, a tough-on-crime conservative, conditionally commuted the prison sentences of some low-level offenders to help fill tourism jobs.
In late May, dozens of employers phoned in to an emotional 90-minute conference call with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which administers the visa program.
On the call was Andrea Hance, president of the Texas Shrimp Association. The industry, which has been buffeted by cheap Asian imports, is now “in crisis” because of the visa shortage, she said. Some 400 to 500 H-2B visa holders, mainly Mexicans, work on vessels that ply the Gulf of Mexico from mid-July to early November. Efforts to find Americans willing to spend 30 to 60 days at sea have failed, Ms. Hance said.
During the salmon run, Alaska Glacier Seafoods in Juneau operates two shifts seven days a week to process the catch. The company typically relies on H-2Bs to fill 60 out of 200 positions but did not get any this year. “That may cause us to buy less fish, which would impact fishermen and their families,” Mike Erickson, the company’s president, said.
He dispatched two human resources workers to recruit in other states. In a month, they hired only 12 people. “At the end of the day, a lot of Americans think working in a fishy, smelly environment is not the thing for them,” Mr. Erickson said.
On Mackinac, Mr. Chambers, the horse-tour operator, said he had found five workers to fill 20 positions for which he sought H-2B visas.
“We have done recruiting over the internet, in newspapers and in horse country to get people to come,” he said.
His great-great-grandfather wrote a bill in 1898 banning cars, giving the island in Lake Huron its vintage appeal that draws a million visitors annually.
The 393-room Grand Hotel, the setting for the 1979 movie “Somewhere in Time,” starring Christopher Reeve and Jane Seymour, has been hiring seasonal foreign workers for decades. “Without them, we would be looking at changing our entire business model,” Jennifer King, general manager of the property, said.
The hotel got the visas it needed. Other businesses on the island have not been as lucky.
Phil Harrington, the sous chef at Yankee Rebel Tavern, has been coming in at noon instead of 3 p.m. to make sure preparations are complete before dinner guests arrive. “With the shortage of visas, it’s more stress on me and others who have to work longer hours to do more of the grunt work,” he said while chopping herbs, a task usually relegated to foreign workers.
Patti Ann Moskwa, the owner and a fourth-generation restaurateur, has been washing dishes herself.
“This is a legal program to supplement American workers,” she said of the visas. “We aren’t taking jobs from anybody.”
PHOTOS: Shantel Scarlett, from Jamaica, clearing dishes during afternoon tea at the Grand Hotel on Mackinac Island, Mich. The hotel has been hiring seasonal foreign workers for decades.; Visa workers from Mexico, above, after a shift at the Grand Hotel. Erik Schubert, below, took over as farrier at Mackinac Island Carriage Tours because the company’s longtime farrier, who lives 50 miles away in Canada, was not granted a visa this year.; Fewer foreign workers means Cecilia Wooley works longer hours at the Harbor View Inn. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Donald Trump to Foreign Workers for Florida Club: You’re Hired
    • Maine’s Governor Wants Inmates to Fill Jobs, Not Prison Beds
    • With Ally in Oval Office, Immigration Hard-Liners Ascend to Power

Load-Date: June 10, 2017


End of Document
Bush Taps Silicon Valley For Support
The New York Times
July 2, 1999, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 846 words
Byline: By RICHARD L. BERKE 

By RICHARD L. BERKE 
Dateline: PALO ALTO, Calif., July 1
Body


Encroaching on political turf that Vice President Al Gore has cultivated for years, Gov. George W. Bush ventured into Silicon Valley today to fatten his already flush campaign treasury and to unveil proposals favored by the technology industry.
The Texas Governor departed from his standard text to make an aggressive pitch to the computer titans in the room, a group with growing influence that both political camps are wooing. He chided President Clinton and Mr. Gore for, among other things, not allowing American companies to sell sensitive technology overseas when those products are available from competitors.
"Our best companies feel frustrated that they cannot sell some of their products abroad even when equipment technology is sold by foreign competitors," he said at the breakfast attended by about 500 people.
But today, in a step the Administration had been expected to take for some time, the White House announced an easing of export restrictions on high-powered computers, which computer makers had lobbied for aggressively.
Mr. Bush criticized the Administration for not loosening immigration restrictions that would allow technology companies to recruit more workers. He also suggested that the Administration had moved too slowly to embrace a bill in Congress that would limit lawsuits arising from Year 2000 computer breakdowns. And he advocated lower taxes on the industry.
Of the $1.7 million Mr. Bush collected from supporters who paid $1,000 apiece to hear his pitch for the Republican Presidential nomination at the packed breakfast here and at a dinner on Wednesday in San Francisco, $850,000 came from Silicon Valley, contributing to a total of $5 million from California this week.
"In Texas, we were one of the first states to protect the technology industry from Y2K legislation -- the biggest potential ambulance chase in the millennium," Mr. Bush said.
"I'll tell you this," he added, "from the very beginning, I will take the side of innovation over litigation every single time."
Mr. Bush also advocated an increase in the number of highly skilled workers allowed into the country under visas known as H1-B, a move adamantly opposed by labor unions. The cap of 115,000 for this year had already been reached, he said, and that could hurt companies facing a shortage of computer engineers and software technicians.
"The limit on H1-B visas should be raised, Mr. President and Mr. Vice President," Mr. Bush said.
That was the closest Mr. Bush came to directly taking on Mr. Gore, the leading candidate for the Democratic nomination.
Mr. Bush's campaign advisers said they had considered lambasting the Vice President head on. But ultimately, they said, they decided -- and Mr. Bush concurred -- that there would be no gain in directly attacking Mr. Gore this early and at a time when polls show he is far less popular than Mr. Bush. They said the outpouring at the event here today would speak for itself.
"It would be disingenuous to say there wasn't some discussion," one Bush adviser said of the talks about whether to criticize Mr. Gore. "But the basic feeling was that we have our own agenda to lay out."
Though he stuck to his own agenda for the most part, Mr. Bush could not resist referring to Mr. Gore's famous gaffe that he had invented the Internet. He incorporated a line about it in almost every speech, and it was particularly well received today. Democrats, he said, "no more invented prosperity than they invented the Internet."
Marla Romash, the deputy chairwoman of the Gore campaign, said the Vice President was not threatened by the outpouring here for Mr. Bush.
"This is one of those places where he has support and we have a lot of support," Ms. Romash said. "We're pleased with the level of support we're receiving."
While Mr. Gore has long held a deep interest in computers, many software financiers are Republicans. And Mr. Bush has some ties of his own to the industry. In Texas, he has assiduously tapped executives in the Silicon Hills of Austin, where many software and semiconductor companies are based.
In his remarks this morning, Mr. Bush went out of his way to cite Silicon Valley again and again, far more than he has other regions on this last day of his three-day swing up and down California.
"It's an incredibly fascinating place," he said. "To me, it means more than a V-chip or an area or a spot on the map. It's a piece of the spirit of America. It not only talks about new technologies that shape our lives, but it speaks about daring, and enterprise and the ultimate American dream."
Among other proposals, Mr. Bush called for freeing the Internet from duties and tariffs and proposed a permanent Federal tax credit for research and development.
Among the computer executives and venture capitalists who helped raise money for Mr. Bush here, many of whom wore "B2K" buttons, are Gordon E. Moore, a co-founder of the Intel Corporation; Robert J. Herbold, executive vice president of the Microsoft Corporation; Ray Lane, president of the Oracle Corporation, and John T. Chambers, chief executive officer of Cisco Systems Inc.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Gov. George W. Bush of Texas led a group of youths in East Palo Alto, Calif., yesterday after a breakfast with computer executives. (Associated Press)
 
       

Load-Date: July 2, 1999


End of Document
Economic Scene;
Work visas are allowing Washington to sidestep immigration reform.
The New York Times
May 25, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section C; ; Section C; Page 2; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By Alan B. Krueger; 

This column appears here every Thursday. Alan B. Krueger is the Bendheim Professor of Economics and Public Affairs at Princeton University and editor of The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Four economic analysts -- Professor Krueger, J. Bradford DeLong, Jeff Madrick and Virginia Postrel -- rotate as contributors.

By Alan B. Krueger;  This column appears here every Thursday. Alan B. Krueger is the Bendheim Professor of Economics and Public Affairs at Princeton University and editor of The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Four economic analysts -- Professor Krueger, J. Bradford DeLong, Jeff Madrick and Virginia Postrel -- rotate as contributors.
Body


THE inscription on the Statue of Liberty is quietly being rewritten: "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free; I'll also take your skilled employees under the temporary visa program, H-1B."
The H-1B visa was established in 1990 to permit foreigners with a college degree or higher to work in the United States for a renewable three-year term for employers who petition on their behalf. In 1998, the program was expanded to allow 115,000 workers, up from 65,000, to enter the United States in fiscal years 1999 and 2000. Demand for H-1B visas by employers is high, particularly among high-technology companies. This year the limit was reached just six months into the year. President Clinton and many members of Congress would like to increase the limit to 200,000 a year the next three years.
The expansion of temporary work visas should be evaluated in the context of overall immigration policy. But immigration reform, replacing Social Security, has become the new third rail of American politics. So instead of tackling the issue head on, Washington has come to rely on temporary work visas as a substitute for addressing the economic and social shortcomings of current policy.
The United States is in the midst of the "Second Great Migration." The first occurred between 1880 and 1924, when 26 million immigrants arrived on our shores. The second began in the late 1970's: more immigrants have come to the United States since 1980 than in the previous 60 years.
Workers admitted under the H-1B program are not immigrants, but experts in the field expect that most of them will end up staying permanently in the United States.
In addition to workers with H-1B visas, hundreds of thousands of other foreigners are admitted to work temporarily in the United States under visa categories covering intracompany transfers, individuals with extraordinary ability, registered nurses and nonprofit religious organizations. A fast-growing category is the Nafta TN visa, which offers an unlimited number of temporary visas for professional workers from Canada and soon Mexico.
In a new book, "Heaven's Door," George Borjas, a Harvard economist, proposes that the United States adopt a Canadian-style point system, in which applicants for visas are assigned points on the basis of characteristics like their ability to speak English, work-force skills, family ties, refugee status and ethnic diversity. Those whose total points exceed a certain threshold would be admitted. Going even further, Professor Borjas favors setting the threshold so that the number of immigrants entering the United States falls from about 900,000 to about 500,000 a year. The total number can be debated. If nothing else, this policy would be transparent.
Who should become an American? The question is profound, involving more than economics alone. But economic considerations obviously play a role.
Theoretically, the economics of immigration is straightforward. If more workers are admitted to the country -- as permanent immigrants or temporary workers -- the earnings of native American workers competing with them for jobs should fall. At the same time, the price of goods and services they produce should decline, and the profits of businesses should rise.
The winners are employers, consumers and the immigrants themselves. The losers are workers in the same job market as immigrants.
Economic research has not been able to estimate with any confidence the wage decline for native workers that results from immigration. Much solid research finds no effect. This suggests to me that any effect is likely to be small.
Professor Borjas's evidence indicates that the skills of legal and illegal immigrants have slipped relative to those of natives since the 1970's. A third of employed male immigrants are high school dropouts.  At the same time, the labor market increasingly demands more high-skilled workers, as suggested by the long-term rise in the number of workers with college degrees and their sharply increased pay compared with that of those with high school degrees.  Therefore, it would be economically beneficial to admit relatively more highly skilled permanent immigrants -- not to mention that skilled immigrants are less likely to take advantage of the safety net.
If immigration reform is off the table, it makes economic sense to increase the number of skilled immigrants by issuing H-1B visas -- through what might be called heaven's backdoor. Yet economic principles also suggest that the playing field between H-1B workers and the rest of the work force should be leveled.
American workers are protected from exploitation on the job by three defenses: exit, voice and regulation. Exit entails the ability to move to a better job if one is available; voice results from representation by labor unions and other organizations; and regulation is a labyrinth of standards enforced by government agencies.
These protections are deficient for H-1B workers.
They cannot easily switch jobs because they must find another employer willing to petition the Immigration and Naturalization Service on their behalf. Even if they manage to do that, they must wait months for a reply. H-1B workers are also unusually beholden to their employers, the ones who can sponsor them for permanent immigrant status.
They lack voice because no organization effectively represents them.
And they have less regulatory protection than other workers because the Labor Department is precluded from investigating their conditions of employment unless a complaint is filed.
Evidence suggests H-1B visa holders suffer as a consequence. Even though 70 percent of them are in well-paid computer-related and engineering fields, a 1996 report by the Labor Department's inspector general found that 19 percent of H-1B workers are paid less than the salary they were promised.
Legislation to increase the number of H-1B visas should provide protection from exploitation. This also would help native workers and improve economic efficiency.
What could be done? Permit H-1B workers to change jobs freely after they are admitted to the country. Authorize the Labor Department to conduct random investigations of their employment conditions. Finally, require the immigration service to process applications for permanent, employment-based immigration more quickly, which would reduce the need for H-1B visas in the first place.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Graph: "Give Me Your College Educated"
The number of skilled temporary foreign workers who enter the United States each year under the H-1B visa program is growing compared with the annual influx of permanent legal immigrant workers.
 
Graph tracks number of new h-1b visas and estimated number of new permanent legal immigrants that are working, age 20 to 64.
 
Note: Immigrant figures for 1989-92 are adjusted for the influx of resident immigrants granted amnesty and for 1997-98 to account for a backlog at the I.N.S. H-1B visas in 1999 exceeded the federal cap because I.N.S. inadvertently issued at least 21,888 extra.
 
(Sources: Immigration and Naturalization Service; Census Bureau)
      

Load-Date: May 25, 2000


End of Document
Reagan Democrats: Gone but Not Forgotten
The New York Times
February 22, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Op-Ed
Length: 616 words
Byline: By Michael K. Deaver; 

Michael K. Deaver is vice chairman of Edelman Public Relations Worldwide and served as President Ronald Reagan's deputy chief of staff.

By Michael K. Deaver;  Michael K. Deaver is vice chairman of Edelman Public Relations Worldwide and served as President Ronald Reagan's deputy chief of staff.
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body


In the Republican primary in Michigan today, both John McCain and George W. Bush will be seeking the support of the elusive Reagan Democrat. Mr. McCain, having lost big in South Carolina when conservative Republicans turned out in force to support Mr. Bush, has a particular stake in courting this mythic bloc of voters.
But even as both candidates make their appeal, they must realize that, to a large extent, Reagan Democrats are no longer -- and the Republican Party must change its message to fit the times.
Michigan was once a bastion for such voters. Born in the shadows of Detroit's auto plants, the Reagan Democrats in Macomb County were always uneasy bedfellows of liberal Democrats like George McGovern and Ed Muskie, though they had instinctively voted Democratic since the days of Franklin Roosevelt.
In the 1960's and 70's, as national Democrats moved away from traditional issues like families, neighborhoods and national security, Republicans moved into places like Macomb County to pick up the conservative Democrats left behind.
In 1980, Ronald Reagan cobbled together a coalition of Republicans and disaffected blue-collar workers that propelled him into the White House and changed the face of the G.O.P.
These Democrats were generally blue-collar workers, who had seen their fathers fight and sometimes die in World War II. They were the guys who got drafted in the Vietnam War and who came back without saying a word. They packed their lunches in Igloo coolers and opened their heating bills with trepidation.
The Reagan Democrats lived in a world today's Generation X would hardly recognize. Stagflation. Malaise. Gas lines. Crime waves. The Ayatollah. Voluntary thermostat controls. One percent pay raises. Mujahadeen. WIN buttons. Hollow military. Killer rabbits. Exploding Pintos. Unemployment. Misery index. Billy Beer.
This was the stuff that drove the regular guy into the arms of Ronald Reagan. He spoke in plain language about ways reinvigorate America, about ending its four-year run as a laughing stock.
But as America has changed since 1980, so have the messages that appeal to the Reagan Democrats.
The auto and steel industries have reinvented themselves, and Joe Sixpack is now Joe Technician. The union guys who once stood with Ronald Reagan are no more. The ones who remain are now the foundation of today's Democratic Party. More than likely, they aren't coming back.
Bill Clinton said recently that he felt sorry for Republicans because they had nothing to run against. The Russians are lambs, the welfare system has been fixed, and the only pessimists are in the bond market.
Life is good, but Republicans still have something to run against. Our current political system is weakened by corruption, complacency and a lack of character.
If Ronald Reagan were running today, he'd focus on these problems and a different audience. He'd be more at home in Silicon Valley than Macomb County. His optimistic message of individuality, distrust of government and reliance on markets would undoubtedly make him a dot-comer.
These people talk an entirely different language: Signing bonus. 401(k). DVD. Lexus. Straight talk. Real time. H1 visas. Profit-sharing. I.P.O.'s. Equity. Venture capital. Angels.
Call these voters the Reagan independents. Republicans can appeal to this new generation of voters, through different, but no less appealing, messages: standing up to Washington insiders, fighting pork-barrel spending and the status quo, and telling the truth.
The candidate who best enunciates where he stands on these new issues has the opportunity to form a governing coalition that will rival the one Ronald Reagan established with those gritty guys from Michigan so long ago.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 22, 2000


End of Document
Plan Aimed at Drawing Immigrants With Technology Skills
The New York Times
May 7, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 719 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The Obama administration, looking to make adjustments to the nation's immigration system while broader legislation is stalled in Congress, announced plans on Tuesday to allow the spouses of some highly skilled temporary immigrants to work in the United States.
The proposed rule changes were announced with fanfare by Alejandro Mayorkas, the deputy secretary of homeland security, and Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker, who said they would help the country attract and retain immigrants with skills in technology and science, and ''unleash more of the extraordinary contributions that immigrants have always made to America's innovation economy.''
The proposals address visa rules that have long caused difficulties for the spouses of skilled immigrants, mainly from China, India and the Philippines, who are working here on temporary visas known as H-1B. The spouses, mainly wives, often have skills and education, too, but are not authorized to work in the United States, causing their careers to languish.
High-tech employers welcomed the plans. Fred Humphries, a vice president at Microsoft, one of the biggest users of H-1B visas, said they would have ''a positive economic impact.''
The proposals will be subject to a 60-day period of public comment that could lead to changes. Homeland Security officials said they hoped to issue final regulations by the end of the year.
The announcement drew criticism from several sides in the immigration debate. Some immigration lawyers and immigrant advocates said the proposals were too narrow. Republicans on Capitol Hill said the opposite, that they were a new example of executive overreach by President Obama.
H-1B workers number in the hundreds of thousands at any given time. The new rules would grant work authorization only to spouses of H-1B visa holders who had taken the first steps to apply for permanent-resident green cards.
Immigrants can work in the United States on H-1B visas for six years. While they have those visas, employers may apply for them to receive employment-based green cards.
The proposed rule changes acknowledge the huge backlogs that have developed for those green cards. The current wait for most immigrants from India is at least 11 years. Filipinos wait as long as seven years and people from China up to six years. The immigrants can remain in the country while they wait, and with the changes, their spouses would be able to work during that waiting period as well.
Mr. Mayorkas said the changes would benefit as many as 97,000 immigrants in the first year and about 30,000 a year after that.
Representative Judy Chu, a Democrat who represents a California district with many immigrant communities, praised the proposals as a good ''first step'' that would protect immigrant families.
''Denying spouses the right to work is an ill-conceived policy that has gone on for too long,'' Ms. Chu said.
But Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, accused the Obama administration of a ''lack of compassion and understanding'' for American workers who have lost jobs because ''companies prefer to hire lower-paid workers from abroad.''
Mr. Grassley also questioned whether the president had the legal authority to change the rules. ''Where will this administration stop?'' he asked. ''What other categories of individuals will be granted work authorizations?''
A broad immigration bill that passed the Senate last year included major changes to the H-1B program, including a provision that would allow the spouses of all H-1B visa holders to work. The House has not taken up that bill, and it remains unclear if it will move on any major immigration measures this year.
Many immigration lawyers were frustrated that the administration's proposal would not grant work permits to all H-1B spouses.
''It is a rather miserly grant,'' said Angelo Paparelli, a lawyer at Seyfarth Shaw in California. ''Other countries are clamoring to get the best and the brightest. Why are we not doing more?''
Australia and Canada are among the countries in the global competition for highly trained workers in science, technology and engineering that have more generous policies for the families of those immigrants.
Demand for H-1B visas has remained strong. This year, the annual limit of 85,000 visas was reached within one week after the application period opened.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/07/us/politics/us-plan-aims-to-draw-immigrants-with-technology-skills.html

Load-Date: May 9, 2014


End of Document
Experts See Vulnerability As Outsiders Code Software 
 The New York Times
January 6, 2003 Monday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1589 words
Byline:  By JOHN SCHWARTZ 
Body


As American companies increasingly move their software development tasks out of their own offices to computer programming companies here and abroad, new concerns are being raised about the security risks involved.
     Some of these concerns over the practice, known as outsourcing, are being raised by people with an obvious self-interest -- for example, programmers who have seen their livelihoods shift to less expensive operations overseas. And the companies providing outsourcing services argue that they take all necessary precautions to limit risk. But the question of whether the booming business in exporting high-tech jobs is heightening the risk of theft, sabotage or cyberterrorism from rogue programmers has been raised in discussions at the White House, before Congress and in boardrooms. 
 "I can't cite any examples of this happening -- but what that means is we haven't found any," said James Lewis, director of the technology program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. "It's clearly a temptation for people, and it's a concern," he said.
While operations in some countries, like the United States, Britain and India, are considered generally safe for such software outsourcing, nervousness is beginning to grow at companies and in the government about the possibility of abuse by hackers, organized crime agents and cyberterrorists in nations like Pakistan, the Philippines and Russia.
To Mr. Lewis, the potential for problems in the software design process goes beyond the earlier trend of running back-office operations and call centers in other countries.
"The banks have done a fairly good job of insulating themselves," he said, keeping their call centers overseas from being able to engage in unwanted activity. But letting outsiders work on the software that runs businesses and financial institutions could be opening up a world of trouble, he said. "You're going to have code that will be written in countries like India and China," he explained, "and no one's going to know what's in it."
David McCurdy, a former congressman and executive director of the Internet Security Alliance, an industry group, said that although he considered himself a "free trader" with a strong belief in the benefits of global commerce, he believed that the risk from offshore outsourcing was "the most serious of the industry-based issues that this country faces."
The issue has been discussed quietly at the highest levels of government, said Howard Schmidt, vice chairman of the president's critical infrastructure protection board. At the White House, he said, "this has come up as part of a broader discussion of how do we get trust and reliability" in computer systems.
He said, however, that the issue was outsourcing itself, not simply the overseas kind, and cited spies like Aldrich H. Ames and Robert Hanssen as examples of how Americans could do just as much damage to the nation from within as outsiders could. "Irrespective of where it's done, we need to make sure that our code is clean and protected across the board," he said.
It is easy to see why companies find the economics of outsourcing compelling; cost savings can be 25 to 40 percent. Forrester Research of Cambridge, Mass., predicted in a recent report that the acceleration in outsourcing would result in 3.3 million American jobs' moving offshore by 2015, an exodus reminiscent of the tide of American blue-collar jobs that moved to East Asia in the 1980's. Forrester estimates that 70 percent of these jobs will move to India, 20 percent to the Philippines and 10 percent to China.
Patrick P. Gelsinger, the chief technology officer of Intel, said the cost of one engineer in the United States would pay for the services of three Indians, four Chinese or five Russians. But he said he was not concerned about the potential for mischief within his own company's overseas software development. The software is reviewed, he said, to avoid surprises.
"Is it possible?" he said. "Sure, it's possible. Is it a unique risk there? No, it isn't." 
Offshore outsourcing got its trial run in preparations for the Year 2000 changeover, when government and industry had to check every line of software for glitches that could make computer networks and even building security systems shut down at 12 a.m. on Jan. 1, 2000. 
Much of that work was done overseas, and although industry experts warned that foreign programmers might commit crimes or lay the groundwork for terrorism, no evidence of sabotage occurred, said Jay Ehrenreich, senior manager for cybercrime prevention and response at PricewaterhouseCoopers, the consulting firm. After that experience, he said, many companies felt comfortable sending software work overseas, and now such bespoke programming is done around the world.
Programmers say the confidence is not justified. 
"Anyone tells you that 'offshoring' computer systems does not put the infrastructure at risk is lying," said Ken O'Neil, a programmer who lives on Long Island. He and other programmers talk of "sleeper bugs" that could be set to go off at a later date, or back doors that would let intruders in to shuttle money around, steal fractions of a penny from millions of transactions or shut down the system entirely. They warn of risks from political instability, organized crime and terror cells, and even from governments that might demand the ability to spy.
Such talk could be dismissed as the grumblings of disgruntled white-collar workers who have seen their high-paying jobs move elsewhere. "Nobody is going to cry for people who make $75,000 or $100,000 a year," said Marc Alan Fink, who lost his programming job more than a year ago.
In fact, some of the newly expressed concern is part of a long-running and acrimonious fight by programmers to hold on to their jobs in the face of relaxed immigration standards for technical workers and increased outsourcing. They attack the rise in special visas for immigrant engineers, known as H1-B visas, and the trend toward sending jobs overseas.
The companies that provide software outsourcing services say that they take rigorous precautions to ensure that their employees are trustworthy and their code is secure. 
Arup Gupta, president of Tata Consultancy Services, an Indian company that is part of a conglomerate, said he had gotten worried calls from clients after the recent F.B.I. raid on Ptech, a software company in Quincy, Mass. The agents were looking for connections between the company and Yasin al-Qadi, a Saudi Arabian financier suspected of financing terrorism, but early speculation in news reports focused on questions about whether the company, which provides software used by many government agencies, including the F.B.I., was secure.
Mr. Gupta assured his clients that his company used exacting background checks and multiple reviews of company-written software based on industry standards. "With all these in place, we can guarantee, basically, that the code we deliver will be bug-free and will perform to specifications and will not have holes in it," he said. 
He said he could speak for only his own company, but he added that since the Sept. 11 attacks, security fears and economic troubles had shrunk his industry and brought about the consolidation of the major Indian software houses. "The top five or six companies, you can be assured that they are conforming to these standards," he said. "The others, you cannot be sure -- but maybe they are."
United States technology services companies are also expanding their overseas outsourcing offerings. Electronic Data Systems provides outsourcing services in 93 "solution centers" that it has opened around the world since 1990. Paul D. Clark, the chief information security and privacy executive for the company, said E.D.S. understood that the threat of sabotage in outsourcing is real. He said, "To say that it isn't is to deny the realities." That is why the company adheres to security and testing standards wherever code is written, he said, adding, "whether it's India or Indiana, it doesn't make any difference." 
The company is careful about what code it releases to which countries, said Dan Zadorozny, president of application services for EDS Solutions Consulting; some federal government work, he said, is done only in the United States and Britain, and "we're not going to move that anywhere." But E.D.S. insists that its standards are high enough that its outsourcing sites offer "a more secure environment than you can provide yourself."
Some programmers, however, argue that reviews are less thorough than companies say. "If code runs, I assure you, nobody ever looks at it," said one, who said conducting a line-by-line review would be like having an electrician tear into walls to check wiring even though the lights were working. "It never gets done in practice."
Mr. Ehrenreich, the crime consultant, said that it was up to companies to demand that kind of security, even if it cost more. He recalled a case in which he was asked to investigate the possibility of illegal activity on an Indian outsourcing contract and discovered that it was nothing more than run-of-the-mill overbilling fraud. 
What struck him, however, was that the company had no idea how big the problem was. He said far-worse crimes could have been committed without anyone's knowing. "The risk was there that more could have been done," he said. "They clearly did not have the controls in place to mitigate it, control it."
"You can outsource the work," he said, "but you can't outsource the risk."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Dave McCurdy of the Internet Security Alliance is concerned about programming done overseas.; Ken O'Neil, a programmer on Long Island, warns that software created overseas could include "sleeper bugs" that could cause trouble at a later date, or back doors that could let intruders in to shuttle money around. (Kevin P. Coughlin/Photostation, for The New York Times)(pg. C4)      

Load-Date: January 6, 2003


End of Document
A Solution Seen To 'Brain Drain'
The New York Times
August 27, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6; BITS
Length: 241 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Body


A new academic study details the benefits and the threat of a ''reverse brain drain'' -- skilled foreign workers going back to their home countries because they cannot get visas in the United States. One of the study's authors has a solution that is not in step with the high-tech lobby. He advocates getting rid of the H-1B visa, the temporary work permit for skilled workers.
  Vivek Wadhwa, a fellow at the Harvard Law School and executive in residence at Duke, said last week that the H-1B program is ''wonderful for technology companies and employers. They have a captive audience.''
The H-1B, he said, allows the sponsoring company to control employees, and often underpay them, as critics of the visa program contend.
  Instead, Mr. Wadhwa said the United States should simply grant skilled immigrant workers permanent residence visas, so-called green cards. The new report says that more than one million skilled workers -- scientists, engineers, doctors and researchers -- are competing for 120,000 permanent residence visas each year. 
  The surging backlog, the study adds, results in skilled workers returning to their home countries.
  The report, published last week, was conducted by researchers at Harvard, Duke and New York University. 
  ''If these people stay, we win,'' Mr. Wadhwa said. ''If they work with our brightest people and learn American ways and go back, we have a big problem. The risk is they leave and compete with us.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 24, 2009


End of Document
White House, Pointing to Pandemic, Moves to Bolster Immigration Barriers
The New York Times
June 13, 2020 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1361 words
Byline: By Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Maggie Haberman
Body


The administration proposed a rule this week that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and is expected to propose additional visa restrictions.
WASHINGTON -- Under the cloak of a pandemic and the convulsions of anti-racist protests, the Trump administration continues to advance its policies to restrict legal immigration, halting the flow of foreign workers and raising the bar for asylum seekers hoping for sanctuary. 
  This week, administration officials proposed a fallback for when they need to lift ''emergency'' border closure rules for the coronavirus, proposing regulations that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and allow immigration judges to deny applications for protection without giving migrants an opportunity to testify in court.
  If adopted, the rules would lay a framework of restrictionist immigration policies that can be enforced well after the pandemic subsides. The administration last month extended a coronavirus border rule that has effectively blocked nearly 43,000 migrants from seeking asylum at the southwest border, according to Customs and Border Protection data released on Friday. In April, President Trump issued an executive order temporarily suspending the issuance of green cards to many outside the United States and is expected to limit certain visas issued to immigrants seeking temporary work in the country.
  Education Secretary Betsy DeVos issued an emergency rule on Thursday night barring colleges from granting virus relief funds to foreign and undocumented students, including tens of thousands protected under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival program, or DACA.
  And the administration is examining restrictions on new skilled-worker H-1B visas in the coming weeks.
  ''You're going to see some more news on that probably sometime soon,'' Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said Wednesday at an event organized by the Heritage Foundation when asked about nonimmigrant visas.
  In the past month, top administration officials, including Stephen Miller, a senior White House adviser and an architect of Mr. Trump's hard-line immigration agenda, have discussed ways to follow up on the executive order in April. That order, which was riddled with exemptions, was immediately criticized by conservative groups that had hoped the administration would restrict nonimmigrant visa programs that are used to bring thousands of workers to the United States.
  Top administration officials have continued to debate whether a new executive order should encompass a host of worker visas, including H-1B visas for skilled workers, according to two government officials. In a meeting held in recent weeks, Mr. Miller has pressed Mr. Trump and the labor secretary, Eugene Scalia, to significantly reduce the number of foreign workers entering the country. But officials emphasized that the order, which is expected to be released in the coming week, is not finished. Visa holders in the United States are not likely to be affected.
  ''Whether it's restrictions to legal immigration or further gutting the asylum system, the goal to reduce immigration to its lowest level possible continues to be at the forefront of this administration's decision-making,'' said Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, the policy counsel the American Immigration Council.
  In defending the initial executive order and border restrictions, White House officials said those moves were needed to conserve American jobs and prevent potential outbreaks during a pandemic that has left tens of millions out of work and ravaged the economy, despite multiple studies that show immigrants bolster the economy. And long before the coronavirus, Mr. Miller sought to use health authorities to turn away migrants at the border.
  The Department of Homeland Security has pointed to the pandemic in ''expelling'' nearly 43,000 migrants to Mexico and their home countries without providing due process, including more than 20,500 in May, Customs and Border Protection officials said on Friday, an increase of 33 percent from April.
  Other programs that have largely halted asylum at the border partly rely on the cooperation of foreign governments, including a bilateral deal that deports asylum seekers to Guatemala to seek protections and an agreement that forces migrants to wait in Mexico for the duration of their asylum case in the United States.
  The proposal pushed forward by the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security on Wednesday night came one day after the first legal challenge was filed to the administration's coronavirus-related border restrictions. The regulation would allow the administration to unilaterally seal off asylum seekers, even while Mr. Trump's physical barrier is far from complete.
  Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center, called the new proposal the culmination of ''all the scattershot regulations'' already in effect and ''an insurance policy against countries saying: 'Never mind. We're not going to do your dirty work anymore.'''
  The proposed regulation, which is open for a comment period for 30 days, would not entitle a migrant to a full court proceeding to hear their claims.
  It would also give officers broad authority to declare asylum applications ''frivolous,'' barring migrants from seeking other forms of immigration relief in the United States.
  The rule would also raise the bar that migrants must meet to be considered persecuted in their home countries. Those claiming to be targeted by gangs or ''rogue'' government officials are likely to be turned away, and those seeking protection on the basis of their gender would have limited ability to seek asylum.
  ''Persecution is an extreme concept involving a severe level of harm that includes actions so severe that they constitute an exigent threat,'' Chad R. Mizelle, the acting general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security, wrote in issuing the rule. Mr. Mizelle said it would not encompass harm from criminal or military strife, intermittent harassment or detentions or foreign governments failing to enforce laws.
  Under the proposed policy, the Trump administration would be able to deny migrants asylum if they spent 14 days in another country and did not apply for protections there on their way to the United States, building off a similar measure announced last July. It remains unclear to what extent the rule would be applied to pending applications.
  The administration has repeatedly said the asylum system should be streamlined given a backlog of more than a million cases.
  As the White House has increased the barriers to seeking sanctuary in the country, thousands of migrants have been left to wait in squalid tent camps.
  ''Here we are fleeing from political violence from a place where they've threatened us, and we have to end up in a place like this,'' said Perla Vargas, 45, who has spent 10 months in a camp in Matamoros, Mexico, with her 27-year-old daughter and two grandchildren. ''It's difficult to seek refuge with conditions like this.''
  Ms. Vargas has tried to keep busy after fleeing Nicaragua, where armed civilian groups began following her after she participated in an anti-government demonstration.
  Before the pandemic, Ms. Vargas, a former health care worker, tried to help form a makeshift school for the many migrant children in the camp. But in recent days, she has sought to encourage other migrants to protect themselves from the coronavirus.
  Ms. Vargas has also tried to distract her grandchildren from their current situation. The family was robbed twice on their way to the border, and their remaining belongings were drenched after recent downpours broke through their tent.
  ''The kids say all the time, 'We want to leave already.' It's frustrating to hear them say it. This has become harder and harder,'' Ms. Vargas said. ''I'm not sure I can keep living in this painful situation.''
  Erica L. Green and Michael D. Shear contributed reporting from Washington, and Maya Averbuch from Mexico City.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/12/us/politics/coronavirus-trump-immigration-policies.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Stephen Miller, a senior White House adviser, has urged the president to curb the number of foreign workers entering the country. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TOM BRENNER/REUTERS)               

Load-Date: June 14, 2020


End of Document
Visa Reforms for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
April 22, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; EDITORIAL
Length: 399 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


The immigration reform bill introduced by a bipartisan group of senators last week would make it easier for skilled workers to come to this country while toughening rules to prevent abuse in temporary work visas.
Many skilled workers and their families spend a decade or more waiting for employment-based green cards, which are capped at 140,000 a year and are subject to per-country limits. The bill addresses this problem by temporarily raising limits to clear a backlog of 234,000 applications for employment-based permanent visas. It would also exempt spouses and children of workers from the limits, which should free up nearly 80,000 visas a year.
It also creates a ''merit based'' category of green cards while getting rid of permanent visas for siblings of citizens and for people from countries with low rates of immigration to the United States. These new visas would be given to people on the basis of points granted for factors like the college degrees they have earned; whether their siblings are citizens; how highly they score in an English proficiency test; and whether they are from an underrepresented country. This proposal is deeply troubling because it appears to buy into the zero-sum thinking that pits employment-based immigration against family-sponsored and diversity immigration. America should welcome both groups of people, not choose between them.
The senators also want to expand the popular H-1B category of work visas to 135,000, from 85,000 -- a quota that is often reached in a matter of weeks or months every year. The new, higher limit would be allowed to increase or decrease by as many as 10,000 visas a year based on demand for them and government unemployment data. In an important provision, people on such visas will be able to switch employers more easily, making it harder for companies to pay workers below-market salaries.
Another provision would clamp down on abuse by imposing higher fees and other restrictions on employers who have a large percentage of their work force on such visas. Over several years, the bill would force these companies, many of which are the United States operations of outsourcing firms from India, to reduce the number of their workers who are foreigners to less than 50 percent.
While some provisions need to be improved, the bill sets the right tone for making America more hospitable to skilled and hard-working immigrants.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/22/opinion/visa-reforms-for-skilled-workers.html

Load-Date: April 22, 2013


End of Document
Businesses Say New York's Clout Is Emigrating, With Visa Policies to Blame
The New York Times
March 24, 2008 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1364 words
Byline: By PATRICK McGEEHAN and NINA BERNSTEIN
Body


New York officials have long taken pride in the city's status as a global gateway. But lately, senior executives of some of the country's biggest corporations, like Alcoa, have been complaining that American immigration policies are thwarting New York's ability to compete with other world capitals.
  Every big employer in the city, it seems, can cite an example of high-paying jobs that had to be relocated to foreign cities because the people chosen to fill them could not gain entry to the United States. 
  In Alcoa's case, one of its chief financial executives, Vanessa Lau, who is from Hong Kong, is working from the company's offices in Geneva when she should be at headquarters on Park Avenue, according to Alain J. P. Belda, the chairman and chief executive.
  Officials of large investment banks on Wall Street said the difficulty in obtaining visas for foreign workers, many of them graduates of American universities, had caused them to shift dozens of jobs to other financial capitals this year. In some cases, foreign-born professionals have grown weary of the struggle to get and renew a work visa in the United States and moved on to cities like London, where they say they feel more welcome.
  ''In a company like ours, we have people moving all over the place all the time,'' Mr. Belda said. ''This visa situation is causing difficulty.''
  Mr. Belda is particularly frustrated, given that he is a Moroccan-born citizen of Brazil whom Alcoa brought to the United States in the early 1990s when immigration rules were looser. Now, with visas for immigrants with special skills tightly controlled and awarded in an annual lottery in early April, managing a global enterprise from New York can be a competitive disadvantage, he said.
  ''After 9/11, it just became more and more complicated,'' Mr. Belda said. ''You're fighting to get everybody in, ''he said, then fighting for renewal of their visas so that they can stay more than three years. ''How do you move somebody with a family if they don't know they're going to be renewed?'' he said.
  Until now, visa restrictions have been seen as a problem that primarily affected technology companies in Silicon Valley and elsewhere in the West. Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, has been railing against them for years.
  But according to the Partnership for New York City, a business advocacy group, there is more demand for visas for specialized jobs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut than in California, and most of the demand comes from small and midsize companies, not the largest corporations. The partnership, whose members include many of the city's biggest employers, has lobbied legislative leaders, including Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senator Charles E. Schumer, for a relaxation of visa policies. 
  ''New York's ability to compete with London, which has much more open immigration, or with the emerging financial capitals in Asia and the Middle East, depends on mobility of talent, both in terms of new and current employees,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, president of the partnership. ''What people miss is, New York's standing as an international capital of business and finance depends on the professionals within these companies being able to come to New York to be trained and groomed for leadership positions around the world.''
  Indeed, companies are capitalizing on more open visa policies elsewhere to recruit some of the leaders educated and trained in New York. Gaurav Gaur, for example, an Indian who earned his M.B.A. from Cornell in 2004, said he seized the chance to leave New York last year for London to work for Barclays, though it meant turning his back on opportunities at Bloomberg L.P. and other American companies.
  ''The whole visa situation was one of the biggest reasons that I took the job,'' Mr. Gaur said in a telephone interview from London, where he is a senior project manager for the British bank. ''I didn't want to keep going through this uncertainty -- it's just a nightmare.'' 
  In New York, Mr. Gaur, 33, had managed to secure one of the three-year visas for professionals known as H-1B visas, and he probably could have renewed it for another three years, he said. But after that he knew he would be faced with the prospect of year-to-year renewals while he waited in a long and unpredictable line for permanent residency -- and remained tethered to whatever company was sponsoring him for a green card. 
  Moreover, he said, his wife, Bhavna, who has a master's degree in social work from Washington University in St. Louis, had work visa woes of her own in a field where few employers were familiar with the H-1B program.
  In Britain, he said, ''it's drastically different.'' There is no cap on work visas, and since he had a work permit, his wife was automatically allowed to work; she quickly found a good social work job. 
  ''If I stay here for five years,'' he added, ''I automatically become eligible for a green card, for permanent residency.''
  In the United States, companies apply for the three-year H-1B visas annually, starting on April 1. The demand typically far outstrips the total supply of visas, limited to 65,000 a year, with an additional 20,000 available for those with advanced degrees from American universities. Last year 120,000 applications came in on April 1 alone, including hundreds of duplicates, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services conducted a lottery for the first time. 
  This year, officials warned, multiple petitions by the same company for one candidate will be disqualified, to prevent businesses from trying to game the system.
  In 2006, more than 10,000 companies sought H-1B visas for jobs in New York City, according to the partnership's analysis in a soon-to-be-published report. Only about one-tenth of those applications came from the country's 1,000 biggest companies, it said. 
  Data about who holds these visas and where they work is closely guarded. But judging by the applications filed, the partnership concluded that the greatest demand is from the New York area.
  More than one-fifth -- 21 percent -- of the applications were for jobs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, according to the report, titled ''Winning the Global Race for Talent.'' In contrast, about 18.2 percent of the H-1B visa applications were for jobs in California. Texas ranked fourth behind New York and New Jersey with about 7.7 percent of the applications, according to the report. A survey by the partnership found that employers had complaints about other immigration policies, including long delays in obtaining visas for employees transferring from offices in other countries and visas for their employees to make short-term visits to the United States. They also said they were constrained by big backlogs on applications for employment-based green cards, which offer permanent residency to sponsored workers.
  The partnership recommended adjusting the cap on H-1B visas to meet demand and more than doubling the annual limit on employment-based green cards to 290,000 from 140,000. It also suggested exempting workers with advanced degrees in science and math from any cap on H-1B visas and extending the term of visas for workers receiving practical training to 29 months from 12 months.
  Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies in Washington, which advocates less immigration, dismissed the partnership's argument as merely ''trying to bend the law to benefit them financially.''
  The H-1B visa program creates a form of indentured worker whose pay, on average, is lower than that of American counterparts, Mr. Krikorian contended. The only morally defensible way to bring workers into the country, he said, is with green cards that allow them to quit working for the sponsoring employer and stay in the United States. Still, he added that he opposed increasing the number of such green cards without the immigration service's raising its standards ''so that it's really Einstein immigration.''
  Ms. Wylde disagrees.
  ''It's a 20th-century, pre-globalization mentality that thinks somehow American companies and jobs can grow if we cut ourselves off from foreign talent,'' she said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: March 25, 2008


End of Document
Parsing the Truths About Visas for Tech Workers
The New York Times
April 15, 2007 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4; ECONOMIC VIEW
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR; Anand Giridharadas contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
Body


THE United States has benefited immensely from its role as a magnet for the best and brightest workers from around the world, especially in innovative fields like high technology. Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, sounded precisely that theme in Senate testimony last month when asked about the visa program for skilled workers, the H-1B.
  Mr. Gates said that these workers are ''uniquely talented'' and highly paid -- ''taking jobs that pay over $100,000 a year'' -- and that America should ''welcome as many of those people as we can get.''
But that is not how the H-1B visa program as a whole is working these days, according to an analysis by Ronil Hira, an assistant professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology. The median salary for new H-1B holders in the information technology industry is actually about $50,000, based on the most recent data filed by companies with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services agency. That wage level, Mr. Hira says, is the same as starting salaries for graduating computer science majors with bachelor's degrees.
  Yet salaries, according to Mr. Hira, are only part of the story. He says that while Microsoft may be paying its H-1B visa holders well and recruiting people with hard-to-find talents, other companies have a different agenda. The H-1B visa program, Mr. Hira asserts, has become a vehicle for accelerating the pace of offshore outsourcing of computing work, sending more jobs abroad. Holders of H-1B visas, he says, do the on-site work of understanding a client's needs and specifications -- and then most of the software coding is done back in India.
  ''Information technology offshore outsourcing has just swamped the H-1B program in recent years,'' he said. The list of the top 10 companies requesting H-1B visas in fiscal 2006, the most recent government data available, was dominated by Indian-based technology outsourcing companies like Infosys Technologies, Wipro Technologies and Tata Consultancy Services, and a few other companies that offer outsourced services and have sizable operations in India like Cognizant Technology Solutions, Accenture and Deloitte & Touche, according to a paper last month by Mr. Hira, which was published by the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal research group. 
  Over the years, the H-1B visa, which allows a person to work in the United States for three years and can be renewed for an additional three, has been used by many people as a steppingstone to becoming a permanent resident. Traditionally, about half of all H-1B holders eventually get green cards, immigration experts say.
  Yet the major outsourcing companies, while seeking thousands of H-1B visas, are asking for relative handfuls of green cards, according to government figures.
  The statistics marshaled by Mr. Hira are not absolutely conclusive. The reported company-by-company numbers are for H-1B visas requested, not granted, but that is because the government does not publish visa counts by company. Since the visas are granted on a first-come-first-served basis, it seems reasonable that the companies seeking the most visas would, proportionately, get the most.
  It is not just critics like Mr. Hira who point to the crucial role that the H-1B visa program plays in the fast-growing global outsourcing industry. ''It has become the outsourcing visa,'' said Kamal Nath, the commerce minister of India.
  But is that a bad thing? Many economists say that paving the way for more efficient global trade in technology services should be a policy goal, and that the American economy will be more competitive and create more jobs as a result. Technology services like software programming and maintenance, they say, are an ''input,'' in economic terms, in industries from banking to manufacturing.
  It used to be that all the parts in a car or a computer were made in a single country; now they are manufactured wherever it is most efficient. The same thing is happening in technology services. ''We're seeing this growing international division of labor in services just as we saw in manufacturing decades ago,'' said Aaditya Mattoo, an economist at the World Bank.
  Still, the issue behind the H-1B controversy is how a nation devises a policy to benefit from global trade in technology services while treating its own workers fairly. The proposals before Congress range from significantly expanding the visa quota to tightening rules to protect American workers. 
  This month, the government announced that it had received more petitions for H-1B visas in one day than it could grant in the entire fiscal year that begins in October. It received 150,000 petitions; the current visa cap is 65,000. Technology lobbying groups declared that the immediate overflow demand for H-1B visas was proof of the skills shortage in the United States and the need for a sharply higher visa limit. But some immigration policy experts and economists say that this argument fails a simple test of economics. It is not surprising, they say, that global companies -- including I.B.M., Microsoft and Oracle -- that benefit from the H-1B program would like to see it enlarged. ''There is no labor market test, using technically sound criteria, to determine whether or not there is a shortage,'' said David M. Hart, an associate professor of public policy at George Mason University. The measures, Mr. Hart suggests, would include recent wage trends and unemployment rates in specific professions.
  Other suggested changes include phasing out caps but holding auctions for H-1B visas in, say, lots of 30,000. After the first auction, the bidding for the next batch would begin at the high end of the initial sale's prices. In 1994, a commission appointed by Congress recommended letting companies hire skilled foreign workers easily if the employers paid a $10,000-a-person fee that would go into a fund to train domestic workers. And there might be a limit on the number of visas that any one company can get.
  ''How to match policies to people in this emerging global labor market is something we really haven't thought through yet,'' said B. Lindsay Lowell, director of policy studies at the Institute for the Study of International Migration at Georgetown University. The current system, he said, tends to depend too much on the companies and how they use the complicated work-visa program. 
  Microsoft, it seems, is paying its H-1B holders quite well -- a median salary of $82,500 for new visa applicants, whose wages over the subsequent three to six years could well rise to about the $100,000 Mr. Gates mentioned. And in fiscal 2006, Microsoft applied for 1,181 green cards and 4,471 H-1B's, a ratio of more than 26 percent. For the leading Indian outsourcing companies, the ratio was less than 1 percent.
  ''Microsoft may well be using the program to bring in the best and the brightest,'' Mr. Hira said. ''But it's definitely not representative of how the H-1B program is being used today.''  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Employees at the training center of Infosys Technologies in Mysore, India. Infosys and others that specialize in outsourcing top the list of companies requesting H-1B visas. (Photo by Aijaz Rahi/Associated Press)
 Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, told Congress last month that having more visas for skilled workers would increase American competitiveness. (Photo by Shawn Thew/European Pressphoto Agency)  Chart: ''Looking to India'' Companies that specialize in offshore outsourcing of technology work to India have the most requests for skilled-worker visas in the United States.  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Infosys Technologies H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 22,590  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Wipro Technologies H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 19,450  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Cognizant Technology Solutions H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 11,330  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Patni Computer Systems H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 9,922  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: MphasiS* H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 9,908  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: HCL America H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 9,128  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Deloitte & Touche H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 8,367  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Tata Consultancy Services H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 7,528  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Accenture H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 7,253  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Satyam Computer Services H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 7,235  *Now a subsidiary of Electronic Data Systems  (Source by Department of Labor)                                                

Load-Date: April 15, 2007


End of Document
Illinois Threatens to Fine Defiant Businesses as Reopening Tensions Rise Nationally
The New York Times 
May 18, 2020 Monday 07:25 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 5522 words
Highlight: Fed chair warns full economic recovery may await vaccine, while Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York has a public nasal swab to encourage testing.
Body


Fed chair warns full economic recovery may await vaccine, while Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York has a public nasal swab to encourage testing.
This briefing has ended. Follow our latest coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.
Illinois makes it a misdemeanor for business owners who flout pandemic restrictions.
The owners of restaurants, bars and other establishments in Illinois that open too soon can now be charged with a Class A misdemeanor under a measure enacted by the governor.
Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a Democrat, filed an emergency rule on Friday that his office said was intended to prevent the spread of the coronavirus as a growing number of businesses defy stay-at-home orders across the country.
In Illinois, where a stay-at-home order remains in effect through May, a Class A misdemeanor carries a punishment of up to a year in jail and up to a $2,500 fine. The rule also applies to businesses such as barbershops and gyms, according to Mr. Pritzker’s office.
Jordan Abudayyeh, a spokeswoman for Mr. Pritzker, said in an email Sunday that the measure provided an “additional enforcement tool for businesses that refuse to comply with the most critical aspects of the stay-at-home order.”
As of Sunday, 4,177 people had died from Covid-19 in Illinois, according to state health officials, and there have been 94,191 confirmed cases of the virus.
Conservative state lawmakers have criticized the measure. Senator Dan McConchie, a Republican and a member of the Senate’s Public Health Committee, called it “an affront to the separation of powers” in a Twitter post on Sunday.
“Legislatures make laws,” Mr. McConchie said. “Governors enforce them. Period.”
In Texas this month, a salon owner in Dallas was jailed for defying state and county orders for nonessential establishments to remain closed. The state Supreme Court ordered her release two days later. And last Sunday in Colorado, a restaurant that reopened for sit-down dining on Mother’s Day was            shut down and had its license suspended.
Ms. Abudayyeh, the governor’s spokeswoman, said that bringing misdemeanor charges against business owners was not a first resort.
“Law enforcement has relied heavily on educating business owners about the order and always first discusses the regulations with business owners to urge compliance,” she said. “Only businesses that pose a serious risk to public health and refuse to comply with health regulations would be issued a citation. The rule gives law enforcement a tool that may be more appropriate and less severe than closing the business altogether.”
In neighboring Wisconsin last week, the state Supreme Court struck down the state’s stay-at-home extension, siding with Republican legislators in a high-profile challenge of the emergency authority of a statewide official during the pandemic.
Governors struggle to find the right balance on reopening.
The pain of the coronavirus shutdown, in terms of wrecked economies and shattered lives, has been unmistakable. Now, governors across the country are contemplating the risks of reopening, particularly if it produces a surge of new cases and deaths.
“This is really the most crucial time, and the most dangerous time,” Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, said on the CNN program “State of the Union” on Sunday. “All of this is a work in progress. We thought it was a huge risk not to open. But we also know it’s a huge risk in opening.”
The push to reopen has been fueled by swelling frustration, as unemployment soars, businesses declare bankruptcy or announce they cannot survive the shutdowns, and fears intensify about enduring economic devastation. Some businesses have even reopened in defiance of state orders.
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, a Democrat, said on CNN, “I deeply understand the stress and anxiety that people have, that entire dreams have been torn asunder because of the shutdowns, their savings account depleted and their credit ratings destroyed.”
“The question is,” he added, “how do you toggle back and make meaningful modifications to the stay-at-home order?”
But governors also acknowledged concerns about a fresh resurgence of the coronavirus, and they are haunted by images of restaurants and stores packed with patrons with uncovered faces.
“This is a virus we’re still learning a lot about,” Mr. DeWine said. 
The response to the virus has been defined by the balance between trying to curb the virus’s spread and trying to minimize the economic harm. In much of the country, the pendulum has swung toward favoring the economy.
The shift has come as the national figures for reported new cases of the virus have declined in recent weeks, and as more states have allowed a wider array of businesses to return to operation. More than two-thirds of states have relaxed restrictions significantly. California, New York and Washington are among those partially reopening on a regional basis. Illinois, Michigan and New Jersey remain fully shut down.
‘This economy will recover; it may take a while.’
Jerome H. Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said that while he expected the U.S. economy to recover from the sharp and painful downturn brought about by the coronavirus, that process would take time — potentially until the end of 2021.
“This economy will recover; it may take a while,” Mr. Powell said in a preview of the CBS program “60 Minutes,” which is scheduled to air Sunday evening. “It may take a period of time, it could stretch through the end of next year, we don’t really know.”
Asked whether the economy could recover without an effective vaccine, Mr. Powell suggested that it could make a start, but not get all the way there.
“Assuming that there’s not a second wave of the coronavirus, I think you’ll see the economy recover steadily through the second half of this year,” he said. “For the economy to fully recover, people will have to be fully confident, and that may have to await the arrival of a vaccine.”
The interview with Mr. Powell, which CBS said was recorded on May 13, follows a blunt speech he gave the same day, warning that the economy may need more financial support to prevent permanent job losses and waves of bankruptcies.
Wondering what a coronavirus test is like? Watch Cuomo get swabbed on live TV.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo provided a lasting image on Sunday for fellow New Yorkers who may be apprehensive about getting tested for the coronavirus — he invited a doctor to stick a swab up his nose during his live news briefing on the pandemic.
“It is so fast and so easy that even a governor can take this test,” Mr. Cuomo said.
Mr. Cuomo then stood up and turned to a doctor, who was holding a cotton swab and was wearing coveralls, a face shield and gloves. Camera shutters clicked furiously as the doctor guided the swab up the Mr. Cuomo’s nostril.
“That’s it?” he said. “That’s it? Nothing else?”
New York has the capability of conducting 40,000 tests per day at 700 sites, said Mr. Cuomo, who noted that testing would be critical to monitoring the spread of the virus as the state begins to reopen.
“There is nothing about this test that should intimidate people from not taking this test,” he said.
Mr. Cuomo, who was expected to get the test results later on Sunday, said he could be squeamish at times when undergoing medical tests. He said he did not like “being poked and prodded.”
Calling into a golf broadcast, Trump says he wants ‘big, big stadiums loaded with people.’
In a telephone appearance during a televised charity golf exhibition Sunday, President Trump said he enthusiastically supported the return of live sporting events during the pandemic.
“We want to get sports back, we miss sports,” Mr. Trump said during NBC’s broadcast of a skins game match involving Rory McIlroy, Dustin Johnson, Rickie Fowler and Matthew Wolff. “We need sports in terms of the psyche of our country. And that’s what we’re doing.”
While Sunday’s exhibition was contested without spectators, Mr. Trump said he hoped that future events would be teeming with fans.
“We want to get it back to where it was, we want big, big stadiums loaded with people,” he said. 
He later added, “We want to get back to normal where you have the big crowds where they’re practically standing on top of each other, not where they’re worried.”
In an interview in April, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, said he would not feel comfortable returning to a stadium until the infection rate was lower.
“I would love to be able to have all sports back,” Dr. Fauci said. “But as a health official and a physician and a scientist, I have to say, right now, when you look at the country, we’re not ready for that yet.”
Thirteen sick sailors seemed to recover. Then they tested positive again.
Thirteen sailors aboard the virus-stricken aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt have retested positive for Covid-19 after seeming to have recovered from the disease, Navy officials said on Sunday.
The infected sailors, who had all tested negative twice before reboarding the Roosevelt in recent days, have been removed from the warship to self-quarantine. The Roosevelt has been docked in Guam since March 27 as Navy officials wrestle with how to deal with sickened sailors, disinfect the vessel and prepare for it to resume operations in the Western Pacific.
Navy officials have said they are aggressively screening and testing as crew members return to the Roosevelt after quarantining at the U.S. military base in Guam, as well as at hotels and in other lodging there. Officials on the ship are requiring masks and repeatedly cleaning and sanitizing to prevent another outbreak of the virus, which has infected about 1,100 crew members since March. One sailor has died.
About 2,900 of the 4,800 crew members are now back on board. They are under strict orders to report to doctors the slightest cough, headache or other flulike symptom. In the past week or so, the new testing even turned up a sailor who tested positive for tuberculosis. That set off a wild contact-tracing scramble that found no other cases on board, Navy officials said.
The results of the Navy’s latest investigation into events surrounding the Roosevelt are due by the end of this month.
Recent research in South Korea suggested that dozens of patients there who had tested positive a second time after recovering from the illness appeared to be “false positives” caused by lingering — but likely not infectious — bits of the virus.
‘You could feel it going through your veins.’ A teen’s battle with a virus-linked syndrome.
When a sprinkling of a reddish rash appeared on Jack McMorrow’s hands in mid-April, his father figured the 14-year-old was overusing hand sanitizer — not a bad thing during a global pandemic.
When Jack’s parents noticed that his eyes looked glossy, they attributed it to late nights of video games and TV.
When he developed a stomachache and didn’t want dinner, “they thought it was because I ate too many cookies or whatever,” said Jack, a ninth-grader in Woodside, Queens, who loves Marvel Comics and has ambitions to teach himself “Stairway to Heaven” on the guitar.
But over the next 10 days, Jack felt increasingly unwell. His parents consulted his pediatricians in video appointments and took him to a weekend urgent care clinic. Then, one morning, he awoke unable to move.
He had a tennis ball-size lymph node, raging fever, racing heartbeat and dangerously low blood pressure. Pain deluged his body in “a throbbing, stinging rush,” he said.
“You could feel it going through your veins and it was almost like someone injected you with straight-up fire,” he said.
Jack, who was previously healthy, was hospitalized with heart failure that day, in a stark example of the newly discovered severe inflammatory syndrome linked to the coronavirus that has already been identified in about 200 children in the United States and Europe and killed several.
The condition, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is calling Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children, has shaken widespread confidence that children were largely spared from the pandemic.
Colorado offers an alternative, much lower, count of its Covid-19 deaths.
What is the difference between “deaths among Covid-19 cases” and “deaths due to Covid-19”? In Colorado, that distinction in wording changes the total by about 30 percent.
Until Friday, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment had been including anyone who had Covid-19 at the time of death in the official total, a practice consistent with the C.D.C.’s counting criteria. By that reckoning, Colorado had 1,192 deaths as of Friday.
But the state said it would now also report a lower figure — those for whom the disease is considered the sole cause of death, with no other complicating factors. Counting that way knocks the state’s total down to 892.
Gov. Jared Polis, a Democrat, defended the change on Sunday.
“The C.D.C. criteria include anybody who died with Covid-19,” he said on Fox News. “What the people of Colorado and the people of the country want to know is how many people died of Covid-19.”
Health experts have warned for weeks that inconsistent reporting protocols and insufficient testing have led to an undercounting of coronavirus deaths nationally. North Dakota and Alabama have both experimented with death counts similar to Colorado’s new approach, but have continued to report the C.D.C.’s way.
Mr. Polis acknowledged that the virus, which he called a “bad bug,” can be particularly dangerous for older people and people with underlying medical conditions — those who would be most likely to be excluded from the state’s sole-cause count.
As Alaska’s salmon season opens, another coronavirus case adds to concerns.
A second fisheries worker in Alaska has tested positive for the coronavirus, adding to fears that the isolated fishing towns that have so far avoided infections could face challenges as thousands of seasonal workers pour in for the start of Alaska’s summer seafood rush.
State officials said the positive case was identified Friday in the city of Dillingham. The infected worker, an employee of Trident Seafoods, had recently arrived and tested positive at the end of a mandatory 14-day quarantine.
Earlier this month, a worker who had arrived in the fishing community of Cordova also tested positive.
Some locals have expressed concern about the fishing season, which began in Cordova with the pursuit of the famed Copper River salmon. In Dillingham, hospital leaders at the Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation had requested that the fishing season remain closed, arguing that the arrival of thousands of outsiders put the community at risk.
To prepare for the influx of workers, state and local government officials have put in place strict quarantine procedures, social-distancing requirements and aggressive testing. Some companies are requiring their workers to stay on site, where the seasonal crews often sleep in bunkhouses.
State officials said the worker who tested positive in Dillingham was removed from the area. None of that person’s contacts in the city have so far tested positive.
Congress appears no closer to a deal on further stimulus spending.
The passage of a $3 trillion stimulus package by the House on Friday appeared to bring Congress no closer this weekend to a deal on coronavirus aid, as pleas for more assistance collided with a conservative push to wait and see whether staggered state reopenings and previous aid packages arrest the economic free-fall.
The Republican-controlled Senate is not expected to take up the legislation that the Democratic-controlled House approved on Friday. Instead, the Senate will turn to a number of pending nominations before an expected Memorial Day recess. Speaker Nancy Pelosi urged Republicans to reconsider.
“Time is of the essence,” she said in an interview aired Sunday on the CBS program “Face the Nation.” “In the past bills, they put forth their proposal, and then we worked in a bipartisan way that we anticipate now.”
“They may think it’s OK to pause, but people are hungry across America,” she added. “Hunger doesn’t take a pause.”
Republican leaders have played down what Democrats say is an immediate need for relief, arguing that it was too early to allocate additional funds after Congress previously passed close to $3 trillion in relief.
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, has laid down a “red line,” saying that strengthening liability protections for health workers and businesses moving to reopen must be part of any future package.
Ms. Pelosi said on Sunday that she had “no red lines,” but she singled out a provision in the bill passed on Friday that would strengthen federal protections for essential workers.
“The best protection for our workers and their employers is to follow very good OSHA mandatory guidelines,” she said, referring to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. “That protects the workers, protects their lives, as well as protects the employer if they follow the guidelines. Remember, when people go to work, they go home.”
The legislation the House passed on Friday, which Democratic leaders acknowledged amounted to an opening offer, faces some opposition from within their party, including in the Senate.
“I think what Pelosi did in the House — it is significant,” said Senator Bernie Sanders, a Vermont independent who caucuses with the Democrats. “I have some disagreements with it, and I want to see the Senate improve on it.”
Fall school openings are shrouded in uncertainty.
A major question on the minds of many parents is whether their children’s schools will reopen in the fall. So far the plans and guidelines that have emerged are a patchwork, and state leaders are divided about whether it is possible to have the schools ready in time and what it will take to do it safely.
Gov. Jared Polis of Colorado said on Sunday that starting the school year open would not guarantee that they stayed that way. “There might be times, if there’s an outbreak at a school, that it has to convert to online for a period of weeks until it’s reasonably safe to return to school,” he said on “Fox News Sunday.”
Governor Polis said his state was considering measures like staggering start times, class schedules and breaks to minimize crowds in hallways.
California will proceed slowly and methodically in allowing crowds to gather again anywhere, including schools, Gov. Gavin Newsom said on Sunday, and that may mean that some schools in the state reopen while others remain closed.
“It’s all predicated on data, on science, not just observed evidence,” he said on CNN. “Each part of California is unique.”
Both governors noted that while children were not often affected as severely by the virus as adults are, they were potential spreaders.
“This is no question from an epidemiological perspective that this is a less severe, almost infinitesimal fatality rate for kids,” Mr. Polis said. “But the thing is, kids live with parents, they live with grandparents, kids are around teachers, so that’s where it gets a little bit more complicated.”
Health issues that affect minority groups are making the pandemic worse, Azar says.
Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services, suggested in televised remarks on Sunday that the high death toll from Covid-19 in the United States, compared with other nations, was due at least in part to the prevalence of underlying health issues in minority communities.
“Unfortunately, the American population is very diverse, and it is a population with significant unhealthy comorbidities that do make many individuals in our communities, in particular African-American minority communities, particularly at risk,” Mr. Azar said on the CNN program “State of the Union,” adding, “That is an unfortunate legacy of our health care system that we certainly do need to address.”
The host, Jake Tapper, pressed Mr. Azar on whether he was trying to place the blame for the pandemic on its victims. “I want to give you an opportunity to clear it up,” Mr. Tapper said, “because it sounded like you were saying that the reason that there are so many dead Americans is because we’re unhealthier than the rest of the world, and I know that’s not what you meant.”
Mr. Azar responded: “We have a significantly disproportionate burden of comorbidities in the United States — obesity, hypertension, diabetes — these are demonstrated facts that make us at risk for any type of disease burden, of course, but that doesn’t mean it’s the fault of the American people.”
The federal agency that issues visas is almost broke.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the federal agency that administers the country’s lawful immigration system, says it could be insolvent by summer, and has asked Congress for $1.2 billion to stay afloat.
The agency handles applications for green cards, citizenship and other programs, and it relies on fees paid by applicants for 97 percent of its $4.8 billion annual budget. Applications have plummeted because of travel and immigration restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic.
In addition to the money it is requesting from Congress, the agency plans to impose a 10 percent surcharge on its fees, on top of previously proposed increases. The cost of petitioning for naturalization would jump more than 60 percent, to $1,170 from $725, for most applicants.
Critics said the Trump administration’s policies, including new requirements for some green card applicants and more extensive reviews for H-1B visas, hit the agency from two sides — reducing revenue by dissuading people from applying, and increasing the amount of labor involved in handling each case.
“With extreme vetting, they are making every single application take longer to review, and processing fewer,” said Melissa Rodgers, the director of programs at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco, who oversees a program to promote citizenship among legal immigrants. “Word gets out that it’s not worth applying,” she said.
In two graduation speeches, Obama offered advice to students and criticized U.S. leadership.
Former President Barack Obama delivered two virtual commencement addresses this weekend, mixing advice to graduates with criticism of the United States’ response to the coronavirus pandemic.
“More than anything, this pandemic has fully, finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge know what they’re doing,” he said on Saturday in the first address streamed online. “A lot of them aren’t even pretending to be in charge.”
Mr. Obama did not mention anyone by name, but the remarks were largely seen as criticism, albeit mild, of his successor, President Trump. Returning to Washington on Sunday from a weekend at Camp David, Mr. Trump did not address the criticism but attacked Mr. Obama.
“Look, he was an incompetent president, that’s all I can say,” Mr. Trump told reporters. “Grossly incompetent.”
Mr. Obama’s speeches came as more than two-thirds of states have significantly relaxed restrictions, leaving the nation at a delicate moment.
Health effects of living in poorer areas may align with the pandemic’s impact.
Across the United States, low-income communities of color are exposed to significantly higher levels of pollution, studies have found, and also have higher levels of lung disease and other ailments. Now, scientists are racing to understand whether long-term exposure to air pollution plays a role in the pandemic, particularly since minorities in the country are dying disproportionately.
The science is preliminary, because the coronavirus remains poorly understood. But researchers are finding reason to look closely.
People with two conditions tied to air pollution — inflammatory lung disease and            coronary heart disease — face a higher risk for severe Covid-19, preliminary research has shown.
And while it is impossible to say with certainty that any one person was made more vulnerable to the virus because of pollution, earlier studies of other respiratory diseases have established that long-term exposure to air pollution            increases the risk of those illness.
Said Dr. Abdul El-Sayed, an epidemiologist and Detroit’s former health director: “The system has allowed, basically, low-income people and people of color to have to breathe the pollution.”
Thousands of students experienced a technical glitch while taking A.P. exams online.
Technical glitches during Advanced Placement online exams are the latest problem that high school students have confronted as they navigate testing, college applications and college visits remotely during the pandemic, adding stress to a process that is anxiety inducing even under the best of circumstances.
The College Board, a nonprofit organization that administers the A.P. exams, said that submission issues had affected under 1 percent of the roughly 2.2 million tests taken last week and that students would be able to retake the tests next month.
“We share the deep disappointment of students who were unable to complete their exam — whether for technical issues or other reasons,” Zach Goldberg, a College Board spokesman, said in a statement. “We’re working to understand these students’ unique circumstances in advance of the June makeup exams.”
The College Board said in March that it would administer digital versions of the A.P. exams, which can allow high school students to receive credit for introductory-level college courses.
The organization — which also oversees the SAT, a standardized test that serves as a gateway to college for millions of applicants each year — also said it would develop digital versions for students to take at home in the fall if social distancing continues to be necessary.
U.S. health care workers are hurting.
Medical workers have been celebrated for their commitment to treating coronavirus patients. But even as applause to honor them swells nightly from city windows, and cookies and thank-you notes arrive at hospitals, many doctors, nurses and emergency responders are battling a crushing sense of inadequacy and anxiety.
Every day, they become more susceptible to post-traumatic stress, mental health experts say. And their psychological struggles could impede their ability to continue working with the intensity and focus that their jobs require.
Although the causes for the suicides last month of Dr. Lorna M. Breen, the medical director of the emergency department at NewYork-Presbyterian Allen Hospital, and           John Mondello, a New York emergency medical technician, are unknown, the deaths served as a wake-up call about the mental health of medical workers. Even before the pandemic, their professions were            pockmarked with burnout and even suicide.
On Wednesday, the World Health Organization issued a report about the pandemic’s impact on mental health, highlighting health care workers as vulnerable. Recent studies of            medical workers in China,            Canadaand            Italy who treated Covid-19 patients found soaring rates of anxiety, depression and insomnia.
“Physicians are often very self-reliant and may not easily ask for help” said Dr. Chantal Brazeau, a psychiatrist at the Rutgers New Jersey Medical School. “In this time of crisis, with high workload and many uncertainties, this trait can add to the load that they carry internally.”
In U.S. resort towns, little or no money will be made this year.
In summer resort towns across the United States, livelihoods for the year are built in the 15 weeks between Memorial Day and Labor Day. It is during that time that tourists arrive to bask on the beach and gather for festivals and weddings. It is also when associated tour operators, hoteliers, innkeepers, restaurant employees and others earn the bulk of their income.
But this year, with Memorial Day — the kickoff for summer — approaching next weekend, there will be fewer guests to welcome and likely no sizable weddings or festivals to host. Business owners in resort areas, from Cape Cod, Mass., to Lake Chelan, Wash., say that as the start of summer approaches, they are facing the difficult reality that little money will be made this year.
Between canceled trips and uncertainty about how willing and able people will be to travel once shelter-in-place rules are lifted, business owners say that even if summer travel starts late, it won’t make up for losses already incurred.
For this weekend and Memorial Day weekend, “everything has been canceled and we have zero income,” said Barb Rishel, the owner of the Wellington Inn, a bed-and-breakfast in Traverse City, Mich. “It’s devastating. It’s bleak.”
Oil prices rise, but analysts eye the rest of 2020 cautiously.
Driving is picking up a little. Refineries in China are buying more oil. Saudi Arabia and Russia ended their price war and slashed production, and U.S. oil companies are decommissioning rigs and shutting wells.
All of those developments helped push up oil prices modestly in recent weeks — just enough for some of the best oil wells in the United States to break even, and what may seem like a minor miracle given that the price is more than $60 above where it was about a month ago.
“May, it seems, is a month when traders can finally sit back more comfortably for a moment and take a breath,” said Bjornar Tonhaugen, the head of oil market research at Rystad Energy, a research and consulting firm. “But we warn that the second half of the year will not be met with precrisis oil prices again.”
Even after the rally, oil prices are roughly half of what they were at the start of the year. And the average price for regular gasoline in the United States is 99 cents a gallon less than it was a year ago, according to AAA.
Energy experts say that oil prices may dip again if there is another surge in coronavirus cases and deaths. Prices could also fall when tankers filled with more than 50 million barrels of crude oil from Saudi Arabia reach the United States in the next two months.
But there are signs that demand for petroleum products is beginning to rise again, especially the demand for gasoline.
New York looks for ways residents can enjoy summer without fueling the virus.
A day after several New York regions were cleared to begin reopening, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said this weekend that horse racing tracks in the state, as well as the Watkins Glen International auto racing track, would be allowed to open without fans on June 1.
“We can have economic activity without having a crowd — that’s great,” Mr. Cuomo said in his daily briefing on Saturday. “We can do that in this state. But no crowds, no fans.”
With the coronavirus’s grip on the region easing, Mr. Cuomo’s announcement paved the way for events to begin at tracks, including Belmont Park on Long Island, which hosts the Belmont Stakes. Watkins Glen International is an annual stop for NASCAR, which is set to resume its top series in South Carolina on Sunday.
The steps were announced as major indicators, such as new hospitalizations and virus-related deaths, continued to decline.
Across the Hudson River, Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey also announced reopening steps in preparation for the state’s beaches to reopen, with some restrictions, by Memorial Day weekend, along with those in New York, Connecticut and Delaware.
Mr. Murphy said that fishing charters and other boating rental services would be allowed to open on Sunday, but that they must ensure social distancing and track customers in logs to help state officials with contact tracing, if necessary.
Mr. Murphy also announced the approval of $1.4 billion in federal funding for the New Jersey Transit system, which has taken an enormous financial hit during the shutdown. “I cannot overstate how vital this funding is,” Mr. Murphy said.
There were 115 new coronavirus deaths reported on Saturday in the state, bringing the total to 10,249.
As both New York and New Jersey looked ahead to plot ways for residents to enjoy the summer without a surge in virus cases, police officers in New York City continued to work to control crowds during a warm weekend, temporarily closing the entrance to the popular Sheep Meadow in Central Park after the area became crowded.
Coronavirus updates from Times correspondents around the globe.
Unable to travel, some turn to backyard camping.
Think s’mores, stars, the air mattress deflating with a cartoony hiss. Picture children’s faces, fire-lit and, for just another minute, little else. It could happen in farmland, suburbia or the Bronx — and it could be lovely. In lieu of summer vacation, there are also ways to vacation at home.
Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker, Karen Barrow, Pam Belluck, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Emily Cochrane, Melina Delkic, Rebecca Halleck, Jan Hoffman, Julia Jacobs, Sheila Kaplan, Clifford Krauss, Michael Levenson, Tariro Mzezewa, Bill Pennington, Rick Rojas, Katherine Rosman, Andrea Salcedo, Eric Schmitt, Hiroko Tabuchi, Jim Tankersley and Neil Vigdor.
PHOTO: In the face of increasing disregard of stay-at home-orders, Gov. J.B. Pritzker has increased the penalty for businesses that violate efforts to slow the rate of Covid-19 infections. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Nam Y. Huh/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 18, 2020


End of Document
Police Reform, Peru, Bob Dylan: Your Friday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
June 12, 2020 Friday 18:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1264 words
Byline: Remy Tumin and Marcus Payadue
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) 
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. The sweeping calls for policing reforms are inching toward policy.
In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed an expansive package of bills aimed, in the wake of George Floyd’s death, at combating police misconduct. The measures included a ban on the use of chokeholds and a repeal of a decades-old statute that has allowed the police to keep disciplinary records of officers secret. Above, police in Brooklyn last week.
In Minnesota, where Mr. Floyd died after an officer pressed his knee into Mr. Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes, state lawmakers convened a special session to consider Democratic-backed bills that would create community alternatives to policing and restore voting rights for paroled prisoners. Republicans said they would oppose some of the measures.
And in Louisville, Ky., City Council members voted unanimously to ban “no-knock” warrants, a controversial procedure that the city’s police force used during the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor in March.
2. Texas, Florida and California all recently reported their highest daily toll of new coronavirus cases, a concerning sign as the U.S. continues to reopen. Above, Long Beach, Calif.
The rise in cases helps explain why the nation continues to record more than 20,000 new cases a day even as some of the original hot spots, including New York, have seen drastic declines. Here’s where cases are rising the fastest.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the highest-risk gatherings are large, packed ones that draw people from outside the local area and where it is difficult for people to stay apart. The guidance came a day after Republicans moved President Trump’s convention speech to Jacksonville, Fla., after he demanded an event without social distancing rules.
3. And in Peru, the coronavirus toll is quickly turning tragic. 
The crisis has exposed deep-rooted inequality and corruption that have thwarted pandemic response, making Peru one of the world’s worst coronavirus hot spots. The country has about 6,000 confirmed Covid-19 deaths and more than 200,000 infections, and experts say those numbers understate the true extent of the pandemic.
Poverty forced many to continue working; one in three Peruvians lacks access to running water, and only half of Peruvian homes have refrigerators, forcing many families to return daily to crowded markets. Above, a cemetery on the southern outskirts of Lima last month.
4. The Trump administration finalized a rule to erase Obama-era protections for transgender people facing discrimination in health care. The move was announced on the fourth anniversary of the Pulse nightclub massacre in Orlando, Fla., and in the middle of Pride Month.
The rule is part of a broad Trump administration push to narrow the legal definition of sex discrimination so that it does not include protections for transgender people. Above, a rally last August.
Separately, the White House is moving to solidify “emergency” restrictive immigration policies put in place for the coronavirus. Officials proposed a rule this week that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum. Officials also plan to examine restrictions on skilled-worker H-1B visas.
5. The rubber bullets used on protesters in marches around the country, like those above, have been deemed “nonlethal weapons” by officials. But their impact can be devastating.
The common crowd-dispersal methods, including tear gas, flash bangs and beanbag rounds, have caused brain damage and other disabilities, prompting growing calls to ban them.
“Instead of calling them nonlethal, we now call these weapons ‘less lethal,’ and that is in comparison to a standard bullet,” said one doctor.
Early demographic data shows a significant presence of white protesters, a striking difference from years past. Why now? Among the factors: a shift in attitudes on race, anger toward President Trump, and the pandemic, according to researchers.
6. There’s one thing voters can agree on: The future isn’t looking so good.
Battered by a health crisis and an economic downturn, and boiled over with fury about racial injustice, many Americans are mourning the past, worried about the present and fearful of what comes next. We spoke with more than two dozen voters in key political battleground states.
“It’s all screwed,” a construction worker in Milwaukee said. “It seems to me that we’re pretty close to a fall.”
In the days since George Floyd’s killing, Democratic politicians have taken to calling out the problem of “systemic racism” in America. But many people say their policy solutions seem to leave the system intact. Above, a memorial for Mr. Floyd in Minneapolis.
7. Do police officers make schools safer or more dangerous?
School resource officers were supposed to prevent mass shootings and juvenile crime. But some schools in Minneapolis, Seattle and Portland, Ore., are eliminating them amid a clamor from students after George Floyd’s death. More school districts are considering the move. Teachers’ unions in Los Angeles, above, and Chicago are pushing to get the police out.
New graduates from around the nation, some still in their caps and gowns, have gone to protests after their online ceremonies to make a statement: that they should not inherit the same discrimination that previous generations faced.
8. Robert Frank crossed America by car in search of broader horizons. What he found fascinated and disturbed him.
“That trip I got to like black people so much more than white people,” he told The Times Magazine in 2015.
He selected the image above for the cover of his eye-opening book of 83 photographs, “The Americans,” published in 1959. “Trolley — New Orleans” is all about divisions, and each portrait within the composition tells its own story. We broke it down frame by frame.
We also spoke to Bob Dylan in a rare interview. The musician talks about mortality, George Floyd, the gospel music of Little Richard and his new album.
9. You’ve probably played a few games while in lockdown. So what draws us to them?
“Games give us the power to transform our living rooms, backyards, and Zoom calls into different playful realities,” writes Sam Von Ehren, the resident Game Maker for The Times. (Yes, we have a Game Maker!)
He and other journalists explore how games shape us, rile us, entertain us and teach us about ourselves, including the remorseless confessions of a champion underbidder.
And we have one more game for you. Here’s a hint: What’s black and white and can be turned into hours of entertainment
10. And finally, about those funky pandemic dreams.
Our Opinion section expected a few head scratchers when it asked readers earlier this year to share their dreams. Dreams, after all, tend not to be good stories — they lack a beginning, middle and end. But going through more than 500 responses, there were some pleasant surprises. Here are 20 favorites.
“A few nights ago I dreamed that I got to meet Oprah, but I could only ask her one question,” one reader wrote in. “My question was, ‘Is thread count really a thing? Like, when you are a guest at someone’s house, does it really matter what the thread count of the sheets is?’”
Have a well-rested weekend.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ryan Christopher Jones for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
As U.S. Tightens Visas for Tech, Canada Opens for Business
The New York Times
December 20, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 1295 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


A Flatiron district artificial intelligence start-up was recently looking to expand, adding new engineers who happened to know a niche computer language.
The people it hired hail from Morocco, Belarus, France, Georgia and Canada. But they are not working in New York. They are in Montreal, where immigration policies make it possible to get work permits within two weeks, and the Canadian tech industry is aggressively trying to woo foreign companies. 
  ''It's becoming less and less sexy to be going to the United States,'' said Tim Delisle, 26, a founder of the start-up Datalogue, which uses artificial intelligence to prepare and synthesize data for other businesses. He added that skilled foreign workers crave the greater stability that he said immigrants have in Canada compared with the United States.
  While much attention has been paid to President Trump's policies cracking down on illegal immigration, the administration has also moved to restrict legal immigration, especially in the tech industry, which draws many workers from abroad. In April, Mr. Trump introduced an executive order, Buy American and Hire American, which included requests to reform a visa program known as H-1B as a way to benefit American workers.
  The program awards 85,000 temporary visas annually to highly skilled foreign workers in what are deemed ''specialty'' occupations through a lottery. Between application and legal fees, the process of applying for one H-1B visa can cost a company up to $6,000, lawyers say, and can take months; it is also as uncertain as roulette, with hundreds of thousands of applicants for the spots.
  Last week, the Department of Homeland Security published a set of proposed rule changes that would make the visas even harder to qualify for, to ensure that only ''the best and brightest'' foreign workers were selected. It also hoped to eliminate a work permit for spouses of some of these visa holders.
  In contrast, Canada's immigration agency in June started the Global Skills Strategy for high-skilled workers from abroad to get a work permit in two weeks.
  ''That is, excuse my English, goddamn fast,'' said Hubert Bolduc, the chief executive of Montreal International, a public-private partnership that recruits foreign companies to move to Canada and offers support once they arrive in Montreal. ''We've been loving government on this because we know it's a talent game.''
  In 2017, the organization conducted eight international recruiting missions, in London, Paris, San Francisco and Los Angeles. Its directors have made several informal visits to New York, where it came this month to woo a video game company.
  With the Trump administration's immigration policies, ''We're almost saying, 'Don't come,''' said Sunil Hirani, the co-founder of trueEx, an electronic global interest rates exchange, also in the Flatiron neighborhood. He came to New York as a child 40 years ago from India. ''How can you have a 'Come to New York City' program if the people of New York City are going to get kicked out? How do you sell that?''
  Last year, trueEx's chief executive and president, Karen O'Connor, was looking at options to expand the company's computer engineer group. A consortium related to Montreal International invited her to Canada for a visit that made her feel like a foreign dignitary, she said. There was the elegant lunch, the precisely coordinated meetings with potential business partners and a visit to the Montreal Stock Exchange.
  Ms. O'Connor said the 50-person company could save more than $1 million in wages if it hired engineers based in Montreal. In part, that was because the cost of living was far less compared with New York and because the company could qualify for certain tax benefits.
  But after Mr. Trump was elected, trueEx hesitated, to gauge the climate; now, it is again considering expanding north of the border in 2018, Ms. O'Connor said, in part because it got a spot site visit from the Department of Homeland Security this summer to verify employment records for its H-1B visa holders. They were in order, but the company's executives found the process nerve-racking.
  ''My advice to other companies would be: Hold on for dear life, but explore other options,'' Mr. Hirani said.
  But John Miano, a lawyer who represents American workers who say that they have lost jobs unfairly to low-skilled H-1B visa holders, thought it was ''posturing'' for companies to say they are moving north of the border to find the best talent. ''The problem is, you got to go to Canada,'' Mr. Miano said. ''The reality is, the place to do business is still the United States.''
  Datalogue's expansion to Montreal, Mr. Delisle's hometown, evolved swiftly. He and a partner founded Datalogue in 2016 at Cornell Tech in Manhattan and were lucky when a tech mogul, Charles E. Phillips Jr., the chief executive of Infor, gave him two desks on the fifth floor of Infor's elegantly restored Flatiron headquarters.
  By spring 2017, Datalogue had grown to five employees and had raised $1.5 million in seed funding. But to bring in more engineers would have cost thousands of dollars in visa fees, Mr. Delisle said, and even then, the process would not be guaranteed. Canada has a burgeoning artificial intelligence sector, and the company opened its Montreal office in April in the trendy Mile End neighborhood; it raised another $1.5 million in seed funding by November.
  Still, Mr. Delisle said that his company has better access to customers in New York, and for that reason he has kept seven employees there for sales and marketing.
  While tech is still thriving in New York, where it is the fastest-growing industry in the city, losing offices or whole companies to Canada could be a concern, said Kevin Ryan, an entrepreneur who had founded a half-dozen start-ups. The multiplier effect of the start-up world is a powerful one.
  ''When someone decides not to come here to join a start-up, and they go to Toronto, some of them may break off and start a new company across the street,'' he said. ''The wider impact will be felt, literally, for decades.''
  Mr. Delisle agreed. ''I'm not necessarily scared for New York; there's phenomenal programs there,'' he said. ''I am more scared for the broader policies being applied right now.''
  According to the Partnership for New York City, a business advocacy group, immigration has always been central to the economy of New York. Forty-eight percent of the city's small-business owners are immigrants, and 45 percent of the work force in the city is foreign-born.
  ''The No. 1 priority of business today is where they can get the talent they need from the global talent pool,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, the chief executive of the group. ''There's not much a locality can do to incentivize, but we can try to keep the global pipeline open.''
  Stimulating the city economy was the impetus for New York City's Economic Development Corporation to create a program called International Innovators Initiative, or IN2NYC. The idea was to provide H-1B visas that were exempt from the government-imposed cap because entrepreneurs would work in partnership with city universities.
  The program was announced in the spring of 2016 and received 144 applications in the first round. The second round, coming on the heels of the Trump administration's travel ban, attracted half that number. The program received only 41 this fall.
  Perhaps even more telling is the small number of foreign entrepreneurs who received visas: six. The IN2NYC program had envisioned at least 25 working at once, but the process, officials say, has been delayed by government challenges to the visas.
  One company that was initially rejected has appealed -- and set up shop in Canada while it is waiting for a decision.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/19/nyregion/trump-legal-immigration-canada-tech-jobs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Datalogue, a New York City start-up, decided to open a Montreal office, above, rather than go through the expensive and uncertain process of trying to get visas for immigrant workers in the United States. Datalogue's founders, Tim Delisle, at far left, and Bryan Russett, in the company's office in Montreal. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RENAUD PHILIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: December 20, 2017


End of Document
Firms Game Visa System, Costing the U.S. Jobs
The New York Times
November 11, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1745 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Théo Négri, a young software engineer from France, had come up with so many novel ideas at his job at an Internet start-up in San Francisco that the American entrepreneur who hired him wanted to keep him on.
So he helped Mr. Négri apply for a three-year work visa for foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills, mainly in technology and science. With his master's degree from a French university and advanced computer abilities, Mr. Négri seemed to fill the bill. 
  But his application for the H-1B visa was denied, and he had to leave the United States. Back in France, Mr. Négri used his data skills to figure out why.
  The answer was simple: Many of the visas are given out through a lottery, and a small number of giant global outsourcing companies had flooded the system with applications, significantly increasing their chances of success. While he had one application in last year's lottery and lost, one of the outsourcing companies applied for at least 14,000. The companies were squeezing out American employers like his boss.
  ''I had this great American dream that got broken,'' Mr. Négri said, speaking by telephone from Lyon, France.
  Congress set up the H-1B program to help American companies hire foreigners with exceptional skills, to fill open jobs and to help their businesses grow.
  But the program has been failing many American employers who cannot get visas for foreigners with the special skills they need.
  Instead, the outsourcing firms are increasingly dominating the program, federal records show. In recent years, they have obtained many thousands of the visas -- which are limited to 85,000 a year -- by learning to game the H-1B system without breaking the rules, researchers and lawyers said.
  In some years, an American employer could snag one of these coveted visas almost anytime. But recently, with the economy picking up, the outsourcing companies have sent in tens of thousands of visa requests right after the application window opens on April 1. Employers who apply after a week are out of luck.
  ''The H-1B program is critical as a way for employers to fill skill gaps and for really talented people to come to the United States,'' said Ronil Hira, a professor at Howard University who studies visa programs. ''But the outsourcing companies are squeezing out legitimate users of the program,'' he said. ''The H-1Bs are actually pushing jobs offshore.''
  Those firms have used the visas to bring their employees, mostly from India, for large contracts to take over work at American businesses. And as the share of H-1B visas obtained by outsourcing firms has grown, more Americans say they are being put out of work, or are seeing their jobs moved overseas.
  Of the 20 companies that received the most H-1B visas in 2014, 13 were global outsourcing operations, according to an analysis of federal records by Professor Hira. The top 20 companies took about 40 percent of the visas available -- about 32,000 -- while more than 10,000 other employers received far fewer visas each. And about half of the applications in 2014 were rejected entirely because the quota had been met.
  Two of those applications came from Mark Merkelbach and his small engineering firm in Seattle. For water projects in China, he needed engineers and landscapers who speak Mandarin, and he could not find them in the local market. With his H-1B visas denied, Mr. Merkelbach had to move the jobs to Taiwan. Another denial went to Atulya Pandey, an entrepreneur from Nepal who founded an Internet company in the United States and now can no longer work legally in this country for his own business.
  The top companies receiving H-1B visas in recent years, Professor Hira found, include Tata Consultancy Services, known as TCS, Infosys and Wipro, all outsourcing giants based in India; Cognizant, with headquarters in New Jersey; and Accenture, a global operation incorporated in Ireland.
  ''They have spent a lot of time and money creating a business model that fits within the rules so they can use the visas to offer cheaper labor,'' said Bruce Morrison, a lawyer representing an association of American engineers.
  For example, federal law requires global companies employing large numbers of H-1B workers to sign a declaration saying they will not displace Americans. But there is a loophole: An exemption cancels that requirement if employers pay H-1B workers at least $60,000 a year -- significantly less than an experienced technology worker's salary in many parts of the country.
  Many of the outsourcing firms' temporary workers earn $60,000 or just a little more, according to federal data compiled by Professor Hira.
  Among the immigration visas offered by the United States, the H-1B program stands out for its peculiar rules. The annual quota includes 65,000 visas for foreign workers applying for the first time, while the remaining 20,000 are for foreign students graduating with advanced degrees from American universities. Each year the period for applications opens on April 1, and they are accepted first come first served.
  Federal officials allow only one application for each foreign worker. But there is no limit on the number of visas a company can seek. A company with thousands of employees can submit many applications. By law, if applications quickly exceed the quota, officials use a computer-run lottery to select the visa recipients.
  Recently, demand for the visas has soared; each year since 2013 the selection went to the lottery. This year, 233,000 applications were received in just seven days, and about two-thirds were denied because the quota was met.
  Immigration officials do not acknowledge the outsourcing firms' advantage. ''The selection process is completely random,'' said Shinichi Inouye, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency in charge of the visa program. ''We cannot speculate as to why one company has more petitions selected in the cap.''
  But Mr. Négri, who is now 27, wanted to understand it. He had been hired by David Petersen through an open job search after he posted his professional profile online. Mr. Petersen was looking for engineers to expand his start-up, BuildZoom, which helps people find construction contractors.
  ''I was just looking for great people,'' said Mr. Petersen, in San Francisco. ''And Théo had been building cool stuff since he was a 13-year-old.'' Mr. Petersen said he had hired several local tech workers at the same time, and Mr. Négri, rather than displacing Americans, brought in more.
  Then his visa was denied. So Mr. Négri combed through public documents that employers file with the Department of Labor as a first step in an H-1B application. For the limited quota of visas, Mr. Négri discovered, the outsourcing companies had submitted far more applications than a small company like BuildZoom could manage or afford -- each application costs up to $4,000.
  Together the top five outsourcing companies had prepared as many as 55,000 H-1B applications. TCS, the company that had prepared applications for at least 14,000 visas, won 5,650 of them.
  Mr. Négri is now working on a tech start-up of his own -- in France.
  American titans like IBM, Microsoft, Facebook and Google also use H-1B visas and have pressed Congress to increase the annual quota.
  A representative of The New York Times Company said it had about 70 employees on visas, most of them skilled technology workers. This year, the company obtained an H-1B visa for Mark Thompson, the president and chief executive, who is British.
  Lawmakers have largely overlooked the outsourcing companies' role in the visa process. On Sept. 30, Congress allowed an extra fee of $2,000, which it imposed five years ago on H-1B applications from the biggest outsourcing companies, to lapse.
  On Tuesday, Senators Richard Durbin of Illinois, a Democrat, and Charles H. Grassley of Iowa, a Republican, introduced a bill to change the H-1B program and another temporary work visa, the L-1B, to raise wage requirements, increase monitoring and enforcement and add other protections for American workers. ''The H-1B visa program was never meant to replace qualified American workers,'' the senators said.
  Most of the global firms focus on technology, offering services to American companies to upgrade their systems and help them compete amid rapid change in the international marketplace.
  The companies say they follow all of the rules when they apply for the visas. Benjamin Trounson, a spokesman for TCS, one of the largest consultants, with 325,000 employees worldwide, said the company serves its customers ''using our U.S. and global talent pool that most effectively meets their needs.''
  Several consulting companies said H-1B workers were only a small part of their work force in the United States. Cognizant said in a statement that it regularly recruits experienced American workers and qualified students, and uses H-1B visas only ''to supplement our U.S. hiring in order to fill talent gaps in the market.''
  Still, Cognizant was the second-largest recipient of H-1B visas in 2014, getting more than 4,200.
  The outsourcing companies say they are hiring more Americans and contributing to the economy. In August, TCS announced a $35 million donation to Carnegie Mellon University for a new research center on its campus in Pittsburgh.
  But Mr. Pandey, after losing out in the H-1B lottery, had to set up shop back in Nepal to try to manage a growing company based in New York.
  As an undergraduate at the University of Pennsylvania, Mr. Pandey befriended an American classmate from Arizona, Vincent Sanchez-Gomez. By their junior year, they were running a start-up. In 2013, after graduating, they turned full time to their venture, Pagevamp, which helps small businesses create and run their own websites.
  The H-1B denial was a blow. ''It was quite stressful, for me and for the entire company, because it's what we were counting on,'' Mr. Pandey, 25, said during a brief stop in New York last month; now he can come to the United States only on a visitor's visa.
  Mr. Sanchez-Gomez, 24, has to handle investors, a staff of 10 and the company's plans for expansion through video calls with a business partner halfway around the globe.
  ''I would expect most people would feel Atulya was making a positive contribution to the U.S. economy,'' he said. ''There is no American who could do his job. Without Atulya, there would be no company.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/11/us/large-companies-game-h-1b-visa-program-leaving-smaller-ones-in-the-cold.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: David Petersen hired American and foreign workers at a start-up, BuildZoom, in San Francisco. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Atulya Pandey, right, an entrepreneur from Nepal, founded an Internet company, Pagevamp, with Vincent Sanchez-Gomez. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PERRY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Théo Négri in Lyon, France, where he returned after he was denied an H-1B visa. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BERTRAND GAUDILLÈRE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)       

Load-Date: November 11, 2015


End of Document
Cap on U.S. Work Visas Puts Companies in India in a Bind 
 The New York Times
October 1, 2003 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section W; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 850 words
Byline:  By SARITHA RAI 
Dateline: BANGALORE, India, Sept. 30  
Body


Prasad Tadiparti, global general manager of human resources at MindTree Consulting, is working his way around what he calls "a logistical nightmare."
     He is trying to anticipate what skills his clients in the United States may need in the next few years and match them with the profiles of his approximately 1,000 software engineers and others. All this while factoring in how many are willing to travel, how many hold valid visas to work in the United States, and for how long. 
 The "nightmare" is a sharp drop -- to 65,000 from 195,000 -- in the number of H-1B visas granted for skilled foreign professionals. The change, effective Wednesday, is making the business environment tougher for Indian software services companies like MindTree.
MindTree, which counts Franklin Templeton and Avis among its clients, will be competing with others in the industry for the tighter number of visas. If the visas are exhausted in the next few months, as some expect, services companies say that their clients' delivery schedules and new projects will be delayed.
H-1B visas are given each year to foreign workers whose specialized skills are sought by American companies. During the technology boom, the H-1B visa program, which allows foreigners to work in the United States for up to six years, provided a gateway for thousands of Indians who came to work in the United States, especially in Silicon Valley.
More recently, the number of visa applications has dropped. Last year, petitions for H-1B visas dropped by 75 percent, to 26,659, according to the American Electronics Association, a trade group that represents technology companies. The lighter use of the visas reflected the downturn in the dot-com sector and the elimination of technology jobs.
But critics now point to another visa, the L-1, that is used to bring in cheaper foreign workers who may be replaced once they are trained. Congress is also looking at the L-1, which has no quotas. The L-1 visa has grown in use, rising nearly 40 percent, to 57,700, last year from 1999, and some say technology employers are switching to this type of visa. 
According to an estimate by the American Immigration Lawyers' Association, there are some 900,000 H-1B employees in the United States, 35 percent to 45 percent of them from India.
The H-1B program became an issue as the United States economy softened and employment slumped. Critics of the program argue that American corporations are replacing employees with less-expensive foreign workers from places like India and the Philippines.
Some have even called for scrapping the H-1B visa program altogether, a move seen as part of a reaction against the increasing trend of sending technology and back-office jobs abroad.
Despite this antipathy and public outcry, American companies argue that the program is essential to help maintain competitiveness in the global economy.
In recent Congressional testimony, the chairwoman of the immigration subcommittee of the United States Chamber of Commerce, Elizabeth Dickson of Ingersoll-Rand, said the visa limit delayed the hiring of needed professionals. "We cannot afford to let arbitrary caps dictate U.S. business immigration policy," Ms. Dickson said.
But with Congress keeping the cap at 65,000, Indian services companies are scrambling to build teams of visa-ready people, said Laxman Badiga, chief staffing officer at India's third-largest software exporter, Wipro. Over 3,000 Wipro employees hold H-1B visas.
As Indian software services companies grapple with the vastly reduced quota ofvisas, American companies will have to figure out ways to collaborate with them to help manage a supply imbalance that is expected to emerge as the economy improves, said Atul Vashistha, chief executive of neoIT, an outsourcing advisory company based in Santa Clara, Calif. "We are already advising our clients on how to manage this risk scenario," he said.
For the Indian subsidiaries of multinationals like Intel, however, the impact of the reduced limit is expected to be minimal. "We see this as a bump in the road rather than something which will have a huge impact in the long term," said Ketan Sampat, president of Intel India.
But Mr. Vashistha's firm is urging clients like Cardinal Health and Exult to look at increasing the number of expatriates to help bridge the gap. "If foreign resources cannot be brought here, then take resources from here to the offshore location," he said.
The reduced visa limit may gradually diminish the United States' ability to attract the most talented workers, industry leaders contend. "With U.S. baby boomers retiring, and the number of tech grads declining, there will be an acute shortage of skilled talent in the coming years," said Kumar Mahadeva, the chief executive of Cognizant Technology Solutions, a software services company based in Teaneck, N.J.
As the economy recovers, industry executives envision an even more acute shortage of skilled workers. "If there are no visas to bring talent to the U.S.," Mr. Badiga of Wipro said, "American companies will eventually say, 'Let's go to India where the resources are."' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 1, 2003


End of Document
Special Visas Help Copycats Take U.S. Jobs
The New York Times
September 30, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1984 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


WAYNE, N.J. -- When Congress designed temporary work visa programs, the idea was to bring in foreigners with specialized, hard-to-find skills who would help American companies grow, creating jobs to expand the economy. Now, though, some companies are bringing in workers on those visas to help move jobs out of the country.
For four weeks this spring, a young woman from India on a temporary visa sat elbow to elbow with an American accountant in a snug cubicle at the headquarters of Toys ''R'' Us here. The woman, an employee of a giant outsourcing company in India hired by Toys ''R'' Us, studied and recorded the accountant's every keystroke, taking screen shots of her computer and detailed notes on how she issued payments for toys sold in the company's megastores. 
  ''She just pulled up a chair in front of my computer,'' said the accountant, 49, who had worked for the company for than 15 years. ''She shadowed me everywhere, even to the ladies' room.''
  By late June, eight workers from the outsourcing company, Tata Consultancy Services, or TCS, had produced intricate manuals for the jobs of 67 people, mainly in accounting. They then returned to India to train TCS workers to take over and perform those jobs there. The Toys ''R'' Us employees in New Jersey, many of whom had been at the company more than a decade, were laid off.
  A temporary visa program known as H-1B allows American employers to hire foreign professionals with college degrees and ''highly specialized knowledge,'' mainly in science and technology, to meet their needs for particular skills. Employers, according to the federal guidelines, must sign a declaration that the foreign workers ''will not adversely affect the working conditions'' of Americans or lower their wages.
  In recent years, however, global outsourcing and consulting firms have obtained thousands of temporary visas to bring in foreign workers who have taken over jobs that had been held by American workers. The Labor Department has opened an investigation of possible visa violations by contractors at  the Walt Disney Company and at Southern California Edison, where immigrants replaced Americans in jobs they were doing in this country. Four former workers at Disney have filed discrimination complaints against the company. The companies say they have complied with all applicable laws.
  But the Toys ''R'' Us layoffs -- and others underway now at the New York Life Insurance Company and other businesses -- go further. They are examples of how global outsourcing companies are using temporary visas to bring in foreign workers who do not appear to have exceptional skills -- according to interviews with a dozen current or former employees of Toys ''R'' Us and New York Life -- to help ship out jobs, mainly to India.
  These former employees described their experience training foreigners to do their work so it could be moved to India. They would speak only on the condition that their names not be published, saying they feared losing severance payments or hurting their chances of finding new jobs.
  In most cases when American workers lost jobs, the positions have been in technology, with employers arguing there are shortages of Americans with the most advanced skills. But in recent years, many jobs that American workers lost have been in accounting and back-office administration -- although there is no shortage of Americans qualified to do that kind of work.
  The core purpose of the temporary work visas is to help American companies compete in the global economy. ''If employers are able to hire the key people, they can keep jobs in the U.S. and create new jobs here,'' said Lynn Shotwell, executive director of the Council for Global Immigration, which lobbies Congress for more visas for highly skilled foreign workers.
  Outsourcing firms, and the companies hiring them, say they are careful not to violate any laws. But some experts argue the intent of the visas is being thwarted.
  ''At the very least, those are violations of the spirit of the law,'' said Christine Brigagliano, a lawyer in San Francisco with extensive experience advising American companies on obtaining visas. ''Those contractors are signing on the bottom line, saying we will not undercut the wages and working conditions of Americans. But, in fact, they are.''
  The companies see it differently.
  Kathleen Waugh, a spokeswoman for Toys ''R'' Us, said the staff reduction there was part of ''designing a streamlined, more efficient global organization to make it fit for growth.'' She said the contractors were required to comply with ''any and all immigration laws.'' The outsourcing, she noted, ''resulted in significant cost savings.''
  William Werfelman, a vice president and spokesman at New York Life, said the outsourcing was part of a transformation of its technology systems that would soon result in more jobs in the United States. ''Our decisions are centered on keeping the company competitive, keeping it in the United States, keeping it growing,'' he said.
  The federal government does not track how often American workers are displaced by workers with temporary visas, but this year, employees at a variety of companies report losing jobs to foreign workers. For example, at Cengage Learning, an educational publisher, about 30 accountants in Ohio and Kentucky were laid off on Sept. 11, after they spent five months training Indian workers from Cognizant, another outsourcing giant. The temporary workers and the jobs went back to India.
  A Cengage spokeswoman, Susan M. Aspey, said the company needed to install higher-grade accounting systems. ''To do this quickly and efficiently,'' she said, Cengage sought support from Cognizant. Employees who were laid off were given ''fair severance packages commensurate with their years of service,'' she said.
  Temporary H-1B visas are limited to 85,000 each year. In the last five years, federal records show, most of the companies that received the largest share of H-1B visas have been global outsourcing firms, including TCS; Infosys, another large Indian company; Cognizant, which is based in the United States; and Accenture, a consulting operation incorporated in Ireland.
  Those companies also use another temporary visa, the L-1B, which has no annual cap and allows businesses to internally transfer their employees who have ''advanced knowledge'' from branches in other countries to offices in the United States. A spokesman for TCS, Benjamin Trounson, said it maintained ''rigorous internal controls to ensure we are fully compliant with all regulatory requirements.''
  At the Toys ''R'' Us headquarters on a leafy campus by a reservoir here in New Jersey, someone dressed as Geoffrey the Giraffe, the retailer's mascot, often wanders around greeting employees to bolster company spirit. But the mood was hardly playful on the morning of March 3, when a company vice president summoned nearly 70 employees to a conference room and told them their positions would be transferred by the end of June to workers from TCS.
  ''We were asked to cooperate and show them respect and train them to do our individual job functions,'' said another former accountant, 36, who had worked for the toy seller for almost 12 years. But, she recalled, ''If you didn't cooperate, you would be asked to leave.''
  A few days later, TCS workers arrived to begin the training called ''knowledge transfer.'' Most had flown in days before from India and were staying at a La Quinta Inn nearby.
  The 36-year-old accountant said the young Indian assigned to shadow her appeared to have no extraordinary knowledge of accounting. His expertise was in observing and mapping what she did.
  ''He was watching me like a hawk,'' she said, remembering long hours at close quarters at her desk under the fluorescent lights of the accounting floor. ''It took him a while to learn what I did.''
  She had a hard time maintaining her composure. ''I felt like, 'Why am I sitting here showing this man how to do my job when they are taking it away from me and sending it to India?' ''
  Ms. Waugh, the spokeswoman, noted that Toys ''R'' Us employed about 33,000 people in the United States. She said the company offered workers ''a severance package, including benefits and career transition services.''
  The layoffs at New York Life were set in motion in 2014 when the company announced a $1 billion plan for an ambitious upgrade of its financial and data technology systems.
  Since New York Life is not a technology company, said Mr. Werfelman, the spokesman, it turned to outside contractors for the upgrade. The company plans to cut about 300 positions, including up to one-fifth of its 1,400 technology workers, as well as some financial accountants. With 9,000 staff employees and 12,000 agents nationwide, New York Life is the largest mutual life insurer in the United States.
  ''We know there will be pain along the way,'' Mr. Werfelman said. But he said that with new innovative technology, the company could rapidly expand despite the job cuts. He said it planned to hire 1,000 employees and 3,500 agents this year alone.
  Accountants at New York Life were among the first scheduled for layoffs that started in May, under a contract with Accenture. The company's accountants found out only by accident -- when Accenture managers in India mistakenly sent out a group email with a full outsourcing plan -- that the Indian workers they had been training for several weeks would be taking their jobs back to India.
  One accountant said a worker from India made an exact digital ''recording'' during the day as he performed his job. At the close of business, the recording was transmitted to India, where workers practiced mimicking his tasks.
  ''It's all just repeating exactly what we have been doing,'' he said.
  As a condition of his severance, he was asked to stay on for nine months to complete the training. The accountant, who at 26 was confident he would find a job elsewhere, preferred to resign.
  An Accenture spokesman, James E. McAvoy, said it was assisting New York Life to build new global, 24-hour systems. He said H-1B workers were a small part of the Accenture employees involved; most were United States citizens or residents.
  In July, about 100 New York Life technology workers were informed their jobs would be taken over by TCS, to be moved to India. At the insurer's verdant campus in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y., and at offices in New York City, New Jersey and Georgia, tech employees began receiving individual layoff notices last week.
  ''After 30 years, it is very, very disappointing being told you are going to lose your job to a foreign country,'' said one technology team member who is 49, and started with New York Life when he was 18.
  Many tech workers facing layoffs are older, with years at the insurer. They were galled by executives' statements that they were less qualified to learn the new systems than the foreign workers replacing them. ''There are a lot of new technologies coming in all the time,'' said an applications engineer in New York, who is 58 with 18 years at the company. ''There is no reason at all we can't do training for that.''
  Some workers were not as dismayed, saying the company was offering generous severance packages.
  But a hard irony for many of the New York Life employees losing jobs to immigrants is that they are immigrants themselves. They came to the United States a generation ago from the Philippines, Eastern European countries, and even India and raised families in this country. They followed the immigration rules -- some coming as refugees, others with work visas and computer degrees from their home countries. Most became American citizens.
  One technology manager, an immigrant from Europe, recalled that when he was hired at the insurer. ''There was an open position that had to be filled,'' he said. ''Nobody lost their job because I got my job.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/us/temporary-visas-meant-to-import-talent-help-ship-jobs-abroad.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Tata Consulting Services in India in 2011. Toys ''R'' Us used its workers to replace Americans. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KAINAZ AMARIA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A3)       

Load-Date: September 30, 2015


End of Document
Fake University Is Used as Bait in a U.S. Case on Visa Fraud
The New York Times
April 6, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 1206 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


NEWARK -- On the surface, the University of Northern New Jersey seemed legitimate. It had a website, with a seal featuring the Latin words ''Humanus, Scientia, Integritas,'' a list of business-oriented degrees offered and a promise of ''an exceptional educational experience.''
It was so exceptional it did not exist. 
  Instead, the university was a fake, set up by the Homeland Security Department as part of a sting operation to ensnare criminals involved in student visa fraud.
  On Tuesday, that operation resulted in the arrests of 21 people, the United States attorney for New Jersey, Paul J. Fishman, and Sarah R. Saldaña, the director of United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, announced at a news conference here.
  The people arrested were brokers who recruited foreign students who were mainly from China and India to an institution that they knew would not have real classes. The brokers, working with people posing as university officials, then charged the students in a scheme that allowed them to maintain their student visas and stay in the country, the government said. Some brokers also arranged, illegally, for work visas and jobs, the authorities said. Some of these so-called students, according to a law enforcement official, even used the fraudulent visas to get jobs at high-profile companies.
  Those arrested were mainly naturalized citizens and legal permanent residents, Mr. Fishman said. Six live in New York City, including three in Flushing, Queens.
  ''Our message is pretty loud and clear,'' Ms. Saldaña said in an interview. ''We're out there, we have intelligence to identify you, we're going to find you and bring you to justice.''
  The brokers arranged student visas for the University of Northern New Jersey for a total of 1,076 people. Most of the ''students'' will ultimately have their visas revoked, Ms. Saldaña said.
  Mr. Fishman said all of the recruited students were already living in the United States, having initially obtained visas legally, but were looking for a way to stay. Many were living and working throughout the country.
  ''All the defendants were pretty stunned about the charges,'' said Michael Horn, whose client, Tajesh Kodali, 44, of Edison, N.J., pleaded not guilty. ''They're hopeful the truth will come out.''
  The operation, the government said, was a way to understand the extent of the criminal network behind visa fraud, including how students are recruited, how fake universities work and what happens after the students are enrolled.
  While the case exposed a network of fraud, it also exposed a gap in national security, the officials said on Tuesday. The brokers who negotiated visas did not do any background checks on their clients or their potential connections to terrorist organizations. Mr. Fishman said the United States government did vet the people who applied for student visas and did not find any threats to security.
  Some of the so-called students used the visas to get jobs at Facebook and Apple, according to the law enforcement official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because this information was not part of the complaints. ABC News  reported that Facebook hired an applicant with a fraudulent visa, and that another visa holder went to the Army.
  The official confirmed that one person did enlist, and that only one person was employed by Facebook, one person by Apple, two at Morgan Stanley and several at other prominent financial institutions.
  The University of Northern New Jersey opened in 2013, according to the complaints filed on Tuesday. The location was an office building in Cranford, N.J.
  The university may have been billed as an institution of higher learning, but no learning took place. It purported to offer undergraduate and graduate degree programs in areas like accounting, marketing and health care management. To lure recruiters, it was listed as state-licensed and certified by the Homeland Security Department. But there were no classes and no faculty members.
  No matter. ''Once word got out, brokers descended on the school, clamoring to enroll their clients,'' Mr. Fishman said.
  The Homeland Security Investigations unit, which conducted the sting operation, had undercover agents accept calls from recruiters, according to several of the 14 complaints filed on Tuesday. These agents, in recorded telephone calls, warned the brokers that there would be no classes.
  A defendant named Chaun Kit Yuen, 24, responded, according to the complaint, ''We've been doing this for years, no worries.''
  Some of the agents also obtained fraudulent work authorizations through the university in order to outsource their foreign national clients as full-time employees. A broker from Brooklyn, Syed Qasim Abbas, 41, who is an American citizen, owned an ''information technology staffing company'' in East Northport, N.Y., called Fastnet Software International, according to the complaint.
  He paid the university $6,000 to obtain 20 visas for skilled workers, known as H-1B visas, the complaint said. (The government never issued them.) He paid another $17,750 to the school for arranging the extension of student visas.
  Some brokers negotiated thousands of dollars of commissions from the undercover officials, one worth as much as $4,000, according to the complaint. Other brokers received illicit payments for placing students in jobs.
  About 1.2 million students are currently in the United States on student visas, a majority of whom are legitimately attending universities, government officials said.
  There have been several high-profile student visa fraud cases in recent years from California to New York, which represent a security concern for a government under pressure to screen visa applicants for possible terrorism ties.
  The most prominent arrest in the case of sham universities, also known as visa mills, was in 2011. Susan Xiao-Ping Su, the founder of Tri-Valley University, in Northern California, was sentenced to 16 years in prison. The university had offered classes in engineering and medicine, but did not require that students attend them. More than 1,500 students, mostly from India, were affected, and not all knew that they were being defrauded.
  In January, in a case brought by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York,  three executives of Micropower Career Institute, a for-profit college with five locations in the New York City-New Jersey area, pleaded guilty to visa fraud. Among other offenses, the executives took $7.4 million from foreign students in exchange for visas, prosecutors said.
  In 2012, a Government Accountability Office report faulted Immigration and Customs Enforcement for not providing enough control in the verification process for student visas. Officials with ICE said it had since been trying to tighten its accreditation protocols.
  Although the officials would not discuss how many fraudulent schools might actually be operating, Mr. Fishman said they were ''too prevalent.''
  For the recruiters, he added, ''the University of Northern New Jersey was another stop on the 'pay to stay' tour.''
  Follow The New York Times's Metro coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the New York Today newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/nyregion/new-jersey-university-was-fake-but-visa-fraud-arrests-are-real.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The office building in Cranford, N.J., that was listed as the address of the fictitious University of Northern New Jersey. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PERRY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)       

Load-Date: April 6, 2016


End of Document
U.S. Uncertain of How Many Overstay Visas
The New York Times
January 2, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1282 words
Byline: By RON NIXON
Body


WASHINGTON --  The question from the congressman to the Obama administration official was straightforward enough: How many foreign visitors overstay their visas every year?
The reply was simple too, but not in a satisfying way. ''We don't know,'' the official said. 
  The testy exchange during a recent congressional hearing between Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina, and Alan Bersin, the assistant secretary for international affairs at the Department of Homeland Security, highlights what some law enforcement officials call a critical weakness in the United States foreign visa program.
  The issue has taken on added urgency as part of a broader examination of immigration policy following the mass shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., that left 14 people dead and 22 wounded. Tashfeen Malik, one of the attackers, was granted entry to the United States under a K-1 visa, also known as a fiancé visa. Her husband, Syed Rizwan Farook, was an American-born citizen. Both died in a shootout with the police. While Ms. Malik did not overstay her visa, the attack added to fears that a terrorist could exploit gaps in the system.
  Nearly 20 years ago, Congress passed a law requiring the federal government to develop a system to track people who overstayed their visas. After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, an entry and exit tracking system was seen as a vital national security and counterterrorism tool, and the 9/11 Commission recommended that the Department of Homeland Security complete a system ''as soon as possible.'' Two of the Sept. 11 hijackers, Satam al-Suqami and Nawaf al-Hazmi, had overstayed their visas.
  Since then, the federal government has spent millions of dollars on the effort, yet officials can only roughly estimate the number of people in the United States illegally after overstaying visas.
  Officials blame a lack of technology to conduct more advanced collection of data like iris scans, resistance from the airline and tourism industries because of cost, and questions about the usefulness of tracking people exiting the country as a counterterrorism measure.
  Some experts also note that a sizable number of those who overstayed their visas are highly skilled workers who come under the H-1B program or are foreign students.
  One widely cited statistic, from a 1997 report by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, puts the number of people who overstay their visas at 40 percent -- which now would mean about 4.4 million of the estimated 11 million undocumented residents in the United States. Numerous lawmakers, including the Republican presidential candidates Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, have used that figure when trying to describe the scope of the problem. But even that number has never been conclusively substantiated.
  Federal agencies have not provided a new report to Congress on overstays since 1994, despite the congressional mandate.
  In early 2013, Janet Napolitano, then the secretary of Homeland Security, testified before Congress that the agency planned to issue a report on overstay rates by December 2013. The agency did not follow through because officials said they did not have confidence in the quality of the data. Mr. Bersin said last month that the report would be issued in the next six months.
  Many members of Congress and some law enforcement officials worry that terrorists could exploit the visa program because the United States does not routinely collect biometric information -- fingerprints, iris scans and photographs that can be used for facial recognition -- of people leaving the country. Nearly three dozen countries, including many in Europe, Asia and Africa, collect such information.
  ''U.S. airports and other entry and exit points were never designed with departure control in mind,'' said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of Immigration Policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center in Washington and a Department of Homeland Security official under President George W. Bush. ''If we want to do that it's going to mean building a lot more infrastructure.''
  The 9/11 Commission report called the establishment of an entry and exit biometric system ''fundamental to intercepting terrorists'' trying to enter the United States because it would allow law enforcement officials to determine if a traveler had overstayed a visa.
  Still, efforts to build such a system to collect the information have stalled for decades. In 2004, lawmakers passed legislation that required Homeland Security officials to accelerate efforts to create an automated biometric entry and exit data system. Congress repeated its demand for a biometric exit system in 2007 and set a deadline for 2009. But the deadline passed, with the department putting into place only a handful of pilot programs.
  Since then, the department has continued to struggle to meet this requirement. A 2013 report by the Government Accountability Office said the Department of Homeland Security had more than one million ''unmatched'' arrival records, meaning that those records could not be checked against other information showing that the individuals had left the country, but again the department could not offer a precise number.
  Despite the call by some lawmakers for an exit system, airports and the airline industry have balked because it would cost airlines $3 billion, according to a 2013 Homeland Security estimate. The department issued regulations in 2008 requiring airports to collect biometric exit information, but carriers have largely ignored the regulation, and there have been no sanctions.
  Some national security experts are not convinced that a biometric system would be an effective counterterrorism tool.
  ''A biometric exit system does little to help stop those who fail to register an exit -- i.e., overstay their visas,'' said David Inserra, a policy analyst on domestic security with the Heritage Foundation. ''The system merely tells officials that an overstay has occurred, not if it is a false positive, a national security risk, or just an honest mistake.''
  Mr. Inserra and other experts like Ms. Brown added that Homeland Security did not have the resources to enforce existing immigration laws, let alone pursue all those who overstay their visas. The best way to deal with terrorism threats, they say, is to give more resources to intelligence agencies.
  ''The biometric exit system is not going to solve all our problems,'' Ms. Brown said. ''All it will ever do is just generate a really expensive list if there aren't any additional resources allocated.''
  The experts say Homeland Security would be better off using biographical information, such as a traveler's name and date of birth, to track exits and collect overstay data. But other experts say names and identifications like passports and travel documents are hardly foolproof.
  Groups like the Islamic State have used fake passports and aliases to bypass border checkpoints and move from country to country, Janice Kephart, former counsel for the Senate Judiciary Committee and a staff member on the 9/11 Commission, said last year in congressional testimony. She provided lawmakers with Islamic State documents that encouraged supporters to get fake credentials.
  ''Having accurate data on who is coming and going -- not who is pretending to be coming and going -- is essential to curtailing the insidious and increasing direct threat that ISIS is loudly declaring at our homeland,'' said Ms. Kephart, who is now the chief executive of the Secure Identity and Biometrics Association, a trade group.
  Follow the New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/02/us/politics/us-doesnt-know-how-many-foreign-visitors-overstay-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alan Bersin, assistant secretary for international affairs for Homeland Security, at a House hearing last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ZACH GIBSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10)       

Load-Date: January 2, 2016


End of Document
U.S. Proposes Immigration Rule Aimed at Entrepreneurs
The New York Times 
August 26, 2016 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 794 words
Byline: STACY COWLEY
Highlight: The proposal, which doesn’t require congressional approval, would grant temporary entry for up to five years to people building start-ups in the U.S.
Body


Foreign entrepreneurs building new companies in the United States could soon gain a new immigration option that would grant them temporary entry for up to five years, under a rule proposed on Friday by the Department of Homeland Security.
The proposal, which does not require congressional approval, would allow immigration officials to admit entrepreneurs case by case. To qualify, an applicant must have an “active and central role,” and a significant ownership stake, in an American company founded in the last three years.
The move is one of many piecemeal efforts by the Obama administration to expand America’s immigration policies without action from Congress. Entrepreneurs in any industry would be eligible to apply, but the new rule would be especially significant for the technology field. Creating an immigration route for start-up founders has been one of Silicon Valley’s political priorities.
“This is a big step in the right direction,” said Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant and the chief executive of Stripe, a payment processing company based in San Francisco. “I think it will have major impact on U.S. entrepreneurship, and potentially on the broader economy.”
More than half of American tech start-ups valued at $1 billion or more had at least one immigrant founder, according to a recent study by the National Foundation for American Policy, a research group that focuses on immigration issues.
Mr. Collison and his brother John started Stripe five years ago while attending colleges in Massachusetts. Dealing with the brothers’ visa issues was one of the biggest challenges Stripe had to overcome in its early days, Mr. Collison said. The company now has more than 500 employees, and Mr. Collison is part of a group of Silicon Valley executives and investors pressing for immigration reform.
President Obama made it a signature policy issue, speaking frequently about the need for a path that would allow skilled entrepreneurs to build new companies and create jobs, but efforts to create a “start-up visa” for foreign entrepreneurs have repeatedly died in Congress.
In 2014, Mr. Obama changed tactics, using an executive action to order federal officials to draft a plan for granting some entrepreneurs temporary immigration status.
The proposal put forth on Friday circumvents visas by relying on a federal law that lets the secretary of homeland security temporarily admit people whose entry into the United States would create “significant public benefit.” Around 3,000 entrepreneurs a year may qualify, according to an estimate from the Department of Homeland Security.
Sophie Alcorn, an immigration lawyer in Mountain View, Calif., said the new rule, if adopted, could significantly ease the challenges faced by fledgling entrepreneurs, especially those who came to the United States to attend college and began working on a new venture.
“I get calls every day from desperate start-up founders who are brilliant and accomplished, but they get into this chicken-and-egg problem,” she said. “Investors won’t give them money unless they can be confident that people can get into the country, or remain here.”
Immigration has become a major flash point in this year’s presidential race, with the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, calling for stricter limits on entry and his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, proposing automatic green cards for foreign students who earn advanced degrees in technical fields from American universities.
Deepak Kamra, a venture capitalist, testified before Congress three years ago in favor of a visa for entrepreneurs. The idea had broad bipartisan backing, he said, but kept falling apart over the issue’s politics.
“Establishment Republicans and Democrats all support this, but they all then back up and say, ‘It should be part of comprehensive immigration reform,’ which is code for, ‘It’s not going anywhere,’” Mr. Kamra said.
The main immigration pathway for foreign workers with specialized skills, the H-1B visa program, has been plagued by controversy and            abuses, and labor groups generally oppose efforts to expand it. But past proposals to create pathways for entrepreneurs have drawn fairly little criticism, in part because the suggested programs are typically small and targeted.
The Department of Homeland Security’s 155-page proposal will be open for public comment for 45 days. After that, the department can move forward with a final rule, which could take effect as soon as next year.
PHOTO: When Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant, co-founded Stripe, visa issues were a significant hurdle. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAU BARRENA/BLOOMBERG)
Related Articles
    • Countries Seek Entrepreneurs From Silicon Valley
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
    • Tech Incubators on a Mission of Diversity

Load-Date: February 1, 2017


End of Document
Judge Says Disney Didn’t Violate Visa Laws in Layoffs
The New York Times 
October 13, 2016 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 553 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Two former workers’ argued that Disney and two contractors colluded to make false statements when they applied for temporary visas for foreign replacements.
Body


A federal judge in Florida dealt a blow on Thursday to legal claims by American technology workers who were laid off by the Walt Disney Company and forced to train foreign replacements, dismissing lawsuits by two workers who said Disney had conspired with outsourcing companies to violate visa laws.
In a terse decision, Judge Gregory A. Presnell of the United States District Court in Orlando rejected the former workers’ arguments that Disney and the two contractors had colluded to make false statements when they applied for temporary visas, known as H-1B, for the foreign replacements.
The judge found that “none of the allegedly false statements put at issue in the complaint are adequate” to sustain the former workers’ case. The outsourcing companies that were sued with Disney were Cognizant Technology Solutions and HCL America.
The plaintiffs, Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, were laid off early in 2015 from jobs with Disney in Orlando. In their final weeks on the job, they were required to show foreigners on H-1B visas, brought in by the outsourcing contractors mainly from India, how to do their work.
A spokeswoman for Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, Jacquee Wahler, said, “As we have said all along, this lawsuit was completely baseless, and we are gratified by the decision.”
The former workers’ cases hinged on their argument that the companies had violated clauses of the visa law requiring employers to show that hiring H-1B workers “will not adversely affect the working conditions” of other workers in similar jobs. The law also requires large outsourcing companies that employ many H-1B workers to certify in some circumstances that those workers “will not displace any similarly employed U.S. worker” within six months of applying for the visa.
The outsourcing companies argued that the law would apply to them only if the American workers who were displaced by visa holders they hired had originally been their employees, not Disney’s. Judge Presnell was persuaded by that argument, although he did not entirely reject the idea that the Americans were “adversely affected” by being fired.
The decision was a broad victory for Disney and its contractors, but Judge Presnell left the former workers a small window to amend their lawsuits and to try again.
Mr. Perrero said the decision was a dismaying surprise. “This has become an effective business model in the IT industry where two companies can come together and wipe out American jobs without much fear of legal action,” he said. “I just hope that greed isn’t taking our country in the wrong direction.”
Sara Blackwell, the lawyer who represented the Disney workers, said, “I wanted to see if there was any legal avenue we could use to protect our American citizens, but it seems we can’t.”
Congress considered bills this year to amend provisions in the H-1B visa laws that tech workers say have led to thousands of layoffs, but no action was taken.
The Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, said early in his campaign that he would seek to change the law to prevent layoffs. But he has not addressed the issue recently.
Related Articles
    • Lawsuits Claim Disney Colluded to Replace U.S. Workers With Immigrants
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
    • Toys ‘R’ Us Brings Temporary Foreign Workers to U.S. to Move Jobs Overseas

Load-Date: March 17, 2017


End of Document
First Crop of Foreign Entrepreneurs Setting Up Shop at CUNY
The New York Times 
December 25, 2016 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 913 words
Byline: LIZ ROBBINS
Highlight: A new program, IN2NYC, helps founders of start-ups get temporary visas to establish their businesses, all while mentoring students and hopefully creating jobs.
Body


Correction Appended
Gabor Tankovics was checking off the boxes for his New York City tech start-up this past spring. Investors. Advisers. Users. But one box was still noticeably blank: Visa.
“I really felt like, ‘O.K., I am at the stage where things are starting to work out,’” said Mr. Tankovics, 33, a native of Hungary. “At the same time, I might have to leave.”
But then he heard about a new option, a program for international entrepreneurs created this year by New York City’s Economic Development Corporation with            the City University of New York. By working at one of CUNY’s campuses, founders of start-up companies can obtain an 18-month United States visa to establish their businesses — with the aim of creating jobs and training aspiring innovators.
In October, Mr. Tankovics became the first of two visa recipients out of 144 applicants for the program, the International Innovators Initiative, known as IN2NYC.
“This was absolutely designed for me,” Mr. Tankovics said in an empty and echoing co-working space at LaGuardia Community College’s NYDesigns start-up studio. By next year, it will house Mr. Tankovics’s three-employee company,            Dartboard, a web application to help manage            student loans.
The IN2NYC program selected Namisha Bahl, 26, of India, as its second participant. Ms. Bahl is a founder of Mogul, a website for women around the world that has 25 New York-based employees, she said, but is hoping to double in size by next year. Ms. Bahl, the company’s marketing director, will begin mentoring students at            City College of New York’s            Zahn Innovation Center, a start-up incubator promoting diversity in the tech world, next year.
By March, she and Mr. Tankovics will be joined by as many as 20 more participants in the program, working at five schools in the CUNY system, according to IN2NYC officials.
Ms. Bahl had been out of options. She had earned her master’s degree in integrated marketing from New York University in 2015 and twice applied for an H-1B visa. The visas, which go to skilled workers, are given out by lottery each year. The number of recipients is capped at 85,000, but more than three times as many people apply each year. And self-employed entrepreneurs are not eligible.
But in 2000, Congress allowed for exemptions to the cap, including people working at institutions of higher education or affiliated nonprofits.
“It is an amazing and crucial opportunity,” Ms. Bahl said in an email. “I would not have been able to expand Mogul further without work authorization.”
Or, as the program’s consulting lawyer, Peter F. Asaad, put it: “Without a program like this, she certainly would be out in the cold.”
Because of guidelines set by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, IN2NYC applicants must be sponsored for the visa by their company’s board of directors, all of whom are American citizens or permanent residents. The board members have the power to determine how much the applicant earns and other terms of employment.
The program does not just benefit the visa holder, its creators say.
“It’s not just about one person, but it’s about the larger ripple effect,” said Maria Torres-Springer, the president of New York City’s development corporation. “Both in terms of job creation for that company, and what it also means for the students and faculty, the local schools with which they partner.”
She added: “It’s an entire ecosystem.”
Dartboard and Mogul both are geared toward millennials. Mr. Tankovics explained that his web application, available only by invitation now but planned for public testing in January, helps people pay their student loans faster, saving money on interest payments.
Although he does not have any American student loans — he got a law degree and a master’s degree in business administration in Paris — when he came to New York for his master’s degree at Parsons School of Design, his friends in the United States all bemoaned their debt. A prototype of the app was the basis of his master’s thesis.
He has not thought about how he would find a way to stay once his visa expires.
“As a start-up founder, you do need to have a long-term vision, but at the same time you’re very into short-term fights. You’re struggling with every micro-decision,” Mr. Tankovics said.
Next semester, he is planning to teach a course at LaGuardia tentatively called “Designing for Financial Empowerment.” He hopes to teach students how to create opportunities for those New Yorkers who may not be served by traditional financial outlets, like banks.
His short-term goals are simple. “To have more users and a better service at the end of January and then hire new people,” Mr. Tankovics said. Then, looking around at the harshly lit space, he smiled. “And to move to an office with a window.”
Correction: December 28, 2016, Wednesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Monday about a new program for international entrepreneurs misidentified the educational institution that partnered with New York City’s Economic Development Corporation. It is the City University of New York, not the City College of New York.
PHOTO: Gabor Tankovics received a temporary visa with help from IN2NYC, a program for international entrepreneurs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE TAYLOR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
    • CUNY Schools to Lure Foreign Entrepreneurs With New Visa Program

Load-Date: April 10, 2017


End of Document
Top C.E.O.s Denounce Trump Immigration Policy as Threat to U.S. Economy
The New York Times 
August 23, 2018 Thursday 00:46 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1031 words
Byline: Steve Lohr
Highlight: Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Ginni Rometty of IBM and dozens of other C.E.O.s said new guidelines and practices were hindering skilled foreign workers and harmful to economic growth.
Body


Dozens of American business leaders are challenging the Trump administration over changes to immigration policy that they say threaten the livelihoods of thousands of their skilled foreign workers, and the nation’s economic growth and competitiveness as well.
The executives, members of the Business Roundtable, expressed their “serious concern” over the administration’s immigration moves in a jointly signed letter delivered late Wednesday to Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security.
Some of the most prominent chief executives in the United States signed the letter, including Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Ginni Rometty of IBM, Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase, Laurence Fink of BlackRock, Marc Benioff of Salesforce and Indra Nooyi, the departing head of PepsiCo.
The letter comes during a week when the broader debate over the country’s immigration policies has been reignited by the arrest of a Mexican laborer in the killing of an Iowa woman. It also underscores the continuing tension between America’s globally minded corporate establishment and the Trump administration’s “America First” agenda.
Business leaders have praised President Trump’s tax cuts and rolling back of many regulations. But they have deplored some of his statements and some of his administration’s actions, including on immigration.
In one of the most notable examples of the strain, several White House business advisory councils dissolved last year after Mr. Trump blamed “many sides” for white supremacist violence in Charlottesville, Va.
In June, a group of top executives condemned the administrationfor the forced separation of migrant children from their parents at the Mexican border. The Business Roundtable described the separations as “cruel and contrary to American values.”
With their letter on Wednesday, the group’s members took issue with a series of immigration enforcement guidelines that they said were “arbitrary and inconsistent” and created new and unnecessary hurdles for skilled foreigners working in the United States.
The changes, the letter stated, were “causing considerable anxiety for many thousands of our employees while threatening to disrupt company operations.”
The business group’s complaint focused on new guidelines and practices by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security that vets visa applications and administers immigration policy.
The letter’s main focus was the treatment of applications for, and renewals of, H-1B visas for skilled foreign workers. The visas are used by companies to hire computer engineers and other professionals.
As a result of the changes, there has been a sharp increase in the number of denials and requests for more information. A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan policy research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had increased 41 percent in the government’s fourth fiscal quarter of 2017, compared with the third quarter.
Government examiners’ requests for additional information on H-1B visa applications tripled in the same period. The government’s fiscal fourth quarter began in July 2017, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his “Buy American and Hire American” executive order.
The policy foundation’s analysis, published last month, was meant to examine the “Trump effect” on immigration for skilled foreign workers, said Stuart Anderson, executive director of the foundation and a former immigration official.
The Trump administration, experts said, was using the government’s regulatory apparatus, which it has so often scorned, to serve its policy goal of clamping down on the flow of foreign workers into America.
“Step up investigations, slow things down, and you can accomplish your policy goals without legislation,” said Hal Salzman, a professor of public policy at Rutgers University.
In response to the business leaders’ letter, the immigration service said a statement on Thursday that the administration had been “relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move towards a merit-based system.” It added that it handles all applications and petitions “fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.”
The H-1B program was created to provide a pathway for talented foreigners whose special skills were expected to strengthen the American economy. Today, the nation’s technology hubs are filled with H-1B alumni who have become entrepreneurs, executives, venture capitalists and, quite often, United States citizens.
In recent years, however, the visa program has been criticized because corporations, especially Indian technology outsourcing companies, have exploited legal loopholes in the H-1B regime to replace American workers and shift jobs out of the United States. The immigration service has said its increased scrutiny and enforcement actions were intended to strengthen “protections to combat H-1B abuses.”
But to the business leaders, the policies are vague and capricious, creating uncertainty for their workers and in company operations. For example, the group’s letter stated, “companies now do not know whether a work visa petition that was approved last month will be approved when the company submits the identical application to extend the employee’s status.”
A particular concern, the business leaders said, was that the immigration service was expected to revoke work eligibility for spouses of H-1B visa holders. The spouses, they said, are often highly skilled workers who have built careers in America.
“Revoking their U.S. work authorization,” the letter said, “will likely cause high-skilled immigrants to take their skills to competitors outside the United States.”
PHOTO: Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, was among dozens of business leaders who signed a letter complaining that the Trump administration’s immigration policies were hurting the economy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Lee/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As C.E.O.s Condemn Splitting Up Migrant Families, Goldman Chief Defends Trump
    • Inside the C.E.O. Rebellion Against Trump’s Advisory Councils
    • Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy

Load-Date: August 25, 2018


End of Document
How Outsourcing Companies Dominate the H-1B Program
The New York Times
November 11, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 374 words
Byline: By HAEYOUN PARK
Body


H-1B visas are designed to bring foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. But in recent years, global outsourcing companies have dominated the program, winning tens of thousands of visas and squeezing out many American companies. Congress set a limit of 85,000 visas annually, and more than 10,000 companies applied in 2014. But just 20 companies received more than 32,000 visas, according to Ronil Hira, a professor at Howard University who studies visa programs and analyzed federal H-1B data. 
The top 20 included several large outsourcing firms that provided temporary workers for businesses like Disney and Toys ''R'' Us. The federal government approves the visas on a first-come-first-served basis. Officials allow only one application for each foreign worker, but firms can submit an unlimited number of applications for their employees, so global outsourcing giants can, and do, submit many requests. Since 2011, as the American economy returned to growth, there has been a spike in the number of H-1B visas granted to outsourcing companies. Some companies are receiving at least four times as many visas as they did just a few years ago. To prepare an H-1B visa application, employers must first submit a public document known as a labor condition application. Companies can apply for more than one worker based on one labor condition application, and many outsourcing firms use one application to apply for 10 or more. The more labor condition applications a company gets approved, the more H-1B applications it can submit. Because H-1B visa applications are not public record, the labor condition applications are an indicator of how many applications a company intends to file. Under federal rules, employers with large numbers of H-1B workers must declare that they will not displace American workers. But the firms are exempt from that requirement if the workers are paid at least $60,000 a year. H-1B workers at outsourcing firms often receive wages at or slightly above $60,000, below what skilled American technology professionals tend to earn, so those firms can offer services to American companies at a lower cost, undercutting American workers. 

Graphic

 
CHARTS: Thirteen outsourcing companies took nearly one-third of all H-1B visas in 2014.
The outsourcing companies dominate the visa program by flooding the system with applications.
With more applications, the number of visas given to outsourcing companies has risen sharply.
Many H-1B workers earn salaries below market rates, and the vast majority of H-1B workers are from India. (Sources: Ronil Hira, Howard University
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
U.S. Department of Labor
 Théo Négri, jobsintech.io)       

Load-Date: November 11, 2015


End of Document
Laid-Off Americans, Required to Zip Lips on Way Out, Grow Bolder
The New York Times 
June 11, 2016 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1527 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Those who have lost jobs to foreigners on temporary visas, in particular, have begun to speak out despite their severance agreements with companies.
Body


LIBERTYVILLE, Ill. - American corporations are under new scrutiny from federal lawmakers after well-publicized episodes in which the companies laid off American workers and gave the jobs to foreigners on temporary visas.
But while corporate executives have been outspoken in defending their labor practices before Congress and the public, the American workers who lost jobs to global outsourcing companies have been largely silent.
Until recently. Now some of the workers who were displaced are starting to speak out, despite severance agreements prohibiting them from criticizing their former employers.
Marco Peña was among about 150 technology workers who were laid off in April by Abbott Laboratories, a global health care conglomerate with headquarters here. They handed in their badges and computer passwords, and turned over their work to a company based in India. But Mr. Peña, who had worked at Abbott for 12 years, said he had decided not to sign the agreement that was given to all departing employees, which included a nondisparagement clause.
Mr. Peña said his choice cost him at least $10,000 in severance pay. But on an April evening after he walked out of Abbott's tree-lined campus here for the last time, he spent a few hours in a local bar at a gathering organized by technology worker advocates, speaking his mind about a job he had loved and lost.
"I just didn't feel right about signing," Mr. Peña said. "The clauses were pretty blanket. I felt like they were eroding my rights."
Leading members of Congress from both major parties have questioned the nondisparagement agreements, which are commonly used by corporations but can prohibit ousted workers from raising complaints about what they see as a misuse of temporary visas. Lawmakers, including Richard Durbin of Illinois, the second-highest-ranking Senate Democrat, and Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the Republican chairman of theSenate Judiciary           Subcommittee on Immigration, have proposed revisions to visa laws to include measures allowing former employees to contest their layoffs.
"I have heard from workers who are fearful of retaliation," said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. "They are told they can say whatever they want, except they can't say anything negative about being fired."
Lawyers said the paragraph Mr. Peña and other workers object to in their separation agreements is routine in final contracts with employees who are paid severance as they leave, whether they were laid off or resigned voluntarily.
"It's a very, very common practice," said Sheena R. Hamilton, an employment lawyer at Dowd Bennett in St. Louis who represents companies in workplace cases. "I've never recommended a settlement that didn't have a clause like that."
But former Abbott employees said the provisions had stopped them from speaking openly with elected officials or appearing at congressional hearings.
"It is very frustrating that you can't share your story with the public," said one former Abbott manager, who had worked for the company for 13 years, rising to an important supervisory position. He had prepared a 90-page manual for his foreign replacements showing how to perform every detail of his work. With a disabled child who requires medical care, he said he had to take his severance and its nondisparagement clause, since it extended his medical benefits. So he asked to remain anonymous.
"I've been laid off before, I can understand that," he said. "But these visas were meant to fill in gaps for resources that are hard to find. This time the company actually asked me to transfer my knowledge to somebody else. That changes the equation."
According to federal rules, temporary visas known as H-1Bs are for foreigners with "a body of specialized knowledge" not readily available in the labor market. The visas should be granted only when they will not undercut the wages or "adversely affect the working conditions" of Americans.
But in the past five years, through loopholes in the rules, tens of thousands of American workers have been replaced by foreigners on H-1B and other temporary visas, according to Prof. Hal Salzman, a labor force expert at Rutgers University.
In March, two Americans who had been laid off in 2014 by a New England power company, Eversource Energy, spoke at a news conference in Hartford even though they had signed nondisparagement agreements. Craig Diangelo, 63, and Judy Konopka, 56, said most of the 220 people facing dismissal had been required as part of their severance to train Indian immigrants with H-1B and other visas.
In a protest, departing employees posted American flags outside their cubicles. As they left, they took the flags down. Mr. Diangelo took a photograph of the flags in his final days at the utility. At the time, he and Ms. Konopka spoke with reporters, including from The New York Times, but they did not want to be quoted, even without their names.
In January, Senator Blumenthal spotted the photograph in an article in Computerworld, a tech industry publication, and was dismayed to learn of the layoffs so long after they happened. In a            letter to the company, the senator questioned whether the dismissals were "accomplished through apparent abuses" of visas, and he demanded assurances that former employees would not be sued if they spoke with government officials.
In a forceful reply, the Eversource general counsel, Gregory B. Butler, said the company had not violated any laws, and its nondisparagement provisions were a "standard form release" that did not restrict former employees from discussing their layoffs "with you or anyone else."
Mr. Diangelo said he was not so sure the company would refrain from legal action if he spoke to the news media. But, he said, "I finally got to the point where I am tired of hiding in the shadows."
Two years later, his work with a local tech contracting company pays $45,000 a year less than his Eversource salary. Many of his former co-workers are also struggling, Mr. Diangelo said, but stay quiet to avoid provoking the company.
At Abbott, executives announced in February that technology jobs would be taken over by the Indian company Wipro. Senator Durbin, who is from Illinois, criticized the layoffs and said Abbott's nondisparagement clause was "overly broad."
According to a copy of the agreement, that clause read, in part: "You agree to make every effort to maintain and protect the reputation of Abbott and its products and agents."
A spokesman for Abbott, Scott Stoffel, said the changes were part of its efforts to "remain globally competitive and a strong U.S. employer." He said the company would retain "the vast majority" of its tech jobs in the United States. Nondisparagement clauses like Abbott's are "very common" in severance agreements, he said.
Mr. Peña said he could afford to turn down his severance payment because he is single and has no children. "I was the only one with the ability to put my foot down," he said.
He received consistently positive work reviews, and a merit raise weeks before his layoff, he said. With no indication that poor performance was a factor, he believed it was a measure to cut costs.
"Anything that had to deal with technology and resolving problems, that was my satisfaction, my passion," Mr. Peña said. "But these days that has no bearing on the decision making of the executives in the higher positions."
Abbott tried to reduce the role of foreigners in the layoffs. Only about 20 percent of the workers brought in by Wipro would be foreigners on H-1B visas, Mr. Stoffel said, while the rest would be American workers.
Mr. Peña said he had been told at first that he would train his Wipro replacements. But after Senator Durbin's rebuke, Wipro workers were trained only by employees who would be remaining with Abbott, he said.
He and 13 other former Abbott employees filed federal claims saying they faced discrimination because of their ages and American citizenship, said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing them. Those claims are confidential. Ms. Blackwell organized the tavern meeting where Abbott workers were invited to mourn their jobs. Of the small group that came, only Mr. Peña spoke up.
On April 20, about two dozen employees of EmblemHealth, a health insurer, protested outside its offices in Manhattan after the company announced that it would transfer about 200 tech jobs to Cognizant, another technology outsourcing company. Even though they were in the street holding signs, the employees declined to have their names used in news reports.
PHOTOS: Technology workers from Abbott Laboratories and supporters gathered in a North Chicago bar after the company laid off about 150 people in April. (A16); Marco Peña, laid off by Abbott, would not sign an agreement with a nondisparagement clause. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSHUA LOTT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)
Related Articles
    • Lawsuits Claim Disney Colluded to Replace U.S. Workers With Immigrants
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
    • Miscalculation on Visas Disrupts Lives of Highly Skilled Immigrants
    • Toys 'R' Us Brings Temporary Foreign Workers to U.S. to Move Jobs Overseas
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.

Load-Date: November 30, 2016


End of Document
Trump to Strip India of Special Tariff Status, Escalating Trade Tensions
The New York Times 
March 5, 2019 Tuesday 01:50 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 934 words
Byline: Alan Rappeport
Highlight: The decision came after a year of failed efforts by the Trump administration to compel India to lower its trade barriers and as the administration tries to ease tensions with China.
Body


WASHINGTON — President Trump has decided to strip India of a special status that exempts billions of dollars worth of Indian exports from American tariffs, raising new trade tensions with the world’s second most populous country.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative said on Monday night that India and Turkey would no longer be eligible for preferential market access to the United States. While the decision to terminate Turkey’s status stemmed from that country’s economic development, the move against India was retaliatory. It came after a year of failed efforts by the Trump administration to compel India to lower its trade barriers, including the tariffs it charges on American goods.
Mr. Trump’s decision to confront India over its trade practices ratchets up trade tensions at a moment when the administration has been trying to ease frictions with China, which have rattled global financial markets and unsettled businesses.
But India’s high tariff rates have been a major source of frustration for Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly assailed India for charging steep tariffs on American motorcycles. The president routinely criticizes India’s “unfair” trade practices and highlighted the disparity between how the United States and India treat imports in sharply worded remarks during last weekend’s Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington.
“India is a very, very high-tariff nation, and they charge tremendous, tremendous numbers,” Mr. Trump said, adding that he wanted to impose a “reciprocal tax” on India.
Mr. Trump frequently cites Harley-Davidson when complaining about India’s trade practices, criticizing the country for charging 50 percent duties on Harleys and other motorcycles. While Harley-Davidson does sell motorcycles in India, it has moved much of that production abroad to avoid tariffs and has opened a factory outside New Delhi. Most of the 3,000 Harleys sold in India last year avoided the tariffs.
Beyond motorcycles, India has angered American medical device makers with price caps on items such as cardiac stents and knee implants. New policies restricting Visa, Mastercard and American Express also kicked in last year, and Walmart and Amazon have been upset about the            new e-commerce policies recently imposed in India.
The United States and India engaged in $126.2 billion worth of trade in 2017, according to United States trade representative, with the United States running a goods and services deficit of $27.3 billion. About $5 billion of Indian exports to the United States were eligible for reduced tariffs under the Generalized System of Preferences program, or G.S.P. According to India’s Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the program has allowed for $190 million per year in duty reduction.
“It’s survivable, but painful nonetheless,” said Richard Rossow, an expert in United States-India relations at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Mr. Rossow noted that the tariffs could be enough to encourage American importers to buy some products from Mexico or Vietnam instead of India. The program covered imports of items such as automobile parts, agricultural products, jewelry and handicrafts.
For its part, India has been upset by the steel and aluminum tariffs that the United States imposed last year as well as restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers and spouses of H-1B visa holders.
The Trump administration initiated a review of India’s preferential trade status in 2018, and in recent months there have been increasing signs that negotiations were going poorly. Last year, Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, was expected to travel to India but ended up not going. In February Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, backed out of a planned trip and blamed bad weather.
Mr. Lighthizer’s office said this week that, despite “intensive engagement,” India had failed to take the necessary steps to keep its tariff exemptions. The United States has been particularly concerned about market access for dairy and medical devices.
“India has implemented a wide array of trade barriers that create serious negative effects on United States commerce,” the agency said in a statement.
India pushed back against such accusations on Tuesday, arguing that it was willing to work with the United States but that some of the demands were unreasonable.
“India was able to offer a very meaningful way forward on almost all the U.S. requests,” the Ministry of Commerce and Industry said in a statement. “In a few instances, specific U.S. requests were not found reasonable and doable at this time by the departments concerned, in light of public welfare concerns reflective of India’s developing country status and its national interest.”
The change to India’s trade status will take place in 60 days. Lawmakers and business groups expressed hope on Tuesday that a deal could still be worked out.
“The Indian government hasn’t engaged enough to address market access issues,” said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. “For the sake of the many Americans and Indians who relied on G.S.P. benefits, I hope that India will work to quickly address these legitimate concerns.”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting from Mumbai, India. 
PHOTO: President Trump with Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India. The country’s high tariff rates have been a major source of frustration for Mr. Trump. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • In U.S.-India Trade, Trump Sees Only Harley-Davidson
    • India Proposes Chinese-Style Internet Censorship

Load-Date: March 7, 2019


End of Document
H-1B Visa Applications Pour In by the Truckload
The New York Times
April 4, 2017 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1342 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN; Vindu Goel contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Nick Wingfield from Seattle.
Body


LAGUNA NIGUEL, Calif. -- The delivery trucks began arriving with their precious parcels before daybreak, lining up outside a massive government edifice that rises above Orange County's suburban sprawl.
On Monday, the starting gun went off on application season for skilled-worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which allow employers, primarily technology companies, to bring in foreign workers for three years at a time. For the last few years, the federal government has been so overwhelmed by applications that it has stopped accepting them within a week of opening day, hence the line of trucks trying to deliver applications before the doors close on the program for another year. 
  And this year, the rush has escalated to an all-out scramble because the future of the H-1B program  is unclear.
  Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized as a scheme to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. President Trump has vowed to overhaul it, and lawmakers from both parties have drafted bills to alter it.
  At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors at companies that included Disney. ''We won't let this happen anymore,'' he thundered in one stump speech about the practice, which he has called ''outrageous'' and ''demeaning.''
  This past weekend, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced a technical change that could make it harder for entry-level programmers to receive the visas, and on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would investigate companies that it believed had overlooked qualified American workers.
  ''The Justice Department will not tolerate employers' misusing the H-1B visa process to discriminate against U.S. workers,'' Thomas Wheeler, the head of the department's civil rights division, said in a statement.
  Each year, 65,000 H-1B visas are made available to workers with bachelor's degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master's degrees or higher.
  When the gates swung open at the government processing center here on Monday, the first truck in line, a FedEx rig, carried 15,000 packages, said a courier, Andrew Langyo.
  ''We're loaded, and we have more trucks coming,'' said Mr. Langyo, who would return two hours later in the same truck with another haul.
  Last year, the government received 236,000 applications in the first week before deciding it would accept no more. A computer randomly chooses the winners.
  The average H-1B petition, a collection of forms and documents attesting to the bona fides of a job offer and the person chosen to fill it, is about two inches thick. But some files are six inches thick and weigh several pounds, according to Bill Yates, a former director of the Vermont Service Center, which also processes H-1B applications.
  Mr. Yates recalled some mishaps, like the time a driver bound for the center in Vermont drove 50 miles unaware that his truck's back door had swung open, spilling its cargo onto the road.
  The visas are attractive not only to the companies that file the applications, but also to the workers themselves, who can become eligible for a green card while working on an H-1B.
  Among the petitions expected to land in California's center is that of Minh Nguyen, a software-design engineer from Vietnam who was sponsored for an H-1B by BitTitan, a cloud software company in Kirkland, Wash. It is his second attempt at a visa.
  ''In America, you're in the center of new technology and cutting-edge changes in the I.T. industry,'' said Mr. Nguyen, 25. ''I would contribute directly to the company and to software development in the U.S.''
  In 2014, the last year for which information is available, just 13 outsourcing firms accounted for a third of all granted visas. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all based in India.
  The companies, which subcontract their employees to banks, retailers and other businesses in the United States to do programming, accounting and other work, often inundate the immigration service with tens of thousands of applications.
  BitTitan, a growing company that hopes to hire 60 engineers in the next 12 months, is submitting six applications. ''We are trying to fill specific positions around cloud and artificial intelligence,'' the chief executive, Geeman Yip, said. ''If we can't fill them, our innovation suffers.''
  Several bipartisan bills in the Senate and the House seek to make companies give more priority to American workers before they fill jobs with H-1B visas. They also seek to raise the minimum pay for the jobs, which depend on skill level and location: A computer systems analyst in Pittsburgh, for example, must make at least $49,000 under current regulations. The theory is that higher pay will eliminate some of the rationale for importing workers.
  A draft of a presidential executive order on ''protecting American jobs and workers by strengthening the integrity of foreign worker visa programs'' was distributed widely in late January but never signed. Then, without warning, Citizenship and Immigration Services published a memo on its website over the weekend that could affect many applications.
  Specifically, companies seeking to import computer programmers at the lowest pay levels will have to prove that the work they perform qualifies as ''specialty'' labor, which is what the H-1B visas were created for. ''There will be greater scrutiny of the role the company wants to fill,'' said Lynden Melmed, a lawyer in Washington and a former chief counsel for the immigration service.
  The measure appears to be directed mainly at outsourcing firms, rather than the big technology companies, which tend to hire workers at higher skill and pay levels.
  In a statement, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, the main trade group for India's outsourcing industry, said, ''The H-1B visa system exists specifically because the U.S. has a persistent shortage of high-skilled I.T. talent.''
  The group said that its members followed all the program's rules, and that the change would have little impact. ''It is aimed at screening out less-qualified workers, whereas our members tend to provide well-credentialed workers to help U.S. companies fill their skills gaps and compete globally,'' it said.
  Even before the memo and the Justice Department's warning, fears about the future of the H-1B program were making this year more pressure-packed than most. ''Just to make sure the petitions get in, almost every client demanded that theirs arrive on the first day,'' said Greg McCall, a lawyer at Perkins Coie in Seattle who prepared 150 applications.
  Inside the federal building, a formidable structure that has provided backdrops for movies including ''Coma'' and ''Outbreak,'' the logistical dance unfolded over two floors. In the mailroom, about 40 people wearing blue gloves sat around tables opening packages that arrived nonstop in six-foot-high bins. In a huge warehouse, those same packages were separated according to whether the applicants had bachelor's or master's degrees.
  All told, 1,500 workers were involved, with a second shift expected to stretch past normal business hours.
  ''This is the day we prepare for months and months in advance,'' said Donna P. Campagnolo, the center's deputy director.
  Trucks came and went all day, with some couriers, including from FedEx, staggering their deliveries to avoid having dozens of trucks backed up at the gate.
  Some smaller delivery companies received a piece of the action, too. One courier, Fernando Salas, pulled up in a red Suzuki station wagon stuffed with 10 boxes. ''I have 109 envelopes,'' he said. ''That is all that fits in here.''
  It was all surprisingly low-tech for a program used primarily for high-tech jobs. Asked why the government had not digitized the process, Ms. Campagnolo said: ''There's obviously a lot of paper. There's no denying it.''
  The biggest challenge, she said, is ''trash overflow.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/us/tech-visa-applications-h1b.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Couriers delivered visa petitions Monday to a federal processing center in Laguna Niguel, Calif. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)       

Load-Date: April 4, 2017


End of Document
Can't Get Visa for Silicon Valley? Mexico Awaits
The New York Times
August 2, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1845 words
Byline: By KIRK SEMPLE and IAN AUSTEN; Kirk Semple reported from Guadalajara, and Ian Austen from Ottawa. Javier Hernandez contributed reporting from Beijing.
Body


GUADALAJARA, Mexico -- With his frequent refrains about Mexicans and the need for a wall to contain them, it's no surprise that President Trump has made few friends in Mexico.
Yet here in the capital of Jalisco State, sometimes referred to as Mexico's Silicon Valley, people are practically celebrating him. 
  ''He's helping us a lot!'' Gov. Aristóteles Sandoval exclaimed. ''He's put us on the world's agenda.''
  As part of Mr. Trump's efforts to push an America-first philosophy, he has vowed to restrict the availability of special visas that are widely used by technology companies to hire talent from around the world.
  Mr. Trump's plans, combined with an American political climate that has left many immigrants feeling less welcome, has cast a pall of uncertainty over the American tech industry, which relies heavily on highly skilled workers from abroad.
  But while entrepreneurs and executives in the United States are fretting, other countries -- including Mexico, Canada and China -- are salivating over the Trump administration's rumblings.
  Silicon Valley's loss, they say, could be their gain.
  In recent months, foreign governments and tech industry leaders have sought to capitalize on the uncertainty in Silicon Valley. They are stepping up their efforts to attract engineers and entrepreneurs who might rely on the special American visa program, known as H-1B, to work or to run businesses in the United States.
  ''It's an exciting time,'' said Brad Duguid, the minister of economic development in Ontario, where the capital, Toronto, is one of Canada's biggest tech hubs. ''And while it's unfortunate that the U.S. is looking more internally, far be it from us not to take advantage of that.''
  In June, Canada set up a new visa program that makes it easier for companies to recruit highly skilled foreign workers. Under the program, which was in development before Mr. Trump's election victory, the Canadian government has promised to approve two-year visas in less than two weeks -- blindingly fast, compared with the process in the United States.
  And unlike the H-1B visa in the United States, there is no limit to the number of Canadian visas available.
  Beyond that, Ontario is in the early stages of preparing a social media campaign for technology executives around the world to sell the province as a place for investment.
  ''Canada is seizing its moment,'' said Navdeep Singh Bains, the country's federal minister of innovation, science and economic development. ''We're open to trade and people.''
  In Mexico, states with growing regional tech hubs, like Jalisco, have been redoubling their efforts to attract talent and investment in recent months, peddling a philosophy of openness that departs from what Mr. Sandoval called Mr. Trump's ''xenophobia'' and ''lack of global vision.''
  The efforts have included visits by Jalisco officials to the San Francisco Bay Area and to Europe. The San Francisco Chronicle published an  op-ed piece by Mr. Sandoval pitching the advantages of doing business in his state.
  The officials herald Mexico's proximity to Silicon Valley, its alignment with time zones in the United States and its lower cost of living. They are also sweetening the invitation with enticements like tax incentives and promises of full government cooperation.
  ''We want you,'' says a new promotional website, Come2Jalisco.com. ''Innovation has no borders.''
  Even Mexico's ambassador to India has echoed the pitch.
  ''We will be more than happy to have Indians relocate to Mexico,'' the ambassador, Melba Pría, told The Indian Express newspaper earlier this year, emphasizing the ''visa ease'' that foreign talent will experience in Mexico.
  China's tech leaders have also been seizing on the opportunity created by Mr. Trump's immigration policies.
  Wang Huiyao, founder and president of the Center for China and Globalization, a research group in Beijing, said Mr. Trump's ''America First'' doctrine was a boon for China's efforts to attract foreign tech talent and persuade Chinese engineers now working abroad to return home.
  ''China is shifting from attracting foreign capital to foreign talent,'' Mr. Wang said. ''The U.S. is losing out.''
  Among the Chinese voices leading the push is that of Robin Li, the chief of Baidu, China's largest search engine.
  ''Many entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley have expressed their concern that this will hurt America's field of innovation,'' Mr. Li said recently at China's World Internet Conference. ''I really hope that talent from all over the world comes to China.''
  President Emmanuel Macron of France has sought to throw open a slightly different door. When Mr. Trump announced that he was pulling the United States out of the Paris climate accord, Mr. Macron extended an unusual offer to Americans: ''To all scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs, responsible citizens who were disappointed by the decision of the president of the United States, I want to say that they will find in France a second home.''
  These messages of welcome stand in contrast to the Trump administration's tough approach to immigration.
  In an executive order this spring, Mr. Trump directed federal agencies to review immigration laws with an eye toward ending what he called ''the theft of American prosperity.''
  The president has taken particular aim at the H-1B visa program, under which the government admits 85,000 highly skilled foreign workers every year, most of them in the tech field.
  Mr. Trump says businesses use the program to avoid hiring higher-paid Americans, and his executive order instructed the agencies to ensure that visas were awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers.
  Disney, Toys ''R'' Us, Southern California Edison and New York Life are among the companies that have laid off American tech workers who first were asked to train their replacements -- tech workers from low-wage countries like India brought in on temporary visas. In some cases,  the jobs themselves went back home with the new workers.
  Canada revised its temporary visa program partly because the Royal Bank of Canada, the country's largest financial institution, shuffled jobs overseas using that technique.
  Mr. Trump's executive order made no immediate changes, but it has sowed concern throughout the industry. Competition for H-1B visas was already intense. The government received 199,000 applications in the first five days of its lottery this year, then stopped accepting them. Many companies fear that Mr. Trump's efforts might put highly skilled immigrant workers even further out of their reach.
  A change could favor the biggest American tech companies, which tend to pay the highest wages. But it could hurt some of the biggest users of the H-1B program -- the outsourcing companies, including several from India -- that bring thousands of workers to the United States on lower wages to handle computing tasks for banks, health care companies and other firms.
  It could also hurt start-ups and smaller firms without the cash to compete on salaries.
  Adding to the uncertainty, the Trump administration said last month that it would delay, and perhaps eliminate, an Obama-era rule allowing thousands of foreign entrepreneurs to move to the United States every year to build start-ups.
  ''People here are extremely nervous,'' said Andreas Kraemer, managing partner of MITA Ventures, a San Francisco-based venture capital firm. ''This whole area is driven by immigration.''
  The White House referred questions about whether the uncertainty surrounding temporary visas could shift jobs to other countries to the Department of Homeland Security. The department declined to comment on Tuesday.
  León David Pérez, president of Propulsar, a Mexico City-based company that develops tech start-ups and has an office in San Francisco, argued that Mr. Trump's policies could jeopardize Silicon Valley's culture of creativity.
  ''When you want to spur innovation, the best way to generate it is to employ the greatest diversity of people,'' he said. ''That's what's being threatened with Trump's policies.''
  The uncertainty in Silicon Valley -- combined with the invitations from around the world -- have already begun to lead some tech companies and entrepreneurs to rethink the gravitational pull of Silicon Valley.
  Business interest in Jalisco has soared since Mr. Trump's election, leaders in the state's tech sector contend. Mr. Trump's immigration policies, said Jaime Reyes Robles, Jalisco's secretary of innovation, science and technology, have been ''our best marketing.''
  In 2003, Manuel R. Gutiérrez Novelo, a Mexican engineer, moved to Silicon Valley to develop TDVision Systems, a company specializing in 3D technology. He went on to develop a multipronged operation based in California, with offices in Europe and Asia.
  But in recent weeks, he uprooted his businesses and moved them back to Guadalajara, his hometown. Mr. Trump's efforts to restrict immigration were a big reason, he said, calling them anathema to his company's philosophy and a potential barrier to hiring foreign workers.
  ''If I saw Donald Trump, I'd tell him he has lost my business,'' he said.
  For decades, Jalisco was mainly a center for tech manufacturing. But as its talent pool has expanded, fed by highly regarded engineering programs at local universities, it has increasingly become a place for high-tech innovation.
  Andy Kieffer, an American entrepreneur who runs Agave Lab, a venture capital firm in Guadalajara, said that when he was seeking investors in Silicon Valley several years ago, he was waved off.
  ''I couldn't get anyone to look at Mexico,'' he recalled. ''They said, 'Look, I don't know anything about Mexico. It's off my radar.'''
  But in the past several months, he said, interest among investors has shot up.
  In Canada, officials expect their new visa to give their tech industry a big boost. Not only is there no limit on the number of visas, but government employees have been hired to act as visa concierges to make it easier for companies.
  ''It's a huge advantage when you contrast it to what's happening across the border,'' said Stephen Lake, whose company, Thalmic Labs, produces devices that enable users to control computers through gestures.
  Sharoon Thomas, an Indian entrepreneur, last year began shifting his start-up from Mountain View, Calif., to Toronto, and officially made the move in May. Seven of his engineers are still working in the United States and other countries, but he plans to use Canada's new visa program to bring them north.
  ''Canada's immigration policy makes you feel more welcome than the U.S.,'' said Mr. Thomas, whose company, fulfil.io, designs software to manage inventories.
  Evan J. Green, an immigration lawyer in Toronto, said he was helping companies in banking, insurance and retail seek visas for employees.
  ''These people have options,'' he said. ''This is the best and the brightest of the world. We want these people. This is good for Canada. Let's keep the door open while they're slamming it shut south of the border.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/02/world/trump-h1b-visa-silicon-valley-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Programmers in Guadalajara, Mexico. U.S. immigration policy is heartening foreign tech rivals. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ULISES RUIZ BASURTO/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A1)
Clockwise from top: a window used to organize activities at the Guadalajara, Mexico, office of Wizeline, a San Francisco-based start-up
a work area at Wizeline's office in Guadalajara
and employees of the start-up Musical.ly in Shanghai. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RODRIGO CRUZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 GILLES SABRIE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8)       

Load-Date: August 2, 2017


End of Document
Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
The New York Times 
April 3, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1397 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: Possible changes to a program that allows technology companies to import foreign workers may be adding to an even heavier rush than usual this year.
Body


LAGUNA NIGUEL, Calif. — The delivery trucks began arriving with their precious parcels before daybreak, lining up outside a massive government edifice that rises above Orange County’s suburban sprawl.
On Monday, the starting gun went off on application season for skilled-worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which allow employers, primarily technology companies, to bring in foreign workers for three years at a time. For the last few years, the federal government has been so overwhelmed by applications that it has stopped accepting them within a week of opening day, hence the line of trucks trying to deliver applications before the doors close on the program for another year.
And this year, the rush has escalated to an all-out scramble because the future of the H-1B program is unclear.
Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized as a scheme to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. President Trump has vowed to overhaul it, and lawmakers from both parties have drafted bills to alter it.
At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors at companies that included Disney. “We won’t let this happen anymore,” he thundered in one stump speech about the practice, which he has called “outrageous” and “demeaning.”
This past weekend, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced a technical change that could make it harder for entry-level programmers to receive the visas, and on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would investigate companies that it believed had overlooked qualified American workers.
“The Justice Department will not tolerate employers’ misusing the H-1B visa process to discriminate against U.S. workers,” Thomas Wheeler, the head of the department’s civil rights division, said in a statement.
Each year, 65,000 H-1B visas are made available to workers with bachelor’s degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master’s degrees or higher.
When the gates swung open at the government processing center here on Monday, the first truck in line, a FedEx rig, carried 15,000 packages, said a courier, Andrew Langyo.
“We’re loaded, and we have more trucks coming,” said Mr. Langyo, who would return two hours later in the same truck with another haul.
Last year, the government received 236,000 applications in the first week before deciding it would accept no more. A computer randomly chooses the winners.
The average H-1B petition, a collection of forms and documents attesting to the bona fides of a job offer and the person chosen to fill it, is about two inches thick. But some files are six inches thick and weigh several pounds, according to Bill Yates, a former director of the Vermont Service Center, which also processes H-1B applications.
Mr. Yates recalled some mishaps, like the time a driver bound for the center in Vermont drove 50 miles unaware that his truck’s back door had swung open, spilling its cargo onto the road.
The visas are attractive not only to the companies that file the applications, but also to the workers themselves, who can become eligible for a green card while working on an H-1B.
Among the petitions expected to land in California’s center is that of Minh Nguyen, a software-design engineer from Vietnam who was sponsored for an H-1B by BitTitan, a cloud software company in Kirkland, Wash. It is his second attempt at a visa.
“In America, you’re in the center of new technology and cutting-edge changes in the I.T. industry,” said Mr. Nguyen, 25. “I would contribute directly to the company and to software development in the U.S.”
In 2014, the last year for which information is available, just 13 outsourcing firms accounted for a third of all granted visas. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all based in India.
The companies, which subcontract their employees to banks, retailers and other businesses in the United States to do programming, accounting and other work, often inundate the immigration service with tens of thousands of applications.
BitTitan, a growing company that hopes to hire 60 engineers in the next 12 months, is submitting six applications. “We are trying to fill specific positions around cloud and artificial intelligence,” the chief executive, Geeman Yip, said. “If we can’t fill them, our innovation suffers.”
Several bipartisan bills in the Senate and the House seek to make companies give more priority to American workers before they fill jobs with H-1B visas. They also seek to raise the minimum pay for the jobs, which depend on skill level and location: A computer systems analyst in Pittsburgh, for example, must make at least $49,000 under current regulations. The theory is that higher pay will eliminate some of the rationale for importing workers.
A draft of a presidential executive order on “protecting American jobs and workers by strengthening the integrity of foreign worker visa programs” was distributed widely in late January but never signed. Then, without warning, Citizenship and Immigration Services published a memo on its website over the weekend that could affect many applications.
Specifically, companies seeking to import computer programmers at the lowest pay levels will have to prove that the work they perform qualifies as “specialty” labor, which is what the H-1B visas were created for. “There will be greater scrutiny of the role the company wants to fill,” said Lynden Melmed, a lawyer in Washington and a former chief counsel for the immigration service.
The measure appears to be directed mainly at outsourcing firms, rather than the big technology companies, which tend to hire workers at higher skill and pay levels.
In a statement, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, the main trade group for India’s outsourcing industry, said, “The H-1B visa system exists specifically because the U.S. has a persistent shortage of high-skilled I.T. talent.”
The group said that its members followed all the program’s rules, and that the change would have little impact. “It is aimed at screening out less-qualified workers, whereas our members tend to provide well-credentialed workers to help U.S. companies fill their skills gaps and compete globally,” it said.
Even before the memo and the Justice Department’s warning, fears about the future of the H-1B program were making this year more pressure-packed than most. “Just to make sure the petitions get in, almost every client demanded that theirs arrive on the first day,” said Greg McCall, a lawyer at Perkins Coie in Seattle who prepared 150 applications.
Inside the federal building, a formidable structure that has provided backdrops for movies including “Coma” and “Outbreak,” the logistical dance unfolded over two floors. In the mailroom, about 40 people wearing blue gloves sat around tables opening packages that arrived nonstop in six-foot-high bins. In a huge warehouse, those same packages were separated according to whether the applicants had bachelor’s or master’s degrees.
All told, 1,500 workers were involved, with a second shift expected to stretch past normal business hours.
“This is the day we prepare for months and months in advance,” said Donna P. Campagnolo, the center’s deputy director.
Trucks came and went all day, with some couriers, including from FedEx, staggering their deliveries to avoid having dozens of trucks backed up at the gate.
Some smaller delivery companies received a piece of the action, too. One courier, Fernando Salas, pulled up in a red Suzuki station wagon stuffed with 10 boxes. “I have 109 envelopes,” he said. “That is all that fits in here.”
It was all surprisingly low-tech for a program used primarily for high-tech jobs. Asked why the government had not digitized the process, Ms. Campagnolo said: “There’s obviously a lot of paper. There’s no denying it.”
The biggest challenge, she said, is “trash overflow.”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Nick Wingfield from Seattle.
PHOTO: Couriers delivered visa petitions Monday to a federal processing center in Laguna Niguel, Calif. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)
Related Articles
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
    • Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document
Readers Respond: On 'Workers Betrayed by Visa Loopholes'
The New York Times Blogs 
(Taking Note)
June 16, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 702 words
Byline: MARIE TESSIER
Highlight: Workers, entrepreneurs, and others illustrated the complexity of the immigration reform debate with their responses to an editorial. 
Body


American workers, entrepreneurs, immigrants and a few readers supporting big employers illustrated the complexity of the immigration reform debate with their responses to an editorial about abuses in a high-tech visa program.
"Immigration policy should not undermine Americans' jobs, wages or working conditions," the editorial board wrote. "The problem is that what some companies want - cheap, exploitable, disposable labor - is exactly what the system can be twisted into giving them."
The editorial addressed two recent major instances, at Walt Disney World in Orlando and at Southern California Edison, in which companies laid off hundreds of technology workers and replaced them with lower-paid foreign workers via outsourcing firms in India. These workers entered the country under the H-1B visa program that was meant to allow companies to recruit abroad for jobs they were not able to fill with American workers.
"Americans have known about H-1B visa abuses for years," wrote Jeffrey in Massachusetts, who said he had lost his own job. "The administration and Congress both have been aware of the problems, but the issue has been buried under the mounds of money coming from the tech industry."
Many readers argued that the United States has plenty of highly educated workers.
"I know too many underemployed U.S. students in STEM fields and laid off older workers in computer science and engineering to believe that we don't have good workers here," Nancy Darling in Oberlin, Ohio, wrote.
Large companies like Disney and Southern California Edison should respect the market forces that place a premium on high-tech wage rates, some readers said.
"That we need to import foreign workers to fill a skills shortage is absurd because it defies the basic underpinnings of American capitalism," John Coffey in Georgia wrote. "Send the H-1B workers home and you will see a flood of highly qualified, home-grown Americans going back to work."
Several high-technology visa holders wrote to say the immigration system ill serves both the United States economy and highly skilled would-be immigrants.
"I am an Indian and spent close to 10 years spinning through the H-1B and immigration circus," V in Philadelphia wrote. "The fact is that when I left India to pursue a master's degree, I had full intentions to pursue a long career in the U.S.
"We need to a solution that separates candidates who want to immigrate and will add value to the country from candidates who are intended to be used for temporary staff."
A bipartisan effort in Congress would tighten eligibility rules, give workers more access to job openings, require better pay and give federal investigators more power to investigate abuses, the editorial board wrote.
A number of readers endorsed reforms that would bring the program back in line with its creators' intentions.
"As an educator and an entrepreneur, I may be in the minority defending H-1B, but that visa proved crucial in starting two tech companies, which hired more U.S. Citizens than H-1B visa holders, but needed both to survive," J. Carbonell in Pittsburgh wrote. "The right policy is to reform, not to reduce or eliminate."
Some readers said American technology workers should face facts about global wages.
"American programmers routinely demand compensation which exceeds five digits. Foreign specialists are more realistic, more flexible, and typically work harder," Vizitei Yuri in Columbia, Mo., wrote. "In a world of global, integrated commerce, artificial barriers to the tendency for economic disparities to equalize will simply not work."
Some said solutions need to address such a global market.
"A casual look at all the 'business process outsourcing' jobs posted around the world shows that a very large number of these jobs are being off-shored," Ben P. in Austin, Texas, wrote. "To blame the H-1B program for these job losses entirely misses the broader picture."
And in a theme that is familiar across comments on the United States economy, many readers remarked on the intersection between power and money in Washington, D.C.
"Our H-1B program is allowing Congress to disempower educated, hard-working Americans," Springtime in Boston wrote. "This is not a democracy, it's an auction."

Load-Date: June 16, 2015


End of Document
America’s Competitors Angle for Silicon Valley’s Business
The New York Times 
August 2, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD
Length: 1950 words
Byline: KIRK SEMPLE and IAN AUSTEN
Highlight: As the Trump administration tightens immigration, governments around the world are stepping up their efforts to lure talent and capital away from the United States.
Body


GUADALAJARA, Mexico — With his frequent refrains about Mexicans and the need for a wall to contain them, it’s no surprise that President Trump has made few friends in Mexico.
Yet here in the capital of Jalisco State, sometimes referred to as Mexico’s Silicon Valley, people are practically celebrating him.
“He’s helping us a lot!” Gov. Aristóteles Sandoval exclaimed. “He’s put us on the world’s agenda.”
As part of Mr. Trump’s efforts to push an America-first philosophy, he has            vowed           to restrict the availability of special visas that are widely used by technology companies to hire talent from around the world.
Mr. Trump’s plans, combined with an American political climate that has left many immigrants feeling less welcome, has cast a pall of uncertainty over the American tech industry, which relies heavily on highly skilled workers from abroad.
But while entrepreneurs and executives in the United States are fretting, other countries — including Mexico, Canada and China — are salivating over the Trump administration’s rumblings.
Silicon Valley’s loss, they say, could be their gain.
In recent months, foreign governments and tech industry leaders have sought to capitalize on the uncertainty in Silicon Valley. They are stepping up their efforts to attract engineers and entrepreneurs who might rely on the special American visa program, known as H-1B, to work or to run businesses in the United States.
“It’s an exciting time,” said Brad Duguid, the minister of economic development in Ontario, where the capital, Toronto, is one of Canada’s biggest tech hubs. “And while it’s unfortunate that the U.S. is looking more internally, far be it from us not to take advantage of that.”
In June, Canada set up a new visa program that makes it easier for companies to recruit highly skilled foreign workers. Under the program, which was in development before Mr. Trump’s election victory, the Canadian government has promised to approve two-year visas in less than two weeks — blindingly fast, compared with the process in the United States.
And unlike the H-1B visa in the United States, there is no limit to the number of Canadian visas available.
Beyond that, Ontario is in the early stages of preparing a social media campaign for technology executives around the world to sell the province as a place for investment.
“Canada is seizing its moment,” said Navdeep Singh Bains, the country’s federal minister of innovation, science and economic development. “We’re open to trade and people.”
In Mexico, states with growing regional tech hubs, like Jalisco, have been redoubling their efforts to attract talent and investment in recent months, peddling a philosophy of openness that departs from what Mr. Sandoval called Mr. Trump’s “xenophobia” and “lack of global vision.”
The efforts have included visits by Jalisco officials to the San Francisco Bay Area and to Europe. The San Francisco Chronicle published an op-ed piece by Mr. Sandoval pitching the advantages of doing business in his state.
The officials herald Mexico’s proximity to Silicon Valley, its alignment with time zones in the United States and its lower cost of living. They are also sweetening the invitation with enticements like tax incentives and promises of full government cooperation.
“We want you,” says a new promotional website, Come2Jalisco.com. “Innovation has no borders.”
Even Mexico’s ambassador to India has echoed the pitch.
“We will be more than happy to have Indians relocate to Mexico,” the ambassador, Melba Pría, told The Indian Express newspaper earlier this year, emphasizing the “visa ease” that foreign talent will experience in Mexico.
China’s tech leaders have also been seizing on the opportunity created by Mr. Trump’s immigration policies.
Wang Huiyao, founder and president of the Center for China and Globalization, a research group in Beijing, said Mr. Trump’s “America First” doctrine was a boon for China’s efforts to attract foreign tech talent and persuade Chinese engineers now working abroad to return home.
“China is shifting from attracting foreign capital to foreign talent,” Mr. Wang said. “The U.S. is losing out.”
Among the Chinese voices leading the push is that of Robin Li, the chief of Baidu, China’s largest search engine.
“Many entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley have expressed their concern that this will hurt America’s field of innovation,” Mr. Li said recently at China’s World Internet Conference. “I really hope that talent from all over the world comes to China.”
President Emmanuel Macron of France has sought to throw open a slightly different door. When Mr. Trump announced that he was pulling the United States out of the Paris climate accord, Mr. Macron extended an unusual offer to Americans: “To all scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs, responsible citizens who were disappointed by the decision of the president of the United States, I want to say that they will find in France a second home.”
These messages of welcome stand in contrast to the Trump administration’s tough approach to immigration.
In an executive order this spring, Mr. Trump directed federal agencies to review immigration laws with an eye toward ending what he called “the theft of American prosperity.”
The president has taken particular aim at the            H-1B visa program, under which the government admits 85,000 highly skilled foreign workers every year, most of them in the tech field.
Mr. Trump says businesses use the program to avoid hiring higher-paid Americans, and his executive order instructed the agencies to ensure that visas were awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers.
Disney, Toys “R” Us, Southern California Edison and New York Life are among the companies that have laid off American tech workers who first were asked to train their replacements — tech workers from low-wage countries like India brought in on temporary visas. In some cases,            the jobs themselves went back home with the new workers.
Canada revised its temporary visa program partly because the Royal Bank of Canada, the country’s largest financial institution, shuffled jobs overseasusing that technique.
Mr. Trump’s executive order made no immediate changes, but it has sowed concern throughout the industry. Competition for H-1B visas was already intense. The government            received 199,000 applications in the first five days of its lottery this year, then stopped accepting them. Many companies fear that Mr. Trump’s efforts might put highly skilled immigrant workers even further out of their reach.
A change could favor the biggest American tech companies, which tend to pay the highest wages. But it could hurt some of the biggest users of the H-1B program — the outsourcing companies, including several from India — that bring thousands of workers to the United States on lower wages to handle computing tasks for banks, health care companies and other firms.
It could also hurt start-ups and smaller firms without the cash to compete on salaries.
Adding to the uncertainty, the Trump           administration           said last month that it would delay, and perhaps eliminate, an Obama-era rule allowing thousands of foreign entrepreneurs to move to the United States every year to build start-ups.
“People here are extremely nervous,” said Andreas Kraemer, managing partner of MITA Ventures, a San Francisco-based venture capital firm. “This whole area is driven by immigration.”
The White House referred questions about whether the uncertainty surrounding temporary visas could shift jobs to other countries to the Department of Homeland Security. The department declined to comment on Tuesday.
León David Pérez, president of Propulsar, a Mexico City-based company that develops tech start-ups and has an office in San Francisco, argued that Mr. Trump’s policies could jeopardize Silicon Valley’s culture of creativity.
“When you want to spur innovation, the best way to generate it is to employ the greatest diversity of people,” he said. “That’s what’s being threatened with Trump’s policies.”
The uncertainty in Silicon Valley — combined with the invitations from around the world — have already begun to lead some tech companies and entrepreneurs to rethink the gravitational pull of Silicon Valley.
Business interest in Jalisco has soared since Mr. Trump’s election, leaders in the state’s tech sector contend. Mr. Trump’s immigration policies, said Jaime Reyes Robles, Jalisco’s secretary of innovation, science and technology, have been “our best marketing.”
In 2003, Manuel R. Gutiérrez Novelo, a Mexican engineer, moved to Silicon Valley to develop TDVision Systems, a company specializing in 3D technology. He went on to develop a multipronged operation based in California, with offices in Europe and Asia.
But in recent weeks, he uprooted his businesses and moved them back to Guadalajara, his hometown. Mr. Trump’s efforts to restrict immigration were a big reason, he said, calling them anathema to his company’s philosophy and a potential barrier to hiring foreign workers.
“If I saw Donald Trump, I’d tell him he has lost my business,” he said.
For decades, Jalisco was mainly a center for tech manufacturing. But as its talent pool has expanded, fed by highly regarded engineering programs at local universities, it has increasingly become a place for high-tech innovation.
Andy Kieffer, an American entrepreneur who runs Agave Lab, a venture capital firm in Guadalajara, said that when he was seeking investors in Silicon Valley several years ago, he was waved off.
“I couldn’t get anyone to look at Mexico,” he recalled. “They said, ‘Look, I don’t know anything about Mexico. It’s off my radar.’”
But in the past several months, he said, interest among investors has shot up.
In Canada, officials expect their new visa to give their tech industry a big boost. Not only is there no limit on the number of visas, but government employees have been hired to act as visa concierges to make it easier for companies.
“It’s a huge advantage when you contrast it to what’s happening across the border,” said Stephen Lake, whose company, Thalmic Labs, produces devices that enable users to control computers through gestures.
Sharoon Thomas, an Indian entrepreneur, last year began shifting his start-up from Mountain View, Calif., to Toronto, and officially made the move in May. Seven of his engineers are still working in the United States and other countries, but he plans to use Canada’s new visa program to bring them north.
“Canada’s immigration policy makes you feel more welcome than the U.S.,” said Mr. Thomas, whose company, fulfil.io, designs software to manage inventories.
Evan J. Green, an immigration lawyer in Toronto, said he was helping companies in banking, insurance and retail seek visas for employees.
“These people have options,” he said. “This is the best and the brightest of the world. We want these people. This is good for Canada. Let’s keep the door open while they’re slamming it shut south of the border.”
Kirk Semple reported from Guadalajara, and Ian Austen from Ottawa. Javier Hernández contributed reporting from Beijing, and Yang Xiong contributed research from Beijing.
PHOTOS: Programmers in Guadalajara, Mexico. U.S. immigration policy is heartening foreign tech rivals. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ULISES RUIZ BASURTO/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A1); Clockwise from top: a window used to organize activities at the Guadalajara, Mexico, office of Wizeline, a San Francisco-based start-up; a work area at Wizeline’s office in Guadalajara; and employees of the start-up Musical.ly in Shanghai. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RODRIGO CRUZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; GILLES SABRIE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8)
Related Articles
    • A Trump Dividend for Canada? Maybe in Its A.I. Industry
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.

Load-Date: August 3, 2017


End of Document
Trump to Strip India of Special Tariff Status, Escalating Tensions
The New York Times
March 6, 2019 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 878 words
Byline: By ALAN RAPPEPORT; Vindu Goel contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Trump has decided to strip India of a special status that exempts billions of dollars worth of Indian exports from American tariffs, raising new trade tensions with the world's second most populous country.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative said on Monday night that  India and Turkey would no longer be eligible for preferential market access to the United States. While the decision to terminate Turkey's status stemmed from that country's economic development, the move against India was retaliatory. It came after a year of failed efforts by the Trump administration to compel India to lower its trade barriers, including the tariffs it charges on American goods. 
  Mr. Trump's decision to confront India over its trade practices ratchets up trade tensions at a moment when the administration has been trying to ease frictions with China, which have rattled global financial markets and unsettled businesses.
  But India's high tariff rates have been a major source of frustration for Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly assailed India for charging steep tariffs on American motorcycles. The president routinely criticizes India's ''unfair'' trade practices and highlighted the disparity between how the United States and India treat imports in sharply worded remarks during last weekend's Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington.
  ''India is a very, very high-tariff nation, and they charge tremendous, tremendous numbers,'' Mr. Trump said, adding that he wanted to impose a ''reciprocal tax'' on India.
  Mr. Trump frequently cites Harley-Davidson when complaining about India's trade practices, criticizing the country for charging 50 percent duties on Harleys and other motorcycles. While Harley-Davidson does sell motorcycles in India, it has moved much of that production abroad to avoid tariffs and has opened a factory outside New Delhi. Most of the 3,000 Harleys sold in India last year avoided the tariffs.
  Beyond motorcycles, India has angered American medical device makers with price caps on items such as cardiac stents and knee implants. New policies restricting Visa, Mastercard and American Express also kicked in last year, and Walmart and Amazon have been upset about the new e-commerce policies recently imposed in India.
  The United States and India engaged in $126.2 billion worth of trade in 2017, according to United States trade representative, with the United States running a goods and services deficit of $27.3 billion. About $5 billion of Indian exports to the United States were eligible for reduced tariffs under the Generalized System of Preferences program, or G.S.P. According to India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the program has allowed for $190 million per year in duty reduction.
  ''It's survivable, but painful nonetheless,'' said Richard Rossow, an expert in United States-India relations at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
  Mr. Rossow noted that the tariffs could be enough to encourage American importers to buy some products from Mexico or Vietnam instead of India. The program covered imports of items such as automobile parts, agricultural products, jewelry and handicrafts.
  For its part, India has been upset by the steel and aluminum tariffs that the United States imposed last year as well as restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers and spouses of H-1B visa holders.
  The Trump administration initiated a review of India's preferential trade status in 2018, and in recent months there have been increasing signs that negotiations were going poorly. Last year, Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, was expected to travel to India but ended up not going. In February Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, backed out of a planned trip and blamed bad weather.
  Mr. Lighthizer's office said this week that, despite ''intensive engagement,'' India had failed to take the necessary steps to keep its tariff exemptions. The United States has been particularly concerned about market access for dairy and medical devices.
  ''India has implemented a wide array of trade barriers that create serious negative effects on United States commerce,'' the agency said in a statement.
  India pushed back against such accusations on Tuesday, arguing that it was willing to work with the United States but that some of the demands were unreasonable.
  ''India was able to offer a very meaningful way forward on almost all the U.S. requests,'' the Ministry of Commerce and Industry said in a statement. ''In a few instances, specific U.S. requests were not found reasonable and doable at this time by the departments concerned, in light of public welfare concerns reflective of India's developing country status and its national interest.''
  The change to India's trade status will take place in 60 days. Lawmakers and business groups expressed hope on Tuesday that a deal could still be worked out.
  ''The Indian government hasn't engaged enough to address market access issues,'' said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. ''For the sake of the many Americans and Indians who relied on G.S.P. benefits, I hope that India will work to quickly address these legitimate concerns.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/05/us/politics/trump-us-india-tariffs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Harley-Davidson motorcycles at a mall in Mumbai, India. President Trump has criticized India for charging 50 percent duties on Harleys and other motorcycles made in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: March 6, 2019


End of Document
U.S. Immigration Option Could Aid Entrepreneurs
The New York Times
August 27, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 750 words
Byline: By STACY COWLEY
Body


Foreign entrepreneurs building new companies in the United States could soon gain a new immigration option that would grant them temporary entry for up to five years, under a rule proposed on Friday by the Department of Homeland Security.
The proposal, which does not require congressional approval, would allow immigration officials to admit entrepreneurs case by case. To qualify, an applicant must have an ''active and central role,'' and a significant ownership stake, in an American company founded in the last three years. 
  The move is one of many piecemeal efforts by the Obama administration to expand America's immigration policies without action from Congress. Entrepreneurs in any industry would be eligible to apply, but the new rule would be especially significant for the technology field. Creating an immigration route for start-up founders has been one of Silicon Valley's political priorities.
  ''This is a big step in the right direction,'' said Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant and the chief executive of Stripe, a payment processing company based in San Francisco. ''I think it will have major impact on U.S. entrepreneurship, and potentially on the broader economy.''
  More than half of American tech start-ups valued at $1 billion or more had at least one immigrant founder, according to a recent study by the National Foundation for American Policy, a research group that focuses on immigration issues.
  Mr. Collison and his brother John started Stripe five years ago while attending colleges in Massachusetts. Dealing with the brothers' visa issues was one of the biggest challenges Stripe had to overcome in its early days, Mr. Collison said. The company now has more than 500 employees, and Mr. Collison is part of a group of Silicon Valley executives and investors pressing for immigration reform.
  President Obama made it a signature policy issue, speaking frequently about the need for a path that would allow skilled entrepreneurs to build new companies and create jobs, but efforts to create a ''start-up visa'' for foreign entrepreneurs have repeatedly died in Congress.
  In 2014, Mr. Obama changed tactics, using an executive action to order federal officials to draft a plan for granting some entrepreneurs temporary immigration status.
  The proposal put forth on Friday circumvents visas by relying on a federal law that lets the secretary of homeland security temporarily admit people whose entry into the United States would create ''significant public benefit.'' Around 3,000 entrepreneurs a year may qualify, according to an estimate from the Department of Homeland Security.
  Sophie Alcorn, an immigration lawyer in Mountain View, Calif., said the new rule, if adopted, could significantly ease the challenges faced by fledgling entrepreneurs, especially those who came to the United States to attend college and began working on a new venture.
  ''I get calls every day from desperate start-up founders who are brilliant and accomplished, but they get into this chicken-and-egg problem,'' she said. ''Investors won't give them money unless they can be confident that people can get into the country, or remain here.''
  Immigration has become a major flash point in this year's presidential race, with the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, calling for stricter limits on entry and his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, proposing automatic green cards for foreign students who earn advanced degrees in technical fields from American universities.
  Deepak Kamra, a venture capitalist, testified before Congress three years ago in favor of a visa for entrepreneurs. The idea had broad bipartisan backing, he said, but kept falling apart over the issue's politics.
  ''Establishment Republicans and Democrats all support this, but they all then back up and say, 'It should be part of comprehensive immigration reform,' which is code for, 'It's not going anywhere,''' Mr. Kamra said.
  The main immigration pathway for foreign workers with specialized skills, the H-1B visa program, has been plagued by controversy and abuses, and labor groups generally oppose efforts to expand it. But past proposals to create pathways for entrepreneurs have drawn fairly little criticism, in part because the suggested programs are typically small and targeted.
  The Department of Homeland Security's 155-page proposal will be open for public comment for 45 days. After that, the department can move forward with a final rule, which could take effect as soon as next year.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/27/business/entrepreneur-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: When Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant, co-founded Stripe, visa issues were a significant hurdle. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAU BARRENA/BLOOMBERG)       

Load-Date: August 27, 2016


End of Document
Business Leaders View Immigration Policy as Threat to Economy
The New York Times
August 24, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 965 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Body


Dozens of American business leaders are challenging the Trump administration over changes to immigration policy that they say threaten the livelihoods of thousands of their skilled foreign workers, and the nation's economic growth and competitiveness as well.
The executives, members of the Business Roundtable, expressed their ''serious concern'' over the administration's immigration moves in a jointly signed letter delivered late Wednesday to Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security. 
  Some of the most prominent chief executives in the United States signed the letter, including Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Ginni Rometty of IBM, Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase, Laurence Fink of BlackRock, Marc Benioff of Salesforce and Indra Nooyi, the departing head of PepsiCo.
  The letter comes during a week when the broader debate over the country's immigration policies has been reignited by the arrest of a Mexican laborer in the killing of an Iowa woman. It also underscores the continuing tension between America's globally minded corporate establishment and the Trump administration's ''America First'' agenda.
  Business leaders have praised President Trump's tax cuts and rolling back of many regulations. But they have deplored some of his statements and some of his administration's actions, including on immigration.
  In one of the most notable examples of the strain, several White House business advisory councils dissolved last year after Mr. Trump blamed ''many sides'' for white supremacist violence in Charlottesville, Va.
  In June, a group of top executives condemned the administration for the forced separation of migrant children from their parents at the Mexican border. The Business Roundtable described the separations as ''cruel and contrary to American values.''
  With their letter on Wednesday, the group's members took issue with a series of immigration enforcement guidelines that they said were ''arbitrary and inconsistent'' and created new and unnecessary hurdles for skilled foreigners working in the United States.
  The changes, the letter stated, were ''causing considerable anxiety for many thousands of our employees while threatening to disrupt company operations.''
  The business group's complaint focused on new guidelines and practices by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security that vets visa applications and administers immigration policy.
  The letter's main focus was the treatment of applications for, and renewals of, H-1B visas for skilled foreign workers. The visas are used by companies to hire computer engineers and other professionals.
  As a result of the changes, there has been a sharp increase in the number of denials and requests for more information. A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan policy research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had increased 41 percent in the government's fourth fiscal quarter of 2017, compared with the third quarter.
  Government examiners' requests for additional information on H-1B visa applications tripled in the same period. The government's fiscal fourth quarter began in July 2017, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order.
  The policy foundation's analysis, published last month, was meant to examine the ''Trump effect'' on immigration for skilled foreign workers, said Stuart Anderson, executive director of the foundation and a former immigration official.
  The Trump administration, experts said, was using the government's regulatory apparatus, which it has so often scorned, to serve its policy goal of clamping down on the flow of foreign workers into America.
  ''Step up investigations, slow things down, and you can accomplish your policy goals without legislation,'' said Hal Salzman, a professor of public policy at Rutgers University.
  In response to the business leaders' letter, the immigration service said a statement on Thursday that the administration had been ''relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move towards a merit-based system.'' It added that it handles all applications and petitions ''fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.''
  The H-1B program was created to provide a pathway for talented foreigners whose special skills were expected to strengthen the American economy. Today, the nation's technology hubs are filled with H-1B alumni who have become entrepreneurs, executives, venture capitalists and, quite often, United States citizens.
  In recent years, however, the visa program has been criticized because corporations, especially Indian technology outsourcing companies, have exploited legal loopholes in the H-1B regime to replace American workers and shift jobs out of the United States. The immigration service has said its increased scrutiny and enforcement actions were intended to strengthen ''protections to combat H-1B abuses.''
  But to the business leaders, the policies are vague and capricious, creating uncertainty for their workers and in company operations. For example, the group's letter stated, ''companies now do not know whether a work visa petition that was approved last month will be approved when the company submits the identical application to extend the employee's status.''
  A particular concern, the business leaders said, was that the immigration service was expected to revoke work eligibility for spouses of H-1B visa holders. The spouses, they said, are often highly skilled workers who have built careers in America.
  ''Revoking their U.S. work authorization,'' the letter said, ''will likely cause high-skilled immigrants to take their skills to competitors outside the United States.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/23/business/trump-immigration-business-leaders-economy.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The offices of BuildZoom in San Francisco. Denials of visas for skilled workers have risen sharply under the Trump administration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: August 24, 2018


End of Document
Federal Judge Says Disney Didn't Violate Visa Laws in Layoffs
The New York Times
October 14, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 522 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


A federal judge in Florida dealt a blow on Thursday to legal claims by American technology workers who were laid off by the Walt Disney Company and forced to train foreign replacements, dismissing lawsuits by two workers who said Disney had conspired with outsourcing companies to violate visa laws.
In a terse decision, Judge Gregory A. Presnell of the United States District Court in Orlando rejected the former workers' arguments that Disney and the two contractors had colluded to make false statements when they applied for temporary visas, known as H-1B, for the foreign replacements. 
  The judge found that ''none of the allegedly false statements put at issue in the complaint are adequate'' to sustain the former workers' case. The outsourcing companies that were sued with Disney were Cognizant Technology Solutions and HCL America.
  The plaintiffs, Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, were laid off early in 2015 from jobs with Disney in Orlando. In their final weeks on the job, they were required to show foreigners on H-1B visas, brought in by the outsourcing contractors mainly from India, how to do their work.
  A spokeswoman for Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, Jacquee Wahler, said, ''As we have said all along, this lawsuit was completely baseless, and we are gratified by the decision.''
  The former workers' cases hinged on their argument that the companies had violated clauses of the visa law requiring employers to show that hiring H-1B workers ''will not adversely affect the working conditions'' of other workers in similar jobs. The law also requires large outsourcing companies that employ many H-1B workers to certify in some circumstances that those workers ''will not displace any similarly employed U.S. worker'' within six months of applying for the visa.
  The outsourcing companies argued that the law would apply to them only if the American workers who were displaced by visa holders they hired had originally been their employees, not Disney's. Judge Presnell was persuaded by that argument, although he did not entirely reject the idea that the Americans were ''adversely affected'' by being fired.
  The decision was a broad victory for Disney and its contractors, but Judge Presnell left the former workers a small window to amend their lawsuits and to try again.
  Mr. Perrero said the decision was a dismaying surprise. ''This has become an effective business model in the IT industry where two companies can come together and wipe out American jobs without much fear of legal action,'' he said. ''I just hope that greed isn't taking our country in the wrong direction.''
  Sara Blackwell, the lawyer who represented the Disney workers, said, ''I wanted to see if there was any legal avenue we could use to protect our American citizens, but it seems we can't.''
  Congress considered bills this year to amend provisions in the H-1B visa laws that tech workers say have led to thousands of layoffs, but no action was taken.
  The Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, said early in his campaign that he would seek to change the law to prevent layoffs. But he has not addressed the issue recently.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/us/judge-says-disney-didnt-violate-visa-laws-in-layoffs.html

Load-Date: October 14, 2016


End of Document
Florida, Bernie Sanders, Aung San Suu Kyi: Your Wednesday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
September 13, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1022 words
Byline: KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. They survived Irma, but perished in sweltering temperatures days later.
Three people were discovered dead at a nursing home in Hollywood, Fla., whose air-conditioning had been knocked out. That number grew to eight after other residents were evacuated to hospitals.
“It felt like 110 degrees,” said the daughter of a 96-year-old resident.
The police and state authorities are conducting a criminal investigation, and fanning out to check other nursing homes. Roughly 160 nursing homes in Florida — a state where one in five residents is over 65 — remain without commercial power amid high temperatures.
_____
2. On Capitol Hill, liberals and conservatives are planning to set forth two radically different proposals for health care: a huge expansion of Medicare, and a rollback of the Affordable Care Act.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, above, proposed what he called “a Medicare-for-all, single-payer health care system,” and said 15 Democratic senators supported it.
The White House and Republican leaders of Congress said they will release the framework of their plan to overhaul the tax code the week of Sept. 25.
And President Trump got an earful about his Charlottesville response from Tim Scott, the Senate’s only black Republican. The White House misidentified him as Tom Scott in a handout.
_____
3. The Trump administration is considering reducing the number of refugees admitted to the U.S. over the next year, to below 50,000. That would be the lowest number since at least 1980. Above, Syrian families at a U.N. refugee office in Beirut.
The Supreme Court will hear challenges to the administration’s barring of refugees next month, but in the meantime, is allowing the administration to bar many refugees.
Separately, when undocumented immigrants finish their sentences, local sheriffs face a problem: Should they keep them locked up pending deportation or honor federal court decisions that the practice is unconstitutional?
_____
4. In other immigration news: The widow of the Indian engineer killed by a gunman in a Kansas bar in February lost her visa.
Sunayana Dumala’s husband, one of two Indian men shot that day, was here on an H-1B visa, and upon his death, her residency status was terminated. She was scared she wouldn’t be able to come back to the U.S. after his funeral in India. Above, the couple in a family photo.
Her congressman, Kevin Yoder, is helping her get her own visa — and argues that the law should be changed to protect spouses of hate crime victims.
_____
5. “It was a frat house.” Our tech reporters went inside the events that led to the exit of the C.E.O., Mike Cagney, from SoFi, a prominent San Francisco start-up.
“You would find people having sex in their cars and in the parking lot,” said one former employee at the online lending start-up. “It was a free-for-all.”’
_____
6. Fires are now raging across the West, from Southern California to Glacier National Park, with experts predicting that 2017 will go down as one of the worst wildfire seasons in decades.
A crew of scientists at Yellowstone National Park has been studying how forests regrow after fires, and their findings will guide forest management and firefighting policy in the years to come. Global warming is expected to contribute to more frequent fires. Above, two forests whose paths diverged after a succession of wildfires.
_____
7. Russia and Belarus are about to attack Veishnoriya. Luckily, that’s a fictional state.
It’s the focus of a six-day joint military exercise that is expected to be the biggest display of Russian military power since the end of the Cold War. NATO is wary.
Today on our podcast “The Daily,” we talk to our reporter Jim Rutenberg about a parallel effort — the information war that the Kremlin is waging against the West. Read his full story            in this week’s Times Magazine.
And U.S. agencies are dropping antivirus software made by a Russian technology company, Kaspersky Lab, whose executives are suspected of having ties to Russian intelligence.
_____
8. Myanmar’s national leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, will not attend the coming U.N. General Assembly because of the crisis that has forced about 400,000 Rohingya Muslims to flee to Bangladesh in just weeks.
International leaders and rights groups have denounced Myanmar for ethnic cleansing — some have called it genocide — and castigated her inaction. Here are the basics on the roots and history of the strife.
_____
9. We talked to Angelina Jolie about her latest movie, “First They Killed My Father,” based on the true story of Loung Ung, who as a young girl survived the Cambodian genocide.
While Ms. Jolie’s earlier work as a director has garnered tepid reviews, several critics have anointed “First They Killed My Father” her best yet. It’ll be on Netflix as of Friday, when it will also open in a small number of theaters.
In an interview at her $25 million estate in Los Angeles, Ms. Jolie said that making the film affected her view of her family — and intimated that it might have informed her decision to leave Brad Pitt.
_____
10. Finally, after Senator Ted Cruz’s Twitter account liked a pornographic video, you knew he would be prime fodder for the late-night comics.            From James Corden: “When asked to comment on this story, Ted Cruz said, ‘Don’t come in here!’”
On TV tonight, Abbi Jacobson and Ilana Glazer are back for Season 4 of “Broad City,” starring as feminist slackers (above and at 10:30 p.m. on Comedy Central). And Samantha Bee is back with new episodes of “Full Frontal” (10:30 p.m. on TBS).
And a word to the wise: Do not read our story on the fatberg menacing London’s sewer system over dinner.
Have a great night.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or            Google Play.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.

Load-Date: September 14, 2017


End of Document
Visa Program Up for Renewal Amid Allegations of Fraud
The New York Times 
September 11, 2016 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1216 words
Byline: RON NIXON
Highlight: The merits of the EB-5 program, which allows foreign investors to gain citizenship by putting money into economic development projects, are being debated again.
Body


Correction Appended
WASHINGTON — A contentious visa program that allows wealthy foreigners to obtain a green card by investing in economic development projects will expire at the end of this month unless Congress acts to extend it.
The program, called EB-5, allows foreign investors to gain a quicker path to citizenship by investing from $500,000 to more than $1 million to finance a business that eventually employs, directly or indirectly, at least 10 American workers in economically depressed areas.
Developers and supporters in Congress say the program, run by the Department of Homeland Security, has brought billions of dollars to areas that would otherwise not have access to capital.
But the program has been marred by fraud and used to build large projects in wealthier areas like Manhattan and the Las Vegas Strip instead of high-unemployment or rural areas. Federal investigators have also discovered that attempts to infiltrate the program were made by people with possible ties to Chinese and Iranian intelligence, and that international fugitives who laundered money in their home countries gained citizenship through the program.
More recently, federal prosecutors in April charged two Vermont developers, Ariel Quiros and William Stenger, with defrauding investors from at least 74 countries. Federal and state officials said the two raised $350 million through the EB-5 program for an array of projects including a ski resort.
According to a 52-count civil complaint filed by the federal            Securities and Exchange Commission and a            15-count complaint by Vermont, the developers engaged in a “massive eight-year fraudulent scheme” in which they “systematically looted” millions of dollars from the foreign investors. Mr. Quiros was accused of using $50 million for personal expenses including a luxury condominium at Trump Place in New York.
Mr. Stenger announced in a statement this month that he had reached a settlement with the federal government. The case against Mr. Quiros is pending.
Critics of the EB-5 program, like Senators Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, see reauthorization of the program as an opportunity to fix problems with how the money is used, increase oversight and address national security issues. They sent a letter on Thursday to Senate leaders opposing reauthorization of the program without a significant overhaul.
“The program has become plagued by fraud and abuse and, if not reformed, it should be allowed to expire on September 30th,” they wrote.
Proponents, including the United States           Conference of Mayors, have urged Congress to leave the program intact, although they say they support some of the changes lawmakers are expected to consider.
“There is a need for more oversight and transparency,” said Ronald R. Fieldstone, a Miami lawyer who has been involved in using EB-5 funding for development projects. “If there is no independence in the administering and the distribution of the funds, it exposes the program to instances of fraud.”
But Mr. Grassley and Mr. Leahy say other changes are needed.
The program, which was created in 1990, has expanded well beyond its original intent, they say. EB-5 requires an investment in either a rural area or a “targeted employment area,” which is defined as an urban area with an unemployment rate of at least 150 percent of the national average.
But Mr. Grassley and Mr. Leahy said developers had broadly defined these areas by adding a few low-income communities to wealthier neighborhoods so they could use EB-5 funding to build luxury condos, convention centers and hotels, amounting to what the senators said was economic gerrymandering.
Angelique Brunner, owner of a Washington-based center that raises capital through the EB-5 program, said many of the examples that critics point to as EB-5 investments in upscale areas failed to note that the program helped transform places that were previously economically depressed.
“One of the challenges of EB-5 investment is that people look at what an area looks like after the investment,” she said. “It’s hard to convince them what it looked like before.”
The EB-5 program has grown rapidly. About 10,000 visas are awarded annually, primarily to wealthy Chinese citizens, who make up about 80 percent of the investors and see the program as an easier way to gain United States citizenship for themselves and their families.
Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the EB-5 program has sent a terrible message to millions of immigrants waiting their turn to enter the United States through normal channels. A number of other members of Congress echo her concerns, in large part because while most visa applicants must meet education or work requirements, the primary requirement for the EB-5 program is a “lawful source of investment income,” as a Homeland Security memo put it.
Many lawmakers say there are also national security concerns. A Government Accountability Office report released last year found that the agency could not be sure that money used for the visas was not coming from “the drug trade, human trafficking or other criminal activities.”
Officials at Homeland Security Investigations, a division of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said they were concerned that those who prepare overseas documents “may try to use increasingly sophisticated methods to circumvent” the program. In a 2013 memo, the agency suggested that the EB-5 regional center program end because “there are no safeguards that can be put in place that will ensure the integrity” of the regional center model.
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency that oversees the EB-5 program, said it was taking additional steps to increase the vetting of applicants for the program and its oversight of the regional centers The S.E.C. said it would increase oversight as well.
Lawmakers have not said when they would take up the EB-5 reauthorization. Last year, the program was extended as part of the omnibus spending bill.
Correction: September 14, 2016, Wednesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Monday about the EB-5 visa program referred incorrectly to one aspect of the process. The program allows foreign investors to gain permanent residency when they invest between $500,000 and $1 million in a business that creates 10 jobs directly or indirectly. They do not gain citizenship by doing so. (They can apply for full citizenship after five years.) The article also referred incorrectly to Angelique Brunner, a spokeswoman for the EB-5 Investment Coalition, which is made up of investors and developers. Ms. Brunner is the owner of a Washington-based center that raises capital through the EB-5 program; she is not a developer.
PHOTOS: Redevelopment is stalled in Newport, Vt., above, after a fraud case involving the use of foreign investors’ money. Senators Charles E. Grassley, far left, and Patrick J. Leahy see a program’s reauthorization as a chance to fix problems. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JACOB HANNAH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; GABRIELLA DEMCZUK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Visa Abuses Harm American Workers
    • Program That Lets Foreigners Write a Check, and Get a Visa, Draws Scrutiny
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
Killing in Kansas Bar Put Victim’s Widow at Risk of Deportation
The New York Times 
September 13, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 689 words
Byline: JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
Highlight: When Sunayana Dumala’s husband was killed in a suspected hate crime in February, she lost her legal right to remain in the United States.
Body


In February, Sunayana Dumala lost her husband to a man who shouted “Get out of my country!” and unloaded a semiautomatic pistol in a Kansas bar.
Ms. Dumala’s immigration status was tied to that of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, one of two Indian-born engineers shot that day. So along with dealing with the horror of his sudden death, she also had to face the fact that the man who shot him may have managed to put her at risk of deportation.
Mr. Kuchibhotla was in the United States on an H-1B visa. Upon his death, Ms. Dumala’s residency status was terminated. And when she went to India to attend his funeral, she feared that she might not be able to re-enter the United States.
It was also unclear whether she would want to. In an emotional Facebook post shortly after the shooting, she posed a question that she said “is in every immigrant’s mind: Do we belong here?”
Her congressman, Kevin Yoder, a Republican from Kansas’ third district, was “horrified” by the shooting, and pushed President Trump to condemn it in a joint address to Congress. Upon learning of Ms. Dumala’s immigration issues, he and his staff began looking at ways to assist her.
“It would have been a real tragedy, on top of the initial tragedy she suffered, to attend her husband’s funeral in India and then be locked out of the U.S. because of it,” Mr. Yoder said in an interview on Wednesday. “This woman suffered enough. We need to fix this.”
Mr. Kuchibhotla was sharing drinks with a colleague and friend, Alok Madasani, at a favorite bar in Olathe when a man sitting nearby began to question their visa status and whether they were in the country illegally.
The man, Adam W. Purinton, was thrown out of the bar. But he returned with a firearm and began shooting, killing Mr. Kuchibhotla and injuring Mr. Madasani, along with another customer who attempted to intervene. In June, Mr. Purinton was indicted by a federal grand jury on hate crime charges.
Ms. Dumala, a developer for Intouch Solutions, a pharmaceutical marketing agency, left the United States for Hyderabad, India, at the end of February.
Mr. Yoder’s office, working on Ms. Dumala’s behalf, helped her return about a month later and obtain a 12-month employment authorization document that will grant her the time she needs to apply for her own H-1B visa. She is also applying for a U visa, which is granted to victims of some crimes.
The congressman, who has taken the hard line on immigration typical of many Republicans in the past, has used the precariousness of Ms. Dumala’s situation to argue for immigration reform. Currently, immigration law dictates that only 7 percent of the green cards issued each year can be given to residents of any one country.
Mr. Yoder noted that between 230,000 and two million Indian workers are in line for a green card, which means that they could be waiting for decades, if not longer.
“Many of us think this is an injustice, it’s discriminatory, and the system is failing people like Srinivas and Sunayana,” he said.
He also argues that the law should explicitly address people whose spouses are the targets of hate crimes.
“I think we ought to have a special exception,” he said. “You don’t get deported because your husband was murdered. They don’t come and grab you at a funeral and say, ‘Now you’ve lost your status.’”
Ms. Dumala has added her voice to the push for the measure. And the help she has received from the congressman, her and her husband’s employers, and the F.B.I. has gone part of the way toward changing her ambivalence about whether people like her can live safely in the United States.
“A lot has happened in the last few months,” she said, when asked if she still questioned whether she belonged. “And one incident does not portray what the entire country stands for, which was evident when people from different communities came forward to lend their support in the time of tragedy and grief.”
Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.
Related Articles
    • He Became a Hate Crime Victim. She Became a Widow.
    • Hate Crime Is Feared as 2 Indian Engineers Are Shot in Kansas
    • Kansas Man Indicted on Hate Crime Charges in Shooting of Indian Immigrants

Load-Date: September 15, 2017


End of Document
Killing in Kansas Bar Put Victim's Widow at Risk of Deportation
The New York Times
September 14, 2017 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Express; Pg. 
Length: 657 words
Byline: By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.
Body


In February, Sunayana Dumala lost her husband to a man who shouted ''Get out of my country!'' and unloaded a semiautomatic pistol in a Kansas bar.
Ms. Dumala's immigration status was tied to that of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, one of two Indian-born engineers shot that day. So along with dealing with the horror of his sudden death, she also had to face the fact that the man who shot him may have managed to put her at risk of deportation. 
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was in the United States on an H-1B visa. Upon his death, Ms. Dumala's residency status was terminated. And when she went to India to attend his funeral, she feared that she might not be able to re-enter the United States.
  It was also unclear whether she would want to. In an emotional Facebook post shortly after the shooting, she posed a question that she said ''is in every immigrant's mind: Do we belong here?''
  Her congressman, Kevin Yoder, a Republican from Kansas' third district, was ''horrified'' by the shooting, and pushed President Trump to condemn it in a joint address to Congress. Upon learning of Ms. Dumala's immigration issues, he and his staff began looking at ways to assist her.
  ''It would have been a real tragedy, on top of the initial tragedy she suffered, to attend her husband's funeral in India and then be locked out of the U.S. because of it,'' Mr. Yoder said in an interview on Wednesday. ''This woman suffered enough. We need to fix this.''
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was sharing drinks with a colleague and friend, Alok Madasani, at a favorite bar in Olathe when a man sitting nearby began to question their visa status and whether they were in the country illegally.
  The man, Adam W. Purinton, was thrown out of the bar. But he returned with a firearm and began shooting, killing Mr. Kuchibhotla and injuring Mr. Madasani, along with another customer who attempted to intervene. In June, Mr. Purinton was indicted by a federal grand jury on hate crime charges.
  Ms. Dumala, a developer for Intouch Solutions, a pharmaceutical marketing agency, left the United States for Hyderabad, India, at the end of February.
  Mr. Yoder's office, working on Ms. Dumala's behalf, helped her return about a month later and obtain a 12-month employment authorization document that will grant her the time she needs to apply for her own H-1B visa. She is also applying for a U visa, which is granted to victims of some crimes.
  The congressman, who has taken the hard line on immigration typical of many Republicans in the past, has used the precariousness of Ms. Dumala's situation to argue for immigration reform. Currently, immigration law dictates that only 7 percent of the green cards issued each year can be given to residents of any one country.
  Mr. Yoder noted that between 230,000 and two million Indian workers are in line for a green card, which means that they could be waiting for decades, if not longer.
  ''Many of us think this is an injustice, it's discriminatory, and the system is failing people like Srinivas and Sunayana,'' he said.
  He also argues that the law should explicitly address people whose spouses are the targets of hate crimes.
  ''I think we ought to have a special exception,'' he said. ''You don't get deported because your husband was murdered. They don't come and grab you at a funeral and say, 'Now you've lost your status.'''
  Ms. Dumala has added her voice to the push for the measure. And the help she has received from the congressman, her and her husband's employers, and the F.B.I. has gone part of the way toward changing her ambivalence about whether people like her can live safely in the United States.
  ''A lot has happened in the last few months,'' she said, when asked if she still questioned whether she belonged. ''And one incident does not portray what the entire country stands for, which was evident when people from different communities came forward to lend their support in the time of tragedy and grief.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/13/us/widow-deported-indian-kansas.html

Load-Date: September 14, 2017


End of Document
Fix the Gap in H-1B Visas
The New York Times
June 21, 2016 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24; LETTER
Length: 212 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Visa Abuses Harm American Workers'' (editorial, June 16): 
  Fixing the flaws in our high-skilled immigration system need not wait for comprehensive legislation. In fact, Congress's continued tolerance of H-1B outsourcing is an obstacle to comprehensive reform, because it is the single most powerful evidence that anti-immigration forces have for the bogus claim that new green-card recipients cost jobs.
  This Congress should seize the opportunity to do one simple thing to fix a gaping hole in the system: Repeal the special treatment that Congress provided H-1B outsourcing companies in 1998.
  Contractors whose business model is to replace American workers who must train their replacements are actually specifically exempted from the requirement not to displace Americans, provided that they pay a salary that amounts to half the market rate for these jobs.
  Narrow language to eliminate this special treatment for H-1B outsourcers could be enacted on any legislation this Congress considers.
  BRUCE A. MORRISON
  Bethesda, Md.
  The writer, a former Democratic member of Congress and the principal author of the Immigration Act of 1990, is a legislative advocate for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers-U.S.A., a professional group. 

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/21/opinion/fix-the-gap-in-h-1b-visas.html

Load-Date: June 21, 2016


End of Document
Russia, Syria, Bill O’Reilly: Your Morning Briefing; Asia and Australia Edition
The New York Times 
April 4, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1187 words
Byline: CHARLES McDERMID
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


Good morning. 
Here’s what you need to know:
 Syria’s deadliest chemical attack in years.
Dozens of people were killed, including women and children. Graphic photographs and videos posted online showed people struggling to breathe or lying motionless in mud.
The White House blamed President Bashar al-Assad's government and said the “reprehensible act” could not “be ignored by the civilized world.”
What President Trump will do is not clear. A few days ago, administration officials said regime change was not a priority.
_____
 North Korea fired a ballistic missile off its east coast, making its nuclear ambitions known a day before President Xi Jinping of China arrives in the U.S. to meet with Mr. Trump.
The summit meeting at the president’s Mar-a-Lago resort, as well as leaders’ agenda, was crafted in part by Matthew Pottinger, a former journalist and Marine who is the Trump administration’s top Asia policy maker.
Here’s a potential wrinkle: one of Mar-a-Lago’s members is Guo Wengui, an outspoken Chinese billionaire who has recently taken up criticizing the Communist Party.
_____
 The storm at Fox News is intensifying.
BMW, Allstate and at least five other companies joined Mercedes-Benz and Hyundai in an advertising revolt against the channel over the sexual harassment allegations against its superstar host, Bill O’Reilly.
_____
 The rush for skilled-worker visas to the U.S., known as H-1B visas, has escalated to an all-out scramble this year.
So many foreign workers have applied for the 85,000 three-year visas that officials could set the cutoff within days. In recent years, Indians have received more than 70 percentof the total.
A computer randomly chooses the winners.
_____
 Meet Duop. He was one of the 10,000-plus boys who've been toting rifles in South Sudan, some forced to fight as young as 10.
Duop is 16 now, give or take, and what he suffered seems to have robbed him of the ability to speak. Our correspondent went with him to see his mother for the first time in six years.
_____
 And here lies Bukit Brown, one of the world’s largest Chinese cemeteries.
It’s just a few miles from central Singapore. Built in 1922, and now neglected, the 213-acre site packed with tombstones, statues and shrines has become a pilgrimage point for Singaporeans trying to reconnect with their country’s vanishing past.
Business
 Silicon Valley scored one on Detroit as Tesla, the            electric car company, hit a market valuation of $48.7 billion, surpassing Ford ($45.6 billion) and edging nearer to General Motors ($51.2 billion).
 U.S. antitrust regulators approved ChemChina’s acquisition of Syngenta, the Swiss agricultural and chemical giant. The deal would be the largest overseas purchase by a Chinese company.
 Coca-Cola is putting a picture of its largest investor, Warren Buffett, on Cherry Coke cans in China, where he has legions of fans.
 America’s trade deficit declined 9.6 percent to $43.6 billion in February, as exports increased to a two-year high.
 U.S. stocks were up. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
In the News
 The suspect in the St. Petersburg subway bombing was identified as a 22-year-old from Kyrgyzstan who had been living in the city, but his motive remained unclear. The toll rose to 14 dead and 64 injured. [The New York Times]
 Russia is moving to outlaw the pacifist Jehovah’s Witnesses for “extremist activities,” likening members to Islamic militants. [The New York Times]
 The Trump administration axed U.S. funding of the U.N. Population Fund, the world’s leading provider of family planning services, including contraception. [The New York Times]
 The World Health Organization will name a new director general in May, and for the first time the selection will be made by vote rather than horse-trading. The top candidates are from Ethiopia, Britain and Pakistan. [The New York Times]
 To save their land, the Goolarabooloo people of Australia revealed the location of dinosaur footprints that they had kept secret for thousands of years. [Popular Science]
 Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia raised the donation required to receive the honorific title “oknha,” which roughly translates to “tycoon,” from $100,000 to $500,000. [The Phnom Penh Post]
 Our Vietnam ’67 series looks at the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s blistering attack on the government’s conduct of the Vietnam War that, among other things, compared American tactics to those of the Nazis during World War II. [           The New York Times]
Smarter Living
 The best way to get more done may be to spend more time doing less.
 Beginning a new exercise regimen, but gaining weight? Starting to exercise often means we eat more and move less than we did before.
 This recipe for flounder with mustard greens puts bold tastes front and center.
Noteworthy
 Brando’s style on Taipei’s streets: An Rong Xu, the photographer, spent a month in Taiwan and captured looks influenced by street style, Parisian cafes, the American West and 1990s Hong Kong cinema.
 Steve Lillywhite, the producer of multiplatinum records by U2 and the Rolling Stones, now runs a company that bundles CDs with fast food at Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants in Indonesia. “My job is basically like running a record label, except this record label also happens to sell chicken.”
 Finally, our new food writer, the Israeli-born British chef Yotam Ottolenghi, invited the Easter bunny to his Seder. So to speak.
In his latest column, he offers recipes for each holiday, and reflects on how a meal can be “the bridge between generations and the signifier of a story” that allows us to connect personally with history, and make our own.
Back Story
Even a schoolchild can tell you that matter can exist as a solid, liquid or gas. But humanity’s hope for near-limitless, clean energy may hinge on a fourth state: plasma.
A giant plant now under construction in the south of France will be the testing ground, if the project’s partners — which include the European Union, the U.S., Russia and China — stay on course for billions of dollars of investment and a couple of decades of painstaking work.
The kind of plasma we’re talking about was named by an American scientist, Irving Langmuir, who saw a resemblance to blood plasma.
It emerges when energy is added to gas, leaving a cloud of positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons zipping around. That’s what makes up the sun and other stars.
Under the right conditions, some superheated ions can fuse. And as they join, they shed a tiny amount of mass that translates into vast amounts of energy. Hence all that heat and light from the sun.
The French plant aims to create the right conditions by using magnetic fields to contain the plasma and radio waves and microwaves to make it unimaginably hot — and then see if human-created fusion will work.
Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.
_____
This briefing was prepared for the Asian morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian,            European and            American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters            here.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

Load-Date: April 7, 2017


End of Document
How 'Hire American' Could Affect a World of Tech Workers
The New York Times
April 19, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1370 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that directs federal agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote ''Hire American'' policies.
The order makes no immediate changes to work visa programs but tells the Departments of Labor, Justice, Homeland Security and State to study existing laws and procedures and recommend changes. 
  In the case of one program, H-1B temporary visas, the order directs the agencies to suggest changes to help ensure that the visas are awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers. ''Right now, H-1B visas are awarded in a totally random lottery, and that's wrong,'' Mr. Trump said at the signing in Kenosha, Wis.
  The order also calls for a crackdown on fraud and abuse in the current system of work visas -- which the agencies had already signaled they would do.
  What is the H-1B program, and why is the president focused on it?
  The H-1B program grants 65,000 work visas a year to foreigners, with 20,000 more visas granted to foreigners with advanced degrees and an unlimited number of extra visas available for universities, teaching hospitals and other nonprofit organizations. The program is aimed at highly skilled workers, and most of the visas are awarded to technology companies, although other specialty industries such as fashion also use the visas. (Melania Trump, the first lady, worked as a model on an H-1B visa.)
  Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. All H-1B employers are also required to pay prevailing wages to the immigrant workers who receive the visas.
  Labor Department data shows that about 40 percent of the visas go to entry-level workers and another 40 percent go to people with limited experience and skills. The Trump administration says that more of the jobs performed by those people could and should be filled by Americans.
  How are the visas allocated?
  Visa applications must be sponsored by employers. Every April 1, the government begins accepting applications for the next fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1. This year, the government received 199,000 H-1B applications in the first five days and then stopped accepting them.
  Because there are more applicants than visas, the visas are awarded by lottery. Each visa is good for three years and can be renewed for three more years. Immigrants who are applying for a permanent residency visa, known as a green card, can typically stay longer while waiting for approval.
  In 2015, President Obama expanded the program to allow the spouses of H-1B visa holders to also work in the United States, but in a recent court filing, the Trump administration said it was reviewing that policy.
  It is not clear exactly how many foreigners are in the United States on H-1B visas, but analysts estimate 650,000 to 900,000. In recent years, about 70 percent of the visas have been issued to citizens of India.
  Who employs these H-1B visa holders?
  The biggest employers are India-based outsourcing companies like Wipro Technologies, Infosys, Tech Mahindra and Tata Consultancy Services. These firms contract with banks, health care companies and other businesses to handle various computing tasks and bring in thousands of immigrants to do the work. Outsourcing companies based in the United States, particularly IBM and Cognizant, also use large numbers of H-1B workers.
  The leading American technology companies, including Google, Microsoft and Apple, employ thousands of H-1B workers. Two companies, Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm, are heavily dependent on H-1B visas, with at least 15 percent of their American workforces holding the visas, according to federal filings. Thousands of Silicon Valley start-ups also hire some H-1B workers.
  How do these foreign workers contribute to the American economy?
  American technology companies argue that there is a shortage of qualified Americans for scientific and programming jobs, forcing them to turn overseas for workers to meet their hiring needs.
  In addition, immigrants or their children have played key roles in founding many technology companies, including giants like Apple, Google and Intel and up-and-comers like WhatsApp and Airbnb.
  The Indian outsourcers, which generally pay lower wages and operate in a different part of the technology ecosystem, say they are helping American companies cut spending on certain basic services so they can keep employing higher-paid workers in other parts of their businesses. R. Chandrashekhar, the president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, a group that represents the Indian technology industry, says that more than three-quarters of the Fortune 500, America's largest companies by sales, use the Indian outsourcers for some operations.
  ''These services play a critical role in ensuring that corporate America remains a job-creation engine,'' Mr. Chandrashekhar said.
  Still, Indian outsourcing companies are preparing for a world of fewer visas, shifting the work to people in India and other countries.
  Are American workers hurt by immigrant work visa programs?
  Some studies suggest that universities grant technology degrees to more than enough American students to fill all the open jobs in the United States, so critics of the visas say the program is unnecessary. Silicon Valley companies often do not cast a wide net for American job candidates. Instead, they compete to hire the same graduates of the top colleges for many jobs and rely heavily on immigrants to fill out their workforces.
  Under the H-1B program, all companies have to attest that they are paying foreign workers prevailing wages and that their existing workers will not be adversely affected, said Russ Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, the American branch of IEEE, the largest professional association for computer scientists and electrical engineers. ''But all you have to do is check a box.''
  In some cases -- at Walt Disney and at the University of California, San Francisco, for instance -- employers laid off workers and replaced them with cheaper immigrants employed by outsourcing companies.
  Foreign workers can also be abused by the visa programs. The H-1B visa is tied to a specific employer, which means the visa holder cannot easily change jobs. Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, who has long pushed for changes, said some H-1B holders earned less than their stated salaries because they were forced to repay their employer for various expenses, such as travel.
  What changes are under consideration for visa programs?
  The Trump administration was vague about what it would like to change. In a background briefing with reporters, officials said they were considering changing the wage levels that would qualify for visas, raising fees for H-1B applications and steering more visas to immigrants with advanced degrees.
  The government will also publicly release more data about other visa programs, such as the L-1, which allows workers officially employed overseas by a company to work in the United States. ''We don't know how many L-1s are here, who employs them, where they are located and what they are paid,'' said Ronil Hira, an associate professor of political science at Howard University who has extensively studied immigrant visa programs.
  Many in Congress support changing the H-1B lottery system to give preference to the highest-paying jobs. ''We should allocate visas based on who wants to pay the highest salary to avoid undercutting the wages of American workers,'' said Ms. Lofgren, who has sponsored one of several bills on the topic.
  Such a change would favor established American technology companies, which tend to pay high wages, and hurt the outsourcing companies, which hire immigrants to do more basic work at lower wages. But there is a risk of collateral damage to start-ups, which pay less in cash but award stock to new hires, and to hospitals, which recruit immigrants for nursing and other nontech jobs.
  Changes to work visas could also be wrapped into a broader immigration bill. Mr. Trump recently told members of Congress that he was open to discussing that approach.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/18/technology/h1b-visa-facts-tech-worker.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Infosys, an Indian outsourcing company facing more pressure in the U.S. as a major employer of H-1B visa holders, has opened offices in countries like Poland. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM LACH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: June 29, 2017


End of Document
Changes to Tech Worker Visas Are Cosmetic. For Now.
The New York Times 
April 3, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 770 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL and NICK WINGFIELD
Highlight: As the application season opens for H-1B visas for foreign workers, the Trump administration warns tech companies they will face more scrutiny.
Body


The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services           announced on Friday that it was reversing its previous guidance that entry-level computer programming jobs automatically qualify as a “specialty occupation” — a basic requirement for receiving an H-1B work visa. And on Monday, the Justice Department            warned that it would look closely at any employer who discriminates against American workers by showing a preference for hiring H-1B workers.
The announcements came as the government began accepting applications on Monday for H-1B visas that will be issued for the next fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1.
How do the announcements change the government’s policies toward foreign workers?
The changes are more cosmetic than substantive. Visas for entry-level computer jobs have already been getting more scrutiny from immigration officials, and the Justice Department is reminding companies to follow the law.
Still, critics of the H-1B program say the Justice Department’s warning to companies not to discriminate against Americans might lead to enforcement action.
“If the Department of Justice concludes that these companies are discriminating against Americans, the entire outsourcing model becomes deeply suspect,” said Russell Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, a group that represents American tech workers.
Why is the H-1B program important? 
H-1B visas are commonly used by companies to bring foreign workers to the United States to fill technical positions like software developers. Some tech companies say they need foreign workers because they cannot find enough Americans with the skills for these jobs.
There’s a lot of controversy around H-1Bs. Some of the biggest users of these work visas are outsourcing firms, many of them based in India. These firms often bring foreign workers to the United States at low wages to fill jobs once held by higher-paid Americans.
How do the new policies affect Microsoft, Facebook and other big American technology companies? 
The large tech companies are unlikely to be affected much in the near term, immigration lawyers and technology executives said. Technology companies usually apply for H-1B visas when they need to fill a job with higher-skilled workers holding bachelor’s or master’s degrees.
William Moss, a spokesman for Intel, said the chip maker does not expect any impact from the change. “Intel’s foreign national population in the U.S. is largely comprised of individuals possessing unique and difficult to find skills which can only be acquired through advanced-degree, university-level education,” Mr. Moss said.
What about the Indian outsourcing firms? 
Indian outsourcing firms like Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Infosys get a large number of H-1B visas, as do outsource companies that are based in America, such as I.B.M. and Cognizant.
Although they do hire some entry-level programmers, they have been shifting their hiring to higher-skilled and better paid workers.
Benjamin Trounson, a spokesman for Tata Consultancy Services, said the company has cut back on its use of H-1B visas in the past few years, receiving only 1,500 in 2016.
Why is this happening now?
On Monday, the federal government began accepting applications for next year’s visas. Demand for the H-1B visas so far exceeds the supply that the government is likely to cut off applications within a week, and visas will be awarded by lottery. Congress allows for 65,000 H-1Bs each year, with an additional 20,000 for workers possessing a master’s degree or higher.
The Trump administration may be using the moment to discourage what its views as abuse of the work visa.
“The timing is not coincidental,” said Ted Ruthizer, an immigration lawyer with Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel in New York. “It’s an attempt to show a mastery of the situation, that they know what companies are up to with H-1Bs and they’re not going to let them get away with any shenanigans.”
Are more changes coming that could affect the technology sector? 
Probably. Companies like Amazon and Expedia took a leading position in opposing President Trump’s first executive order banning travel to the United States from seven majority Muslim countries, saying that it restricted the movement of employees and hindered their ability to attract talent.
The industry is also awaiting a possible executive order from Mr. Trump that could further change how H-1Bs and other visas used by the tech industry are issued.
Related Articles
    • Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
    • Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document
Companies Say Trump Is Hurting Business by Limiting Legal Immigration
The New York Times 
September 2, 2018 Sunday 16:01 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1763 words
Byline: Nelson D. Schwartz and Steve Lohr
Highlight: The government is making it harder to hire foreigners by denying visas, asking for more information and delaying approvals, corporate leaders say.
Body


The Trump administration is using the country’s vast and nearly opaque immigration bureaucracy to constrict the flow of foreign workers into the United States by throwing up new roadblocks to limit legal arrivals.
The government is denying more work visas, asking applicants to provide additional information and delaying approvals more frequently than just a year earlier. Hospitals, hotels, technology companies and other businesses say they are now struggling to fill jobs with the foreign workers they need.
With foreign hires missing, the employees who remain are being forced to pick up the slack. Seasonal industries like hotels and landscaping are having to turn down customers or provide fewer services. Corporate executives worry about the long-term impact of losing talented engineers and programmers to countries like Canada that are laying out the welcome mat for skilled foreigners.
At Northwell Health’s pathology lab on Long Island, a new doctor’s cubicle stands empty, her computer and microscope untouched. Other residents started on July 1, but she is stuck in India’s Punjab State, held up by unexplained delays in her visa.
“There have been delays in processing that we have not felt before,” said Dr. Andrew C. Yacht, chief academic officer at Northwell, which includes Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan and North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.
In April 2017, President Trump signed a “Buy American and Hire American” executive order, directing government officials to “rigorously enforce” immigration laws. The order did not get the kind of attention that followed the administration’s decision to separate families at the Mexican border this summer.
A few months later, the president endorsed           legislation that would cut legal immigration by half. The bill was introduced by two Republican senators, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia. But Republican leaders in Congress have not advanced it.
Some lawmakers say Mr. Trump is using administrative means to reshape immigration policy because those changes have stalled on Capitol Hill.
“If they want to have a proposal on immigration, they should send it to Congress,” said Representative Ro Khanna, a Democrat whose district includes parts of Silicon Valley. “The administration should engage in that conversation. To unilaterally and without any accountability change what Congress has authorized is not democratic.”
In practice, businesses say the increased red tape has made it harder to secure employment-based visas. That has added to the difficulty of finding qualified workers with the unemployment rate falling to 3.9 percent.
A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions for skilled foreign workers had increased 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the third quarter. Government requests for additional information for applications doubled in the fourth quarter, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his order.
Experts say a sustained reduction in immigration could dampen growth over time as more baby boomers retire, leaving big gaps in the job market.
That goes for high-skilled immigrants and low-skilled workers, said Francine D. Blau, an economist at Cornell. The latter will be vital in fields like elder care and child care, as well as construction and cleaning.
“A lot of our labor-force growth comes from immigrants and their children,” Ms. Blau said. “Without them, we’d suffer the problems associated with countries with an aging population, like Japan.”
The Business Roundtable, a group of corporate leaders, recently challenged the Trump administration over changes that it says threaten the livelihoods of thousands of skilled foreign workers, and economic growth and competitiveness.
In a statement, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the administration was “relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move toward a merit-based system.” It added that all petitions and applications were handled “fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.”
The H-1B program, which was created to bring in foreigners with skills that business leaders argued would strengthen the economy, has long been a target for some politicians. The visa program has been criticized because corporations have exploited it to replace American workers.
Still, many economists say H-1B holders are valuable. Immigrants file patents at twice the rate of native-born Americans and start            about 25 percent of high-tech companies in the United States.
“There’s absolutely no research that supports the idea that cutting legal immigration is good for the economy,” said Ethan Lewis, a Dartmouth economist.
Hospitals in particular argue that they need foreign doctors who are more willing than native-born Americans to take jobs in less glamorous and lower-paying fields, like internal and family medicine. Of Northwell’s 1,826 resident doctors, 165 came in under H1-B or J-1 student visas.
Nearly one-third of pathology residents come from other countries, according to the National Resident Matching Program. But the number of overseas applicants in all specialties has dropped for two years in a row.
“The administration’s policies are having a chilling effect on the interest of international medical graduates coming to the United States to train,” said Mona M. Signer, chief executive of the matching program.
The missing Indian pathologist’s workload at Northwell has been spread among 11 residents, lengthening the time they are on call.
“Our nation’s ability to care for patients is dependent on international medical graduates,” Dr. Yacht said.
The effect of lower-skilled immigrants is more debatable. George J. Borjas, a Harvard economist, has found that an influx of such workers reduced the incomes of people without a high school degree between 3 and 5 percent.
Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis, agrees that individual workers can be hurt by competition from lower-paid foreigners. But he said the overall effect on wages was modest. Immigration also tends to bolster the incomes of college-educated Americans.
Mr. Peri points to what happened when the government deported between 400,000 and 500,000 Mexicans between 1929 and 1934, most of whom worked in agriculture and construction. With fewer people to work the fields, farm owners and agricultural businesses cut administrative, sales and clerical jobs because there was not enough to do.
“Out of eight or 10 positions held by Mexicans, maybe one or two were taken by Americans,” Mr. Peri said. “The rest disappeared.”
Rob Hurst is not concerned with the macroeconomics of immigration. He is just struggling to keep bathrooms clean.
This summer, he has found himself on his hands and knees scrubbing toilets and tubs at Edgartown Commons, a hotel he manages on Martha’s Vineyard in Massachusetts. Five Jamaican workers who had long worked at the property failed to get H2-B seasonal-work visas.
“I’m 65 years old, but you got to do what you got to do,” he said. “We did hire contract workers, but it’s never going to be as good as people with years of experience.”
In the past, returning H2-B visa workers were not counted against the program’s annual cap of 66,000. Congress declined to renew that exemption in December 2016.
Foreign workers are also growing frustrated about the clampdown on visas and rising anti-immigrant sentiment.
Uday Verma is leaving after 12 years in Iowa, time he spent earning a graduate degree in computer science and working for a technology company.
Mr. Verma, 37, who emigrated from India, has repeatedly renewed his H-1B visa while waiting fruitlessly for permanent resident status — also known as a green card. Had he been successful, he could have easily switched employers or started his own business.
“I can’t make a plan here,” Mr. Verma said. “You’re perpetually in this state of limbo. It just doesn’t make sense anymore to stay here and keep pursuing this American dream.”
Mr. Verma, his wife and their 9-year-old son plan to be living in Toronto by the time their American visas expire in the second week of September.
He is taking advantage of the Global Talent Stream initiative the Canadian government started last year. It lets companies in innovative fields, like artificial intelligence, quickly secure visas for workers with vital skills.
With experience with A.I. programming tools, Mr. Verma got a visa in two weeks, and could become a permanent resident in six months or so.
His employer, Kira Systems, makes software that reads and analyzes legal contracts. The company has more than doubled its employment in the past year, to 115 people. Noah Waisberg, a co-founder and the chief executive, said half of Kira’s technical staff was from China, India, Russia and other countries.
Canada has long welcomed immigrants. “But that is even more so relative to the United States, given the climate in America now,” Mr. Waisberg said. “It’s certainly helped us recruit.”
Mr. Trump’s “hire American” push is helping some domestic businesses. One of those is Nexient, which provides software services and competes with firms in India and elsewhere. Fearful of becoming too dependent on offshore firms, corporate customers are increasingly interested in having domestic partners, said Mark Orttung, Nexient’s chief executive.
“You still have to win the business, but it has been an accelerator for us,” he said.
Nexient is based in Newark, Calif., but its programmers are mainly in Michigan and Indiana. The start-up employs more than 500 people, up from 400 last year.
About 10 percent of Nexient’s employees have H-1B visas, typically engineers who have mastered old software systems and other niche technologies in corporate data centers.
Those foreign workers are fielding more government requests for information and waiting longer for visa renewals, Mr. Orttung said. “It adds a great deal of uncertainty to the lives of some of our employees.”
PHOTO: Rob Hurst, manager of Edgartown Commons on Martha’s Vineyard, has had to scrub bathrooms this summer because five Jamaican workers who had long worked at the hotel couldn’t get visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Elizabeth Cecil for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Top C.E.O.s Denounce Trump Immigration Policy as Threat to U.S. Economy
    • With Jobs to Fill, Businesses Play the Visa Lottery
    • What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
    • Without New Laws or Walls, Trump Presses the Brake on Legal Immigration

Load-Date: November 2, 2018


End of Document
How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 05:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1525 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL
Highlight: No immediate changes are expected. But the order asks various federal agencies to recommend changes.
Body


Correction Appended
President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that directs federal agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote “Hire American” policies.
The order makes no immediate changes to work visa programs but tells the Departments of Labor, Justice, Homeland Security and State to study existing laws and procedures and recommend changes.
In the case of one program, H-1B temporary visas, the order directs the agencies to suggest changes to help ensure that the visas are awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers. “Right now, H-1B visas are awarded in a totally random lottery, and that’s wrong,” Mr. Trump said at the signing in Kenosha, Wis.
The order also calls for a crackdown on fraud and abuse in the current system of work visas — which the agencies had already signaled they would do.
What is the H-1B program, and why is the president focused on it?
The H-1B program grants 65,000 work visas a year to foreigners, with 20,000 more visas granted to foreigners with advanced degrees and an unlimited number of extra visas available for universities, teaching hospitals and other nonprofit organizations. The program is aimed at highly skilled workers, and most of the visas are awarded to technology companies, although other specialty industries such as fashion also use the visas. (Melania Trump, the first lady, worked as a model on an H-1B visa.)
Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. All H-1B employers are also required to pay prevailing wages to the immigrant workers who receive the visas.
Labor Department data shows that about 40 percent of the visas go to entry-level workers and another 40 percent go to people with limited experience and skills. The Trump administration says that more of the jobs performed by those people could and should be filled by Americans.
How are the visas allocated?
Visa applications must be sponsored by employers. Every April 1, the government begins accepting applications for the next fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1. This year, the government received 199,000 H-1B applications in the first five days and then stopped accepting them.
Because there are more applicants than visas, the visas are awarded by lottery. Each visa is good for three years and can be renewed for three more years. Immigrants who are applying for a permanent residency visa, known as a green card, can typically stay longer while waiting for approval.
In 2015, President Obama expanded the program to allow the spouses of H-1B visa holders to also work in the United States, but in a recent court filing, the Trump administration said it was reviewing that policy.
It is not clear exactly how many foreigners are in the United States on H-1B visas, but analysts estimate 650,000 to 900,000. In recent years, about 70 percent of the visas have been issued to citizens of India.
Who employs these H-1B visa holders?
The biggest employers are India-based outsourcing companies like Wipro Technologies, Infosys, Tech Mahindra and Tata Consultancy Services. These firms contract with banks, health care companies and other businesses to handle various computing tasks and bring in thousands of immigrants to do the work. Outsourcing companies based in the United States, particularly IBM and Cognizant, also use large numbers of H-1B workers.
The leading American technology companies, including Google, Microsoft and Apple, employ thousands of H-1B workers. Two companies, Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm, are heavily dependent on H-1B visas, with at least 15 percent of their American workforces holding the visas, according to federal filings. Thousands of Silicon Valley start-ups also hire some H-1B workers.
How do these foreign workers contribute to the American economy?
American technology companies argue that there is a shortage of qualified Americans for scientific and programming jobs, forcing them to turn overseas for workers to meet their hiring needs.
In addition, immigrants or their children have played key roles in founding many technology companies, including giants like Apple, Google and Intel and up-and-comers like WhatsApp and Airbnb.
The Indian outsourcers, which generally pay lower wages and operate in a different part of the technology ecosystem, say they are helping American companies cut spending on certain basic services so they can keep employing higher-paid workers in other parts of their businesses. R. Chandrashekhar, the president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, a group that represents the Indian technology industry, says that more than three-quarters of the Fortune 500, America’s largest companies by sales, use the Indian outsourcers for some operations.
“These services play a critical role in ensuring that corporate America remains a job-creation engine,” Mr. Chandrashekhar said.
Still, Indian outsourcing companies are preparing for a world of fewer visas, shifting the work to people in India and other countries.
Are American workers hurt by immigrant work visa programs?
Some studies suggest that universities grant technology degrees to more than enough American students to fill all the open jobs in the United States, so critics of the visas say the program is unnecessary. Silicon Valley companies often do not cast a wide net for American job candidates. Instead, they compete to hire the same graduates of the top colleges for many jobs and rely heavily on immigrants to fill out their workforces.
Under the H-1B program, all companies have to attest that they are paying foreign workers prevailing wages and that their existing workers will not be adversely affected, said Russ Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, the American branch of IEEE, the largest professional association for computer scientists and electrical engineers. “But all you have to do is check a box.”
In some cases — at Walt Disney and at the            University of California, San Francisco, for instance — employers laid off workers and replaced them with cheaper immigrants employed by outsourcing companies.
Foreign workers can also be abused by the visa programs. The H-1B visa is tied to a specific employer, which means the visa holder cannot easily change jobs. Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, who has long pushed for changes, said some H-1B holders earned less than their stated salaries because they were forced to repay their employer for various expenses, such as travel.
What changes are under consideration for visa programs?
The Trump administration was vague about what it would like to change. In a background briefing with reporters, officials said they were considering changing the wage levels that would qualify for visas, raising fees for H-1B applications and steering more visas to immigrants with advanced degrees.
The government will also publicly release more data about other visa programs, such as the L-1, which allows workers officially employed overseas by a company to work in the United States. “We don’t know how many L-1s are here, who employs them, where they are located and what they are paid,” said Ronil Hira, an associate professor of political science at Howard University who has extensively studied immigrant visa programs.
Many in Congress support changing the H-1B lottery system to give preference to the highest-paying jobs. “We should allocate visas based on who wants to pay the highest salary to avoid undercutting the wages of American workers,” said Ms. Lofgren, who has sponsored one of several bills on the topic.
Such a change would favor established American technology companies, which tend to pay high wages, and hurt the outsourcing companies, which hire immigrants to do more basic work at lower wages. But there is a risk of collateral damage to start-ups, which pay less in cash but award stock to new hires, and to hospitals, which recruit immigrants for nursing and other nontech jobs.
Changes to work visas could also be wrapped into a broader immigration bill. Mr. Trump recently told members of Congress that he was open to discussing that approach.
Correction: June 29, 2017, Thursday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on April 19 about President Trump’s “Hire American” order referred incorrectly to the application process for employers seeking to hire H-1B workers. The employers must attest that they are paying the foreign workers prevailing wages and that the working conditions of existing workers will not be adversely affected. They do not have to attest that they tried to find an American first. This correction was delayed because the error was pointed out to editors only recently.
PHOTO: Infosys, an Indian outsourcing company facing more pressure in the U.S. as a major employer of H-1B visa holders, has opened offices in countries like Poland. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM LACH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
    • Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
    • Changes to Tech Worker Visas Are Cosmetic. For Now.

Load-Date: December 21, 2017


End of Document
DealBook Briefing: How to Really Tax the Rich
The New York Times
February 26, 2019 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk
Length: 1961 words
Body


Good Monday. (Want this by email? Sign up here.)
There are other ways to tax the wealthy 
  A majority of Americans are increasingly open to raising taxes on the wealthy. Lawmakers like Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Senator Bernie Sanders have proposed revolutionary ways of reducing wealth inequality. But Andrew writes that there are other ways of bridging the gap -- ways that stand a chance of becoming law.
  Start with the estate tax. Gary Cohn, the former White House economic adviser, once said, ''Only morons pay the estate tax.'' Andrew recommends starting there, writing that no fix could work without this. One solution: taxing inherited property at its current worth to capture gains in value made over decades. According to the Congressional Budget Office, closing this loophole could raise more than $650 billion over a decade.
  Raise capital gains rates for the wealthy. Andrew suggests introducing two new tax brackets -- say, a marginal 30 percent bracket for those earning over $5 million and a 35 percent bracket for over $15 million -- so the U.S. could raise money without discouraging investment.
  Close the carried-interest loophole. Current tax law allows executives at investment firms to have bonuses taxed as capital gains, not ordinary income. Scrapping that -- an idea that President Trump has supported -- has clear appeal to Americans' basic sense of fairness.
  Reconsider breaks for charitable giving. At a minimum, Andrew writes, ''we ought to consider whether the wealthy should be allowed to take deductions when they move money to their own foundations, or whether they should only take a deduction when the money is spent.''
   Support the I.R.S. ''The agency is so underfunded that the chance an individual gets audited is minuscule,'' Andrew writes.
  Deadline extension doesn't end the trade war
  President Trump has delayed his own March 1 deadline to raise tariffs on Chinese goods, Ana Swanson and Alan Rappeport of the NYT report:
   Mr. Trump cited ''substantial progress'' in trade talks between American and Chinese officials.
   He said that negotiators had forged a compromise on key issues, including intellectual property and the trade of agriculture and energy products.
   The president also expects to meet with President Xi Jinping of China to finalize a deal.
  ''The extension will prevent the United States from increasing tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese exports to 25 percent from 10 percent on March 2,'' Ms. Swanson and Mr. Rappeport write. ''The delay, which Mr. Trump had dangled as a possibility in recent weeks, is likely to calm volatile financial markets and reassure business owners who depend on China.''
  But there is still uncertainty. ''In a hint of how fluid the talks remain, the two sides did not sign an official agreement and the White House did not release details on any agreements,'' Ms. Swanson and Mr. Rappeport write. The Chinese state news agency Xinhua says that ''new uncertainties'' could emerge, and analysts think trade tensions won't go away.
  Tensions are reportedly high inside the White House.  Mr. Trump and his top trade negotiator, Robert Lighthizer, ''have grown increasingly frustrated with each other,'' Bloomberg reports, citing unidentified sources. Mr. Trump was apparently embarrassed when Mr. Lightizer corrected him in front of the Chinese delegation, while Mr. Lightizer ''has been growing irritated with Mr. Trump's interventions.''
  Theresa May delayed a crucial Brexit vote
  The British prime minister announced yesterday that a final vote on her Brexit deal that had been scheduled for this week will now take place by March 12 -- just 17 days before Britain is scheduled to leave the E.U.
  She is trying to buy time, so that she can secure tweaks to the agreement that will make it palatable to British lawmakers. ''We still have it within our grasp to leave the European Union with a deal on the 29th of March,'' she told reporters. The Confederation of British Industry accused her of ''running down the clock.''
  Parliament could undermine her game plan. Mrs. May is trying to keep the prospect of a no-deal Brexit on the table, hoping that will convince lawmakers to support her deal. Yet a proposal that will go to vote in Parliament this week ''would force the government to hand power to Parliament if no U.K.-E.U. withdrawal deal has been approved by March 13,'' the FT notes.
  The E.U. is reportedly considering a delay. ''The European Union is considering telling Theresa May that if she can't get her Brexit deal through Parliament and wants to delay the departure date, the country will have to stay in the bloc until 2021,'' Bloomberg reports.
  How the dollar has kept its crown
  The U.S. economy looks precarious, thanks to an enormous public debt and turbulent politics. But as Peter Goodman of the NYT points out, the dollar remains the world's haven, at least when it comes to currencies.
   ''Because banks cannot risk jeopardizing their access to the plumbing of the dollar-based global financial network, they have taken pains to steer clear of nations and companies deemed pariahs in Washington.''
   ''In a clear indication that the American currency has been gaining power, dollar-denominated lending to borrowers outside the United States, excluding banks, soared between late 2007 and early 2018, according to the Bank for International Settlements.''
   ''The Chinese government's restrictions on taking money out of the country and its alarming detentions of foreigners -- often in parallel with geopolitical scrapes -- have tested the appeal of holding money embossed with the image of Chairman Mao.''
   ''A series of crises within the 19 countries that share the euro has provoked more animosity than unity, revealing a foundational defect: The euro is a common currency lacking a common political structure that can guarantee a robust response when trouble arises.''
   '''There is no alternative to the dollar,' said Mark Blyth, an international political economist at Brown University.''
  What to expect from the world's biggest mobile show
  Mobile World Congress, the world's largest mobile technology event, takes place in Barcelona this week. Here's what will be grabbing headlines:
   So much 5G. The next-generation wireless standard has been making political as well as technological headlines recently. Carriers will announce their plans, while countries continue to weigh the security implications of using Huawei hardware in their networks.
   Folding phones. Samsung was first with its Galaxy Fold. Now Huawei has unveiled its own folding phone, the Mate X, and other manufacturers are expected to follow suit.
   Eye-watering prices. The $1,000 iPhone X seemed expensive initially. But experimental smartphones like the Galaxy Fold and Mate X cost twice as much. (Don't worry: Tim Culpan of Bloomberg Opinion argues that you aren't expected to buy one just yet.)
  Hacking attacks escalate at financial services firms
  Britain's Financial Conduct Authority says that financial services companies in the country experienced a fivefold rise in data breaches last year, the FT reports:
   ''Companies reported 145 breaches to the F.C.A. last year, up from 25 in 2017, with investment banks reporting the highest number of incidents at 34, up from just three the previous year.''
   ''Last year's jump in reported attacks can partly be explained by the introduction of the E.U.'s General Data Protection Regulation last May, which requires businesses to identify and report cyber attacks within 72 hours or face penalties.''
   ''But executives at major banks and payments companies said they were now under almost constant fire from attackers. A chief information officer at one U.K. bank said: 'We are seeing a lot more threat actors knocking at the front door.'''
  How long until Netflix wins a best picture Oscar?
  The big winner of last night's Academy Awards was ''Green Book,'' which took the best picture trophy. Commentators regarded the decision as a deliberate snub of Netflix, which had pushed aggressively for ''Roma.''.
  Netflix didn't play by the rules. The company spent millions promoting ''Roma,'' but refused to let it run exclusively in movie theaters for an industry-standard three months. (It ran for three weeks before being streamed.) Netflix also refused to release box-office data.
  That annoyed Hollywood traditionalists. Several theater chains refused to show ''Roma.'' Steven Spielberg is among those who think Netflix films shouldn't contend for an Oscar: ''Once you commit to a television format, you're a TV movie,'' he has said. ''You certainly, if it's a good show, deserve an Emmy -- but not an Oscar.''
  The reluctance will be tested. ''That debate is only going to grow more contentious as Netflix commissions more and more films from A-list filmmakers,'' Gregg Kilday of The Hollywood Reporter writes.
  Revolving door
  Ev Williams, one of Twitter's co-founders, is stepping down from its board after 12 years.
  AutoNation hired Carl Liebert as its new C.E.O., succeeding Mike Jackson.
  Tony Nicely stepped down as C.E.O. of Berkshire Hathaway's Geico insurer last year, Warren Buffett disclosed on Saturday.
  Caesars Entertainment reportedly offered to let Carl Icahn help pick its next C.E.O.
  The White House nominated Kelly Kraft, the U.S. ambassador to Canada, as its pick for U.S. ambassador to the U.N.
  The British insurer Legal & General named Michelle Scrimgeour as chief of its investment management unit.
  The speed read
  Deals
   Barrick Gold unveiled a $17.8 billion unsolicited takeover bid for Newmont Mining. (Barrick)
   Roche said it planned to buy Spark, a gene therapy company, for $4.3 billion. (Reuters)
   The Chinese insurer Ping An reportedly plans to stage an I.P.O. for its cloud-computing unit at an $8 billion valuation. (Bloomberg)
   KKR is reportedly considering buying Walmart's Asda grocery unit. (Sunday Times)
   The exercise equipment maker Peloton has reportedly picked Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase to lead its I.P.O. (Bloomberg)
  Politics and policy
   Before a meeting with Kim Jong-un this week, President Trump said North Korea could enjoy fast economic growth if it gives up its nuclear weapons program. The U.S. may declare an end to the Korean War as part of the talks. (Bloomberg, NYT)
   The Trump administration is denying more H-1B visa applications. (WSJ)
   A sentencing memo from the special counsel's office argued that Paul Manafort ''repeatedly and brazenly'' broke the law. (NYT)
   Meet Karl Racine, the official quietly coordinating states' legal challenges to Trump administration policies. (Politico)
  Tech
   After an investigation revealed that popular apps were sharing personal user data with Facebook, many of the companies involved have curtailed that flow of information. (WSJ)
   Why investors can't ignore the tech battle between China and America. (Barron's)
   Bitcoin saved Carlos Hernández's family. Could it save Venezuela? (NYT Op-Ed)
   How one NYT writer tried to overcome his reliance on a smartphone. (NYT)
   Inside the rise and fall of a multimillion-dollar Airbnb scheme. (NYT)
  Best of the rest
   Bad news: Over three-quarters of business economists expect a U.S. recession by the end of 2021. (Bloomberg)
   Good news: The Fed says that the U.S. financial system is ''substantially'' safer than before the 2008 financial crisis. (WSJ)
   How America learned to love deficits and debt. (Upshot)
   Chinese entrepreneurs are becoming increasingly wary of Beijing. (NYT)
   ICYMI: Here's what Warren Buffett said in his annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders. (DealBook)
  Thanks for reading! We'll see you tomorrow.
  We'd love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to business@nytimes.com

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/25/business/dealbook/tax-the-rich.html

Load-Date: February 26, 2019


End of Document
The Very Bad Economics of Killing DACA; Paul Krugman
The New York Times 
(Paul Krugman)
September 5, 2017 Tuesday 12:16 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 435 words
Highlight: Bad fiscal impact, higher chance of depressions. What&#8217;s not to like? 
Body


Trump’s decision to kill DACA — never mind the attempt to obscure things with that meaningless delay — is, first and foremost, a moral obscenity: throwing out 800,000 young people who are Americans in every way that matters, who have done nothing wrong, basically for racial reasons. But it’s also worth noting that Jeff Sessions just tried to sell it with junk economics, claiming that the Dreamers are taking American jobs. No, they aren’t, even if we leave aside the question of who’s an American. DACA is very much a boon to the rest of the U.S. population, and killing it will make everyone worse off.
To see why, first note that whatever you think about the economics of less-educated immigrants — most of the evidence suggests that they don’t depress wages, but that’s another discussion — none of it applies to DREAMers. Their educational and behavioral profile, as Cato notes, doesn’t resemble the average immigrant, let alone the average undocumented immigrant; they look like H-1B visa holders, that is, skilled immigrants we have specifically allowed in because they help the economy.
Beyond that, DREAMers are young — which means that they help the economy in not one but two big ways, because they mitigate the economic problems caused by an aging population.
One of those problems is fiscal: as the population ages, there are fewer working-age members contributing taxes to pay for Social Security and Medicare. A cohort of relatively high-wage, highly motivated people mostly in their 20s, likely to pay lots of taxes for decades, is exactly what the doctor ordered to make that issue less severe.
Meanwhile, I’m one of those who worries about secular stagnation — persistently weak spending, making episodes in which monetary policy can’t achieve full employment even with zero interest rates much more likely. Several factors contribute to this risk, but probably the most important is demography: a sharp slowdown in the growth of the working-age population, which means less incentive to invest in structures, factories, and more. (The demographic issue is why Japan, with low fertility and great hostility to immigration, entered a zero-rate regime a decade before the rest of us.) 
And what would make secular stagnation more of a problem? Hey, let’s expel hundreds of thousands of young people from the current and future work force.
So this is a double blow to the U.S. economy; it will make everyone worse off. There is no upside whatever to this cruelty, unless you just want to have fewer people with brown skin and Hispanic surnames around. Which is, of course, what this is really all about.

Load-Date: September 6, 2017


End of Document
Under Trump, Wall of Red Tape Hinders Legal Immigration
The New York Times
December 21, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 1650 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


A scientist recruited by the renowned Cleveland Clinic is stuck in India because his visa is delayed. An entrepreneur courted by Silicon Valley companies had his application denied. Many green card applicants have new interviews to pass.
The Trump administration has pursued its immigration agenda loudly and noticeably, ramping up arrests of undocumented immigrants, barring most travel from several majority-Muslim countries and pressing the case for a border wall. 
  But it has also quietly, and with much less resistance, slowed many forms of legal immigration without the need for Congress to rescind a single visa program enshrined in the law.
  Immigration and State Department officials are more closely scrutinizing, and have started more frequently denying, visas for people seeking to visit the United States on business, as well as for those recruited by American companies, according to lawyers representing visa seekers. Foreigners already in the United States whose employers wish to extend their stays are also facing new hurdles.
  ''I call this the real wall,'' said Anastasia Tonello, the president-elect of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. ''The wall is being built.''
  The changes show how the Trump administration has managed to carry out the least attention-grabbing, but perhaps farthest-reaching, portion of the president's immigration plans: cutting the number of people entering the United States each year as temporary workers or permanent residents.
  The administration has put into practice the philosophy President Trump laid out in a pair of executive orders billed as protecting the nation from terrorism and its workers from foreign competition.
  One of them, the ''Buy American, Hire American'' order, singles out the H-1B visa program for skilled workers who otherwise would not be allowed into the country. Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, H-1Bs have also been derided as a way to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor; in one highly publicized case, some Disney employees were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments.
  Each year, 85,000 H-1Bs, which are valid for three to six years, are available to companies, according to a ceiling set by Congress. Demand far outstrips supply when the economy is healthy, prompting the government to hold a lottery.
  But now even applicants lucky enough to be chosen are drawing more scrutiny.
  Officials are asking for extra details about applicants' education and work history, the position to be filled and the employer, requiring the company to amass many additional documents, which can postpone a decision by several months.
  For H-1Bs, the number of such ''requests for evidence'' from January to August this year jumped 44 percent compared with the same period last year, according to the most recent data from United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  So far, the government is still greenlighting most H-1B applications that survive the lottery, but the approval rate is inching down.
  For the first two months of this fiscal year, October and November, 86 percent and 82 percent of H-1B applications were approved. That compares with 93 percent and 92 percent for the same months last year. The data does not reflect companies that give up after receiving requests for more evidence.
  Once a company has spent thousands of dollars in legal fees to petition for a worker, ''there is huge discouragement after an R.F.E. is issued,'' said Roxanne Levine, an immigration lawyer in New York, ''because of the massive extra time, effort and money required to respond.''
  L. Francis Cissna, the immigration agency's new director, said in an interview that if there are more requests for evidence, ''that is perfectly rational and perfectly appropriate.''
  ''We are looking at the entire program to ensure the entire thing is administered well and in conformity with congressional intent,'' he said.
  He recently met with a group of displaced American workers in Florida, including some laid off by Disney. The meeting was arranged by Sara Blackwell, an employment lawyer who leads a group called Protect U.S. Workers. ''The administration has done much more for American workers, but I hope to see much more soon,'' Ms. Blackwell said.
  Immigration lawyers and companies seeking the visas say that some of the decisions appear arbitrary.
  After responding to requests for evidence, a consulting firm that applied for an H-1B for an energy expert from Britain received a denial stating that the skills for the position ''do not appear to be of such complexity, uniqueness or specialization as to require the attainment of a bachelor's degree,'' a prerequisite for the visa.
  Kristen Albertson, the operations manager at the firm, called the outcome ''egregious.''
  ''We apply only when it's a strong case and essential to our business,'' she said of the applicant, who is a graduate of the University of Chicago.
  An H-1B visa for an Indian scientist recruited by the Cleveland Clinic for his expertise in cellular biology is stuck in ''administrative processing'' in New Delhi, meaning it is undergoing further review that could stretch into months. ''His team's projects are now on hold due to the delay,'' said Janice Bianco, an official at the Cleveland Clinic who handles applications for foreigners.
  She said a visa for a pediatric geneticist hired in the spring took three months to be issued -- in the past, it would have taken about three weeks -- forcing the hospital to reroute some patients to other facilities.
  The State Department, which has handled the Cleveland Clinic visa requests, said in a statement that ''consular officers have the discretion to request additional screening in any case.''
  Other types of visas are also tougher to get now. During trips to Silicon Valley, Vladimir Eremeev of Russia was encouraged to establish a branch of his cloud-based technology company, Ivideon, in the United States. In Europe, Ivideon employs 150 people, and Philips, the Dutch multinational, sells a camera powered by its technology.
  Mr. Eremeev drew up plans, which his lawyer in New York detailed in a 347-page visa application. He was applying for an L-1A visa, awarded to executives transferring to the United States.
  ''Sounds and looks great, but it didn't help me obtain a visa,'' Mr. Eremeev said in a phone interview.
  Among other things, the immigration agency stated that the office leased by Mr. Eremeev did not appear to be suited for a ''business that would require the employment of a manager or executive.'' His lawyer provided details and pictures of the space.
  Ultimately, the government denied the petition, stating that the ''organizational structure'' presented did not support the ''managerial or executive position'' that Mr. Eremeev was to fill.
  ''You are going in circles,'' said the lawyer, Oksana Bandrivska, ''and it's getting harder to win cases.''
  Russell Harrison, director of government relations for IEEE-USA, a society of technology professionals, applauded the administration's efforts to tackle visa abuse. However, he said, a blanket approach could stifle American competitiveness.
  ''They seem to be against anyone coming in, which is a simplistic view,'' Mr. Harrison said. ''There are some incredibly talented people not born in this country, and they are being treated just like other workers who are cheap.''
  Some lawyers said they had also seen more scrutiny of H-2B visas, the seasonal work permits that Mr. Trump uses to staff his Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. Jeff Joseph, a lawyer in Aurora, Colo., said the government was more often denying visas for companies that sought the visas season after season. (Mar-a-Lago uses them only during winters.)
  The government's argument, Mr. Joseph said, is that those companies are trying to import temporary workers to fill permanent jobs that should go to Americans. But he said his clients faced a shortage of local labor year after year to fill jobs in construction, lodging, landscaping and amusement parks.
  Other changes affect foreigners already working or living in the United States on H-1Bs or other temporary permits.
  Those sponsored by their employers for a green card, or legal permanent residency, must pass in-person interviews, a reversal of a 20-year-old policy that is likely to exacerbate a long backlog in green card applications. A memo from the immigration agency said the change was in line with the executive order to safeguard the nation from terrorism.
  The administration said this month that it planned to eliminate a program established during the Obama administration that allows international entrepreneurs to stay in the United States for up to five years. The administration also said it would eliminate a two-year-old program that granted work permits for spouses of H-1B workers. And it recently announced plans to restrict the ability of foreign students to work temporarily in the United States after they graduate.
  Another change affects green card holders who enlist in the military. Since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, military service has provided a faster path to citizenship than applying as a civilian, typically taking just 10 weeks.
  In October, the Pentagon enacted new procedures that substantially slow the process by adding several layers of vetting. The change affects thousands of immigrants who have already enlisted because they cannot start training before clearing the background checks.
  The Pentagon said the new measures were needed to ensure that terrorists do not infiltrate the military. But Margaret Stock, an immigration lawyer and retired lieutenant colonel in the Army, said the military would suffer. ''They are turning away green card holders with language, cybersecurity and other skills that the United States military needs,'' she said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/20/us/trump-immigration-slowdown.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The Cleveland Clinic has struggled to secure visas for foreign-born specialists. It has had to delay projects and reroute some patients. (PHOTOGRAPH BY T.J. KIRKPATRICK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: December 21, 2017


End of Document
Without New Laws or Walls, Trump Presses the Brake on Legal Immigration
The New York Times 
December 20, 2017 Wednesday 15:15 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1696 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: The administration says its tougher stand on visa and green card applications will protect Americans from terrorism and job loss, but some call it arbitrary.
Body


A scientist recruited by the renowned Cleveland Clinic is stuck in India because his visa is delayed. An entrepreneur courted by Silicon Valley companies had his application denied. Many green card applicants have new interviews to pass.
The Trump administration has pursued its immigration agenda loudly and noticeably, ramping up arrests of undocumented immigrants,            barring most travel from several majority-Muslim countries and pressing the case for            a border wall.
But it has also quietly, and with much less resistance, slowed many forms of legal immigration without the need for Congress to rescind a single visa program enshrined in the law.
Immigration and State Department officials are more closely scrutinizing, and have started more frequently denying, visas for people seeking to visit the United States on business, as well as for those recruited by American companies, according to lawyers representing visa seekers. Foreigners already in the United States whose employers wish to extend their stays are also facing new hurdles.
“I call this the real wall,” said Anastasia Tonello, the president-elect of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. “The wall is being built.”
The changes show how the Trump administration has managed to carry out the least attention-grabbing, but perhaps farthest-reaching, portion of the president’s immigration plans: cutting the number of people entering the United States each year as temporary workers or permanent residents.
The administration has put into practice the philosophy President Trump laid out in a pair of executive orders billed as protecting the nation from terrorism and its workers from foreign competition.
One of them, the “Buy American, Hire American” order, singles out the H-1B visa program for skilled workers who otherwise would not be allowed into the country. Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, H-1Bs have also been derided as a way to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor; in one highly publicized case, some Disney employees were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments.
Each year, 85,000 H-1Bs, which are valid for three to six years, are available to companies, according to a ceiling set by Congress. Demand far outstrips supply when the economy is healthy, prompting the government to hold a lottery.
But now even applicants lucky enough to be chosen are drawing more scrutiny.
Officials are asking for extra details about applicants’ education and work history, the position to be filled and the employer, requiring the company to amass many additional documents, which can postpone a decision by several months.
For H-1Bs, the number of such “requests for evidence” from January to August this year jumped 44 percent compared with the same period last year, according to the most recent data from United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
So far, the government is still greenlighting most H-1B applications that survive the lottery, but the approval rate is inching down.
For the first two months of this fiscal year, October and November, 86 percent and 82 percent of H-1B applications were approved. That compares with 93 percent and 92 percent for the same months last year. The data does not reflect companies that give up after receiving requests for more evidence.
Once a company has spent thousands of dollars in legal fees to petition for a worker, “there is huge discouragement after an R.F.E. is issued,” said Roxanne Levine, an immigration lawyer in New York, “because of the massive extra time, effort and money required to respond.”
L. Francis Cissna, the immigration agency’s new director, said in an interview that if there are more requests for evidence, “that is perfectly rational and perfectly appropriate.”
“We are looking at the entire program to ensure the entire thing is administered well and in conformity with congressional intent,” he said.
He recently met with a group of displaced American workers in Florida, including some laid off by Disney. The meeting was arranged by Sara Blackwell, an employment lawyer who leads a group called Protect U.S. Workers. “The administration has done much more for American workers, but I hope to see much more soon,” Ms. Blackwell said.
Immigration lawyers and companies seeking the visas say that some of the decisions appear arbitrary.
After responding to requests for evidence, a consulting firm that applied for an H-1B for an energy expert from Britain received a denial stating that the skills for the position “do not appear to be of such complexity, uniqueness or specialization as to require the attainment of a bachelor’s degree,” a prerequisite for the visa.
Kristen Albertson, the operations manager at the firm, called the outcome “egregious.”
“We apply only when it’s a strong case and essential to our business,” she said of the applicant, who is a graduate of the University of Chicago.
An H-1B visa for an Indian scientist recruited by the Cleveland Clinic for his expertise in cellular biology is stuck in “administrative processing” in New Delhi, meaning it is undergoing further review that could stretch into months. “His team’s projects are now on hold due to the delay,” said Janice Bianco, an official at the Cleveland Clinic who handles applications for foreigners.
She said a visa for a pediatric geneticist hired in the spring took three months to be issued — in the past, it would have taken about three weeks — forcing the hospital to reroute some patients to other facilities.
The State Department, which has handled the Cleveland Clinic visa requests, said in a statement that “consular officers have the discretion to request additional screening in any case.”
Other types of visas are also tougher to get now. During trips to Silicon Valley, Vladimir Eremeev of Russia was encouraged to establish a branch of his cloud-based technology company, Ivideon, in the United States. In Europe, Ivideon employs 150 people, and Philips, the Dutch multinational, sells a camera powered by its technology.
Mr. Eremeev drew up plans, which his lawyer in New York detailed in a 347-page visa application. He was applying for an L-1A visa, awarded to executives transferring to the United States.
“Sounds and looks great, but it didn’t help me obtain a visa,” Mr. Eremeev said in a phone interview.
Among other things, the immigration agency stated that the office leased by Mr. Eremeev did not appear to be suited for a “business that would require the employment of a manager or executive.” His lawyer provided details and pictures of the space.
Ultimately, the government denied the petition, stating that the “organizational structure” presented did not support the “managerial or executive position” that Mr. Eremeev was to fill.
“You are going in circles,” said the lawyer, Oksana Bandrivska, “and it’s getting harder to win cases.”
Russell Harrison, director of government relations for IEEE-USA, a society of technology professionals, applauded the administration’s efforts to tackle visa abuse. However, he said, a blanket approach could stifle American competitiveness.
“They seem to be against anyone coming in, which is a simplistic view,” Mr. Harrison said. “There are some incredibly talented people not born in this country, and they are being treated just like other workers who are cheap.”
Some lawyers said they had also seen more scrutiny of H-2B visas, the seasonal work permits that Mr. Trump uses to staff his Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. Jeff Joseph, a lawyer in Aurora, Colo., said the government was more often denying visas for companies that sought the visas season after season. (Mar-a-Lago uses them only during winters.)
The government’s argument, Mr. Joseph said, is that those companies are trying to import temporary workers to fill permanent jobs that should go to Americans. But he said his clients faced a shortage of local labor year after year to fill jobs in construction, lodging, landscaping and amusement parks.
Other changes affect foreigners already working or living in the United States on H-1Bs or other temporary permits.
Those sponsored by their employers for a green card, or legal permanent residency, must pass in-person interviews, a reversal of a 20-year-old policy that is likely to exacerbate a long backlog in green card applications. A memo from the immigration agency said the change was in line with the executive order to safeguard the nation from terrorism.
The administration said this month that it planned to eliminate a program established during the Obama administration that allows international entrepreneurs to stay in the United States for up to five years. The administration also said it would eliminate a two-year-old program that granted work permits for spouses of H-1B workers. And it recently announced plans to restrict the ability of foreign students to work temporarily in the United States after they graduate.
Another change affects green card holders who enlist in the military. Since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, military service has provided a faster path to citizenship than applying as a civilian, typically taking just 10 weeks.
In October, the Pentagon enacted new procedures that substantially slow the process by adding several layers of vetting. The change affects thousands of immigrants who have already enlisted because they cannot start training before clearing the background checks.
The Pentagon said the new measures were needed to ensure that terrorists do not infiltrate the military. But Margaret Stock, an immigration lawyer and retired lieutenant colonel in the Army, said the military would suffer. “They are turning away green card holders with language, cybersecurity and other skills that the United States military needs,” she said.
PHOTO: The Cleveland Clinic has struggled to secure visas for foreign-born specialists. It has had to delay projects and reroute some patients. (PHOTOGRAPH BY T.J. KIRKPATRICK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • With Ally in Oval Office, Immigration Hard-Liners Ascend to Power
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.

Load-Date: January 3, 2018


End of Document
Infosys Built Its Global Machine With Indian Workers. Can It Adjust to Trump’s ‘Hire American’?
The New York Times 
October 15, 2018 Monday 14:09 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1541 words
Byline: Steve Lohr
Highlight: Doing significantly more work in the United States, as the company is being pressured to do, would require an overhaul of its business model and corporate culture.
Body


When Infosys, a big Indian technology outsourcing company, opened a new office in Indianapolis this year, executives hailed it as a step along a new path.
Infosys built itself into a global giant by running the digital engine rooms of American corporations with armies of engineers in India. But the new technology center — a sprawling open-plan space in a downtown office tower — is in the epicenter of the American Midwest.
And its recruits are people like Keith Smith Jr., a graduate of Indiana University, who previously held a variety of jobs before Infosys trained him as a software engineer.
Ravi Kumar, a president of Infosys, described the office as “a manifestation of what the future is going to look like.”
The company, a shining success story in the Indian economy, is under mounting pressure to hire more Americans and do significantly more work onshore, in what would be a striking overhaul of its corporate culture and its business practices. In the process, Infosys has become a case study of how market forces and immigration changes by the Trump administration are reshaping corporations.
Infosys is staring at two daunting challenges to its long-successful business model, which generated $2.5 billion in profit in its last fiscal year. Companies are increasingly adopting technologies best built bysmall teams working side           by           side with customers, like cloud computing and mobile apps. It is work better situated in the Indianapolis tech center than thousands of miles away in India.
Policy changes from the Trump administration may be even more threatening. As part of his efforts to curb the flow of foreign workers into the United States, President Trump called for tighter controls on skilled worker visas in his “Buy American, Hire American” executive order last year.
Traditionally, Indian outsourcers like Infosys have deftly exploited the skilled-worker visa system. The majority of its employees in the United States hold one of those visas, analysts estimate. The company has also been fined by the government for abusing visa rules in the past, and its practices continue to draw the scrutiny of federal investigators.
All the steps Infosys is now taking “would be a huge change,” said Rod Bourgeois, an expert on the industry and the head of research at Deep Dive Equity Research. “It’s not in their DNA.”
Other big offshore outsourcing companies are also responding to the market and political threats, including Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Cognizant. But Infosys made the biggest, most public commitment to building up its work force in the United States, when the company declared last year that it would hire 10,000 workers in America by sometime in 2019.
Then, Infosys began to announce the creation of tech centers in America. Indianapolis was the first, followed by offices in Raleigh, N.C.; Providence, R.I.; and Hartford. Last month, the company said its next hub would be in Arizona. Infosys says it has hired more than 5,800 American workers.
“We will be looking for talent that is closer to our client clusters,” said Mr. Kumar, who is the point man in the company’s initiative to hire American workers. “And our operating model will evolve.”
For now, though, an estimated 80 percent of the 200,000 Infosys workers are in India, a market that accounts for 3 percent of its worldwide revenue of $11 billion last year. The company garners 60 percent of its revenue in North America, mainly in the United States, where Infosys employs more than 20,000 workers, analysts estimate. About two-thirds of the Infosys workers in America, they say, have been Indians with skilled-worker visas.
The main such visa program, H-1B, was intended to bring in talented foreigners with special skills who would complement the domestic work force and strengthen the United States economy.
But critics say the Indian outsourcers mastered the use of legal loopholes to obtain an outsize share of skilled-worker visas, which, in turn, allowed the companies to hire less costly Indian workers.
In 2013, Infosys paid $34 million in a civil settlement with the Justice Department and other federal agencies, which accused the company of systemic abuse of visa rules, including on B-1 visas meant for short trips for training or attending conferences. In that settlement, Infosys agreed to improve its visa compliance practices.
The government continues to monitor the company. One current and two former Infosys employees, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified, said federal investigators had questioned them in recent months about the company’s visa handling.
The Justice Department and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services did not respond to requests for comment.
Infosys also faces two private, civil lawsuits accusing the company of discrimination in hiring, promotions and firing.
The accounts from testimony and interviews with witnesses tied to those suits vary in detail. But the stories share themes that illustrate how hard it could be for Infosys to change its ways.
The plaintiffs and witnesses were experienced lawyers, human relations managers, salespeople and engineers who joined Infosys as the company expanded rapidly in the United States. Things went smoothly at first, when the newcomers brought in new customers or smoothed the way with government agencies.
But tensions surfaced. Important decisions were all made in India. Questions were unwelcome. Complaints brought retaliation — reassignments, demotions, abrupt firings and belittling remarks.
“It’s basically a corporate caste system, run out of India,” said Erin Green, a former immigration lawyer for Infosys, who filed one of the civil suits against the company in Texas last year. “And people who are not Indian are at the bottom.”
Daniel Kotchen, a lawyer who has a pending suit against the company in Wisconsin on behalf of former workers, said, “Infosys has a business model that is discriminatory — its rigid and explicit preference for a certain kind of person.”
Infosys is fighting the suits, denying discrimination and saying its work force reflects the global labor pool for technology skills.
“Employment at our company,” Infosys said in a statement, “is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit and the needs of our clients.”
Even as Infosys increases hiring in America, its lower-paid engineers back in India still animate the business. Wage rates in India have risen in recent years, but the gap is still sizable — a third or a fourth the rates in the United States.
Programming work done in India, analysts estimate, is twice as profitable as writing code in America. On a typical project, 70 percent or more of the work is done in India.
The Indian employees working at United States companies are often there mainly to understand customer needs and communicate with the large teams back in India. They are vital to the Infosys business, but are a fraction of the company’s engineering work force.
That formula — the so-called global delivery model — has been embraced by non-Indian companies, like IBM and Accenture, for parts of their business. But it has been the prime engine of business for Infosys.
“It may be changing some, but Infosys is certainly not abandoning its cash-cow business model,” said Ronil Hira, an offshore outsourcing expert at Howard University.
In India, Infosys is a hiring and training machine. Its pitch in the United States is that it is transplanting a version of that model here, no matter the higher costs. “We’re going to create pools of talent that do not exist in the United States,” Mr. Kumar said, and “strengthen the American work force.”
The message is appealing to state governors, winning Infosys praise and tax breaks. In Indiana, Infosys says it plans to hire 3,000 workers by 2023, after a recent announcement that it would build a training center on a 70-acre site near the Indianapolis airport.
Gov. Eric Holcomb, a Republican, describes the Infosys presence as an important building block for his state’s economic development — and well worth a generous incentive package of tax credits and training grants.
Governor Holcomb shrugs off critics who claim that Infosys undercuts American workers. “They’re hiring here,” he said.
Mr. Smith, the recent recruit who was hired last October, spent his first two months in an intensive training program, honing his skills in several programming languages and developer tools. Before Infosys, he held jobs in marketing, video production and work-force recruiting, and completed a four-month course at a coding boot camp. His current Infosys assignment is helping a large telecom company on web projects.
Mr. Smith, 35, views his Infosys job as an on-ramp to the digital economy. “I see limitless potential,” he said.
Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr. 
PHOTO: The new Infosys office in Indianapolis has a view of the city skyline. The company, under pressure to hire more Americans, has said it will hire 10,000 workers in the United States by 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY A J Mast for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
    • Top C.E.O.s Denounce Trump Immigration Policy as Threat to U.S. Economy
    • Companies Say Trump Is Hurting Business by Limiting Legal Immigration

Load-Date: October 18, 2018


End of Document
Can Infosys Adapt to 'Hire American' Policy?
The New York Times
October 17, 2018 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1473 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr.
Body


When Infosys, a big Indian technology outsourcing company, opened a new office in Indianapolis this year, executives hailed it as a step along a new path.
Infosys built itself into a global giant by running the digital engine rooms of American corporations with armies of engineers in India. But the new technology center -- a sprawling open-plan space in a downtown office tower -- is in the epicenter of the American Midwest. 
  And its recruits are people like Keith Smith Jr., a graduate of Indiana University, who previously held a variety of jobs before Infosys trained him as a software engineer.
  Ravi Kumar, a president of Infosys, described the office as ''a manifestation of what the future is going to look like.''
  The company, a shining success story in the Indian economy, is under mounting pressure to hire more Americans and do significantly more work onshore, in what would be a striking overhaul of its corporate culture and its business practices. In the process, Infosys has become a case study of how market forces and immigration changes by the Trump administration are reshaping corporations.
  Infosys is staring at two daunting challenges to its long-successful business model, which generated $2.5 billion in profit in its last fiscal year. Companies are increasingly adopting technologies best built by small teams working side by side with customers, like cloud computing and mobile apps. It is work better situated in the Indianapolis tech center than thousands of miles away in India.
  Policy changes from the Trump administration may be even more threatening. As part of his efforts to curb the flow of foreign workers into the United States, President Trump called for tighter controls on skilled worker visas in his ''Buy American, Hire American'' executive order last year.
  Traditionally, Indian outsourcers like Infosys have deftly exploited the skilled-worker visa system. The majority of its employees in the United States hold one of those visas, analysts estimate. The company has also been fined by the government for abusing visa rules in the past, and its practices continue to draw the scrutiny of federal investigators.
  All the steps Infosys is now taking ''would be a huge change,'' said Rod Bourgeois, an expert on the industry and the head of research at Deep Dive Equity Research. ''It's not in their DNA.''
  Other big offshore outsourcing companies are also responding to the market and political threats, including Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Cognizant. But Infosys made the biggest, most public commitment to building up its work force in the United States, when the company declared last year that it would hire 10,000 workers in America by sometime in 2019.
  Then, Infosys began to announce the creation of tech centers in America. Indianapolis was the first, followed by offices in Raleigh, N.C.; Providence, R.I.; and Hartford. Last month, the company said its next hub would be in Arizona. Infosys says it has hired more than 5,800 American workers.
  ''We will be looking for talent that is closer to our client clusters,'' said Mr. Kumar, who is the point man in the company's initiative to hire American workers. ''And our operating model will evolve.''
  For now, though, an estimated 80 percent of the 200,000 Infosys workers are in India, a market that accounts for 3 percent of its worldwide revenue of $11 billion last year. The company garners 60 percent of its revenue in North America, mainly in the United States, where Infosys employs more than 20,000 workers, analysts estimate. About two-thirds of the Infosys workers in America, they say, have been Indians with skilled-worker visas.
  The main such visa program, H-1B, was intended to bring in talented foreigners with special skills who would complement the domestic work force and strengthen the United States economy.
  But critics say the Indian outsourcers mastered the use of legal loopholes to obtain an outsize share of skilled-worker visas, which, in turn, allowed the companies to hire less costly Indian workers.
  In 2013, Infosys paid $34 million in a civil settlement with the Justice Department and other federal agencies, which accused the company of systemic abuse of visa rules, including on B-1 visas meant for short trips for training or attending conferences. In that settlement, Infosys agreed to improve its visa compliance practices.
  The government continues to monitor the company. One current and two former Infosys employees, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified, said federal investigators had questioned them in recent months about the company's visa handling.
  The Justice Department and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services did not respond to requests for comment.
  Infosys also faces two private, civil lawsuits accusing the company of discrimination in hiring, promotions and firing.
  The accounts from testimony and interviews with witnesses tied to those suits vary in detail. But the stories share themes that illustrate how hard it could be for Infosys to change its ways.
  The plaintiffs and witnesses were experienced lawyers, human relations managers, salespeople and engineers who joined Infosys as the company expanded rapidly in the United States. Things went smoothly at first, when the newcomers brought in new customers or smoothed the way with government agencies.
  But tensions surfaced. Important decisions were all made in India. Questions were unwelcome. Complaints brought retaliation -- reassignments, demotions, abrupt firings and belittling remarks.
  ''It's basically a corporate caste system, run out of India,'' said Erin Green, a former immigration lawyer for Infosys, who filed one of the civil suits against the company in Texas last year. ''And people who are not Indian are at the bottom.''
  Daniel Kotchen, a lawyer who has a pending suit against the company in Wisconsin on behalf of former workers, said, ''Infosys has a business model that is discriminatory -- its rigid and explicit preference for a certain kind of person.''
  Infosys is fighting the suits, denying discrimination and saying its work force reflects the global labor pool for technology skills.
  ''Employment at our company,'' Infosys said in a statement, ''is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit and the needs of our clients.''
  Even as Infosys increases hiring in America, its lower-paid engineers back in India still animate the business. Wage rates in India have risen in recent years, but the gap is still sizable -- a third or a fourth the rates in the United States.
  Programming work done in India, analysts estimate, is twice as profitable as writing code in America. On a typical project, 70 percent or more of the work is done in India.
  The Indian employees working at United States companies are often there mainly to understand customer needs and communicate with the large teams back in India. They are vital to the Infosys business, but are a fraction of the company's engineering work force.
  That formula -- the so-called global delivery model -- has been embraced by non-Indian companies, like IBM and Accenture, for parts of their business. But it has been the prime engine of business for Infosys.
  ''It may be changing some, but Infosys is certainly not abandoning its cash-cow business model,'' said Ronil Hira, an offshore outsourcing expert at Howard University.
  In India, Infosys is a hiring and training machine. Its pitch in the United States is that it is transplanting a version of that model here, no matter the higher costs. ''We're going to create pools of talent that do not exist in the United States,'' Mr. Kumar said, and ''strengthen the American work force.''
  The message is appealing to state governors, winning Infosys praise and tax breaks. In Indiana, Infosys says it plans to hire 3,000 workers by 2023, after a recent announcement that it would build a training center on a 70-acre site near the Indianapolis airport.
  Gov. Eric Holcomb, a Republican, describes the Infosys presence as an important building block for his state's economic development -- and well worth a generous incentive package of tax credits and training grants.
  Governor Holcomb shrugs off critics who claim that Infosys undercuts American workers. ''They're hiring here,'' he said.
  Mr. Smith, the recent recruit who was hired last October, spent his first two months in an intensive training program, honing his skills in several programming languages and developer tools. Before Infosys, he held jobs in marketing, video production and work-force recruiting, and completed a four-month course at a coding boot camp. His current Infosys assignment is helping a large telecom company on web projects.
  Mr. Smith, 35, views his Infosys job as an on-ramp to the digital economy. ''I see limitless potential,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/15/technology/infosys-trump-visas-american-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: An employee meeting at the new Infosys offices in Indianapolis. (B1)
A view of Indianapolis from the new Infosys offices. Of the company's roughly 20,000 U.S.-based workers, about two-thirds are estimated to have come from India through skilled-worker visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY A J MAST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Keith Smith Jr., left, a recent hire, said he viewed his job as an on-ramp to the digital economy. Erin Greene, right, who has filed a civil suit, said Infosys is ''a corporate caste system, run out of India.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY A J MAST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 BRANDON THIBODEAUX FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)       

Load-Date: October 17, 2018


End of Document
New U.S. Rule Extends Stay for Some Foreign Graduates
The New York Times
March 9, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 839 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


Shruthi Aramandla's education and her job are geared to New York City's skyline. She did not want to go back to her native India and start all over again.
Ms. Aramandla, 24, who has a master's degree from the  Tandon School of Engineering at New York University, has been waiting anxiously for the federal government to publish its new rule on a foreign-worker training program so she would know whether she could stay longer -- and perhaps one day permanently -- in the United States. 
  The federal government will publish the rule on Friday, saying that international students earning degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields in the United States will now be eligible to stay for three years of on-the-job training. This is seven months longer than under the 2008 rule it replaces for the STEM Optional Practical Training program, known as OPT. The new rule will take effect on May 10.
  Beyond offering graduates more experience in their fields, the extension serves another purpose. ''If my work visa gets denied this year, I still have two more opportunities to apply, and I can keep working within the country,'' said Ms. Aramandla, who wanted to be an engineer since she was 10, growing up in Chennai, India. She graduated from N.Y.U. in May; under the previous 29-month rule, she would have been able to stay only through October 2017.
  Ms. Aramandla will apply in April for a visa, known as an H-1B, for so-called skilled foreign workers. But Congress caps those yearly at 65,000, with an additional 20,000 slots for graduates with advanced degrees like Ms. Aramandla. The government received nearly four times as many applications for those visas as were accepted in last year's lottery.
  This rule is yet another flash point in the controversy over immigration reform. Industry leaders who say they are desperate for skilled talent and those defending the rights of American workers see the training program's extension as an end-around to stalled reform. But that is all they agree upon.
  ''It's an ongoing assault on American workers,'' said John Miano, a lawyer for a technology workers' union in Washington State, whose lawsuit last summer was what forced the government to vacate the previous rule and create a new one, this time for public comment.
  ''They are just trying to double down on what they're doing before,'' he said of the government. '''O.K., you didn't like 29 months? We'll make it 36 months.'''
  Mr. Miano says his group, the Washington Alliance of Technology Workers, is still arguing the legality of the program in an appeal. The next hearing will be in May at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
  The government posted a similar version of the rule in the federal register in October, drawing more than 50,500 comments. (Death threats to President Obama were removed, officials said.) A large number of commenters who said they were foreign students supported the rule. But there were also comments from people who identified themselves as unemployed technology workers or concerned citizens who believed the government ''was destroying this country,'' and thought that it showed the government was ''standing with illegals.''
  ''I hope you rip it up,'' one commenter said.
  The new rule states directly that ''a STEM OPT student would not replace a full- or part-time, temporary or permanent U.S. worker,'' and that the salary offered would ''be commensurate'' to American workers.
  Officials with the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency said they tried to tighten training programs, mandate oversight of employers and make sure that the students come from accredited universities in an effort to prevent fraud.
  ''In our mind, it enhances training and puts safeguards in to make sure that if you are an employer that you are not unfairly disadvantaging U.S. workers,'' Rachel Canty, deputy director for the agency's Student and Exchange Visitor Program.
  The agency said it would provide help sessions for eligible students, employers and academic institution on its website on Friday.
  Ms. Aramandla, who works for Loring Consulting Engineers and designs heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems for schools in New York, said her training would not be applicable in India, nor would she find the same work environment there; as a woman in India, she feels she would not be as respected as she is in the United States.
  Michael DesRochers, the president of Loring, said Ms. Aramandla was an integral employee in his technical work force, which is 7 percent foreign.
  ''The labor market is tight,'' Mr. DesRochers said. ''We don't look at it as the international students are taking away American opportunities. We feel we're offering to all.''
  His company's work may intersect again with the new rule: Recently, his engineers replaced the ventilation and mechanical systems for the United States Supreme Court.
  Follow The New York Times's Metro coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the New York Today newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/09/nyregion/new-us-rule-extends-stay-for-some-foreign-graduates.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Shruthi Aramandla, 24, a native of India who received a master's degree in engineering from New York University in May, said she would be able to stay longer in the United States under the new rule. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: March 9, 2016


End of Document
At a Funeral Pyre in India, Anger Over a Shooting in Kansas
The New York Times 
February 28, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 758 words
Byline: SRIRAM KARRI and ELLEN BARRY
Highlight: As family and friends said goodbye to Srinivas Kuchibhotla, killed last week in a Kansas bar, mourners denounced President Trump for failing to condemn the act.
Body


HYDERABAD, India — Just after 2 p.m. Indian Standard Time on Tuesday, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, an Indian immigrant fatally shot in a bar outside Kansas City, Kan., was placed on a pyre made of logs.
Grains of rice were placed around his mouth, as per Hindu tradition, to signify his last earthly meal, and his forehead was smeared with sandalwood paste. His father poured clarified butter on his head, as a sign of purification, and used a burning stick to light the fire.
But before the ancient rituals could be completed, a cluster of young mourners — mostly information technology professionals or engineers, like the dead man — began shouting. “Trump, down, down!” they said. “Down with racism! Down with hatred!”
Here in Hyderabad, a city so immigration-minded that a particular temple deity is believed to help grant United States visas, Mr. Kuchibhotla’s violent death is seen by many as a harbinger of rising anti-immigrant sentiment in the United States.
Last Wednesday, a 51-year-old white Navy veteran confronted Mr. Kuchibhotla, 32, and another Indian patron at a bar in Olathe, Kan., questioned them belligerently about their visa status and, after being asked to leave, returned with a gun and shot them.
“Hate has a way of growing, and becoming a trend,” said Kiran Kumar, a software engineer who attended the funeral, holding a handmade sign condemning hate crimes.
On Tuesday night during his address to Congress, President Trump condemned the attack on the two men.
Earlier in the day, the White House issued a statement that called the shooting “an act of racially motivated hatred.”
In the days since Mr. Kuchibhotla’s death, most of India’s major daily newspapers had published angry editorials over what they saw as the Trump administration’s silence on the killing.
On Tuesday, as Mr. Kuchibhotla’s body was carried to the cremation ground, dozens of regional camera crews followed, their anchormen staging on-air debates on whether Indian immigrants should return home.
India’s minister of labor, Bandaru Dattatreya, attended, as did a major movie star in the Telugu language, and Chukka Ramaiah, a 91-year-old mathematics teacher who is celebrated for sending students to top-ranked Indian institutions and onward to the United States.
“It is heartbreaking for any teacher to see a student die, at such an age, before having lived his fullest life,” Mr. Ramaiah said. “How much has America lost, too, for this single act of hatred?” After the ceremony, Mr. Dattatreya publicly recommended that Indian students speak only in English for the duration of their time in the United States, as a safety measure.
The last rites on Tuesday coincided with the arrival of India’s foreign secretary, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, in Washington. He is expected to press the Trump administration to ensure the safety of immigrants — and to preserve the annual distribution of 65,000 temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which are overwhelmingly used by Indians.
The immigration story for Mr. Kuchibhotla’s family seemed to be ending. His mother, Parvatha Vardhini, said she had once been “happy that one of the Kuchibhotla family went to the U.S. for a better future.” But this week, after her older son’s death, she demanded that her younger son, who is also employed in the United States, give up his job and stay in India.
“I will not allow my younger son to return to the U.S. again,” she told The Hindustan Times. “I want him and his family to return to Hyderabad for good.”
As the rites reached their conclusion, a cousin, Venu Madhav, described Mr. Kuchibhotla as “a typical immigrant American success story,” and said he and his wife had recently bought their first home.
“He considered Kansas home,” he said. “He had American friends, was part of that society.”
Mr. Madhav had already turned from the pyre, which had burst into crackling, five-foot flames. According to tradition, mourners are expected to turn their backs from the body when it begins to burn. They should be gone before they can hear the sound of the skull cracking, which is believed to signify the soul breaking free.
Follow Ellen Barry on Twitter @EllenBarryNYT.
PHOTO: Sunayana Dumala mourned on Tuesday in Hyderabad, India, near the body of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHESH KUMAR A./ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Related Articles
    • F.B.I. Investigating Kansas Shooting of Indian Men as Hate Crime
    • Who Belongs in Trump’s America?
    • After Kansas Shootings, Indians Are Wary of Coming to U.S.
    • Hate Crime Is Feared as 2 Indian Engineers Are Shot in Kansas

Load-Date: March 2, 2017


End of Document
Suits Claim That Disney Broke Law on Visa Use
The New York Times
January 26, 2016 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1115 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Even after Leo Perrero was laid off a year ago from his technology job at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla. -- and spent his final months there training a temporary immigrant from India to do his work -- he still hoped to find a new position in the vast entertainment company.
But Mr. Perrero discovered that despite his high performance ratings, he and most of the other 250 tech workers Disney dismissed would not be rehired for at least a year, and probably never. 
  Now he and Dena Moore, another American laid off by Disney at that time, have filed lawsuits in federal court in Tampa, Fla., against Disney and two global consulting companies, HCL and Cognizant, which brought in foreign workers who replaced them. They claim the companies colluded to break the law by using temporary H-1B visas to bring in immigrant workers, knowing that Americans would be displaced.
  ''I don't have to be angry or cause drama,'' said Ms. Moore, 53, who had worked at Disney for 10 years. ''But they are just doing things to save a buck, and it's making Americans poor.''
  Ms. Moore had also trained her replacement. After she was laid off, she applied for more than 150 other jobs at Disney. She did not get one.
  The lawsuits by Mr. Perrero and Ms. Moore, who each filed a separate but similar complaint on Monday seeking class-action status, represent the first time Americans have gone to federal court to sue both outsourcing companies that imported immigrants and the American company that contracted with those businesses, claiming that they collaborated intentionally to supplant Americans with H-1B workers.
  A furor over the layoffs in Orlando last January brought to light many other episodes in which American workers, mainly in technology but also in accounting and administration, said they had lost jobs to foreigners on H-1B visas, and had to train replacements as a condition of their severance. The foreign workers, mostly from India, were provided by outsourcing companies, including the two named in the lawsuits, which have dominated the H-1B visa system, packing the application process to win an outsize share of the quota set by Congress of 85,000 visas each year.
  The Labor Department opened investigations of the outsourcing companies -- the direct employers of the temporary immigrants -- at Disney and at Southern California Edison, a utility that laid off hundreds of American workers in 2014. The investigations are continuing. At least 30 former Disney workers also filed complaints with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, claiming that they faced discrimination as American citizens.
  The lawsuits by Mr. Perrero and Ms. Moore are based on the rules for H-1B visas, which Congress designed to bring foreign workers with special skills into the country. Employers are required to declare to the Department of Labor that hiring foreigners on the visas ''will not adversely affect the working conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed.''
  ''Was I negatively affected?'' Ms. Moore asked. ''Yeah, I was. I lost my job.''
  Sara Blackwell, a lawyer in Sarasota, Fla., representing the former Disney employees, said the suits charged that the companies had lied under oath when they said no Americans would lose their jobs.
  Disney, in a statement on Monday, said, ''These lawsuits are based on an unsustainable legal theory and are a wholesale misrepresentation of the facts.'' The company said more than 100 of the workers who were laid off in Orlando had been rehired.
  HCL has said it complies carefully with United States laws. Cognizant, in a statement on Monday, said that it would not comment on the lawsuit, but that it ''fully complies with all U.S. regulations regarding H-1B visas.''
  The company said an internal compliance team ''ensures our practices are not merely compliant with existing laws in letter and spirit, but also adhere to best practices.'' Cognizant said it employed ''many thousands of U.S. citizens and residents in addition to employees on lawful H-1B visas.''
  Responding to the frustration of American workers, Congress in December renewed and increased a fee on outsourcing companies that it had allowed to lapse. Larger companies employing many H-1B workers in the United States will pay an extra fee of $4,000 for each new H-1B visa -- up from $2,000 -- and another $4,000 to move an H-1B immigrant who is already in the country to a new employer.
  Senator Bill Nelson of Florida, a Democrat who has been openly critical of Disney's layoffs, offered a bill to reduce the H-1B quota by 15,000 visas a year to 70,000. The issue came up in the presidential race, as Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a Republican candidate, introduced a bill with Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a Republican hard-liner on immigration, to sharply increase the minimum wage for H-1B workers to $110,000 a year, to discourage outsourcing companies from using the workers to lower wages.
  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, an international association of tech workers, posted an online petition to encourage Americans who were displaced to file complaints with the Justice Department. In a letter to the group in December, Alberto Ruisanchez, a Justice Department lawyer in charge of prosecuting immigration abuses, confirmed that it would be a violation of anti-discrimination laws for an employer, or a contracting firm, to fire workers or hire replacements ''because of citizenship or immigration status.''
  Mr. Perrero, like many Americans who have lost their jobs, said he was long reluctant to speak out publicly against his former employer. At 42 and with a family to support, he worried that he would not find another job in Orlando, where Disney rules as the largest employer by far. He spoke with The New York Times anonymously in an article in June about the humiliation of training his foreign replacement.
  But local recruiters told him that despite the company's statements, Disney managers said they would avoid rehiring workers who had been laid off. Mr. Perrero said he knew of only two workers from the close-knit group of more than 200 who were dismissed who went back to tech jobs at Disney.
  Mr. Perrero said he was ''part Italian, part English, part Swedish.'' He said, ''I wholeheartedly believe our country needs to have amazing people come here to build a long-term foundation.'' But he said the H-1B program had been abused.
  Ms. Moore said that even with strong programming credentials, it was hard for her to start over in her 50s with another company. She has 13 grandchildren, and she confessed that one of the difficult losses was a pass that allowed her to take them to Disney World at no cost.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/us/lawsuit-claims-disney-colluded-to-replace-us-workers-with-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, who were laid off from technology jobs at Walt Disney World, filed federal lawsuits on Monday. Their claims are based on rules for H-1B visas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRIAN BLANCO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)       

Load-Date: January 26, 2016


End of Document
Rural Areas Brace for a Shortage of Doctors Due to Visa Policy
The New York Times 
March 18, 2017 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1398 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: Small-town America relies on a program that attracts foreign physicians to underserved areas. A recent federal change, however, could delay newcomers.
Body


Correction Appended
In Coudersport, Pa., a town in a mountainous region an hour’s drive from the nearest Walmart, Cole Memorial Hospital counts on two Jordanian physicians to keep its obstetrics unit open and is actively recruiting foreign specialists.
In Fargo, N.D., a gastroenterologist from Lebanon — who is among hundreds of foreign physicians in the state — has risen to become vice president of the North Dakota Medical Association.
In Great Falls, Mont., 60 percent of the doctors who specialize in hospital care at Benefis Health System, which serves about 230,000 people in 15 counties, are foreign doctors on work visas.
Small-town America relies on a steady flow of doctors from around the world to deliver babies, treat heart ailments and address its residents’ medical needs. But a recent, little-publicized decision by the government to alter the timetable for some visa applications is likely to delay the arrival of new foreign doctors, and is causing concern in the places that depend on them.
While the Trump administration is fighting, in the courts of justice and public opinion, for its temporary travel ban affecting six countries, the slowdown in the rural doctor pipeline shows how even a small, relatively uncontroversial change can ripple throughout the country.
In Montana, for example, where nine counties do not have a single physician, it means Benefis Health does not know when a Romanian doctor trained in kidney transplants will arrive. The health care company spent months recruiting the doctor and had been expecting her in July.
“Our health system already has nine months invested in her, and now we have no idea when she can start,” said Erica Martin, who recruits doctors for the company.
The doctor, Silviana Marineci, who is completing a fellowship at the University of Minnesota, said she was frazzled by being in limbo.
“I won’t have an income, I don’t know if I will afford rent, I don’t know where I will be,” she said. “It’s insane.”
The procedural change regards temporary visas for skilled workers, known as H-1B visas. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services           recently announced that it would temporarily suspend a “premium processing” option by which employers could pay an extra $1,225 to have H-1B applications approved in as little as two weeks, rather than several months.
Companies using that option, the government said, have effectively delayed visas for others who did not pay the extra fee.
A spokeswoman for the immigration agency, Arwen Consaul, said in a statement that the measure was necessary to “work down the existing backlogs due to the high volume of incoming petitions.”
The H-1B program has raised questions about whether it displaces American workers, particularly in computer programming and engineering jobs, for which most of the visas are issued.
H-1B recipients also include foreign physicians who practice in places shunned by American doctors for personal and professional reasons.
About 25 percent of all physicians practicing or training in the United States are foreign, but in some inner cities and most rural areas, that share is significantly higher.
There were 211,460 international medical graduates practicing in the United States in December 2015, according to the latest data available from the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates.
Senators Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat; Susan M. Collins, Republican of Maine; and Heidi Heitkamp, Democrat of North Dakota, have urged the agency to continue premium processing.
“Slowing down this successful two-decade-old program and the doctors it brings to rural areas will hurt families across North Dakota and rural America,” Ms. Heitkamp wrote in an email.
It was a North Dakota senator, Kent Conrad, who in 1994 proposed to relieve a shortage of doctors by tapping foreign physicians who have completed medical education in the United States.
His program waives the requirement that foreign doctors who graduate from residency programs in the United States return to their home countries for two years before working here. It lures such graduates to practice in underserved areas by offering them the chance to apply for a green card to live permanently in the United States after three years.
The program must be reauthorized by Congress every two years. Ms. Klobuchar, who twice has introduced legislation to make the program permanent, plans to do so again in the coming weeks.
Since the program’s inception, tens of thousands of foreign physicians in a variety of specialties have flocked to clinics and hospitals in Appalachia, the Mississippi Delta region, the Great Plains and elsewhere.
Many of them, such as Dr. Fadel E. Nammour, the vice president of the North Dakota Medical Association, put down roots and never leave.
The friendliness that he found in Fargo reminded him of his home country, Dr. Nammour said. As a token of his gratitude, one of his first patients brought him a Styrofoam box filled with freshly caught walleye, a fish that thrives in the state’s lakes.
“We provide not only the care but also our leadership,” said Dr. Nammour, who is now an American citizen. “The focus should be on making it easier to bring people in to cover the physician shortage we have.”
The delay also could affect the roughly 400 foreign medical graduates who come each year to participate in residency programs at teaching hospitals. The doctors were matched on Friday for residencies starting July 1 across the country.
“Everyone around the country will be in a mad scramble to figure out this visa situation,” said Michelle Larson-Krieg, the director of international student and scholar services at the University of Colorado in Denver, which usually takes 10 or 12 residents on H-1Bs each year at its Anschutz Medical Campus.
The immigration agency said in a statement that applicants could still request an H-1B approval on an “expedited basis,” if they could prove there was an emergency or humanitarian justification.
Immigration lawyers said that it was extremely difficult to meet that standard, and that they doubted whether the agency could handle a flood of such requests.
“If they don’t have the manpower to do premium processing, I don’t see how they are going to do special requests,” said Andrea Szew, a lawyer in Los Angeles.
In the meantime, hospitals and clinics are adjusting to the possibility of being without some doctors for a while. Ms. Martin of Benefis Health said the hospital would have to give other doctors additional shifts or hire costly temporary physicians, who are frowned upon because they cannot develop a rapport with patients during their brief stints or provide continuity of care.
Ms. Martin said Benefis Health was also recruiting other foreign physicians who could end up in the same situation as Dr. Marineci. “The most problematic thing is the unknown” about when the doctors can start, she said.
Rom Satchi, a Canadian who completed his pediatric residency at the University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, was invited for interviews at facilities in Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Pennsylvania and several other places desperate for a pediatrician.
Ultimately, Dr. Satchi signed a contract with Mama Mia Pediatrics in northern Las Vegas, a working-class area that has been struggling to handle a swelling patient caseload. He agreed to start in mid-June.
But now, it is uncertain whether he will be able to get his visa in time.
“At this point, I have no voice,” said Dr. Satchi, who plans to return to Canada and wait, jobless, until the visa is approved. “I can’t do anything.”
Correction: March 28, 2017, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on March 19 about the effect a change in visa policy has had on foreign doctors in rural areas referred incorrectly to the number of such doctors in North Dakota. There are hundreds — not thousands — of foreign physicians practicing in that state.
PHOTO: Dr. Silviana Marineci, a Romanian finishing a fellowship in Minnesota, said an H-1B visa policy change left her in limbo. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Afghans Who Worked for U.S. Are Told Not to Apply for Visas, Advocates Say
    • E.U. Lawmakers Call for End to Visa-Free Travel for Americans
    • In Open Letter, 65 Writers and Artists Urge Trump to Reconsider Visa Ban
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers

Load-Date: March 29, 2017


End of Document
National Briefing
The New York Times
April 8, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 760 words
Body


MID-ATLANTIC
Pennsylvania: Governor Issues Order Barring Gender Bias 
  Gov. Tom Wolf signed an executive order Thursday barring state contractors and grant recipients from discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. Mr. Wolf, a Democrat, said he could not wait any longer for Republican lawmakers to move on legislation to ban such discrimination in employment, housing and public services. The move has the support of some of the state's biggest businesses and advocacy groups. It comes amid a backlash over what Mr. Wolf has called a discriminatory law in North Carolina. The rules apply to entities that receive potentially tens of billions of dollars a year. (AP)
  WASHINGTON
  Visa Applications Reach Limit for Highly Skilled Workers
  Federal officials announced that the annual limit for applications for visas for highly skilled immigrants, known as H-1B visas, was reached on Thursday, less than a week after the application period opened on April 1. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the federal visa agency, said it received more than enough applications for the annual quotas of 65,000 new H-1B visas and 20,000 visas for students graduating with master's degrees or higher from American universities. It was the fourth year in a row that the yearly quota was reached within one week. The selection will now be made by a computer-run random lottery. Many American employers, especially those in technology, have clamored for Congress to increase the H-1B limits. But American tech workers have protested they were laid off from their jobs and replaced by less skilled H-1B visa holders. JULIA PRESTON
  MIDWEST
  Michigan: State Officials Sued Over Detroit Schools Condition
  The Detroit Public Schools board filed a class-action lawsuit against Gov. Rick Snyder and other state officials on Thursday over the deterioration of the city's schools. The suit seeks compensatory damages for all Detroit Public Schools children who have been subjected to ''constitutional violations'' since the state's takeover of the schools in 1999. Detroit's public school system faces $3.4 billion in debt and other obligations. (REUTERS)
  SOUTH
  Virginia: Man Jailed Since 1982 Is Cleared of Rape and Murder
  A man convicted of rape and murder more than three decades ago is innocent and should be released from prison, the state Supreme Court said Thursday. It granted a petition for a writ of actual innocence after DNA tests failed to identify his genetic profile in sperm at the crime scene. The man, Keith Harward, received a life sentence for the 1982 killing of Jesse Perron and the rape of his wife in Newport News. He will be released on Friday, said a lawyer with the Innocence Project who represented him. The order came a day after Attorney General Mark Herring said DNA evidence proves that Mr. Harward could not have committed the crimes. The evidence implicated Jerry L. Crotty, a sailor who was stationed in the area. He died in 2006 in prison while serving a sentence for abduction. (AP)
  WEST
  California: Cross on Seal Is Ruled Unconstitutional
  A federal judge found Thursday that Los Angeles County violated the Constitution by voting to put a cross on the county seal. The judge, Christina A. Snyder of Federal District Court, ruled in a lawsuit filed two years ago by the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California. The cross was removed when the 1957 seal was redesigned in 2004 after the A.C.L.U. threatened legal action. But in 2014, county supervisors voted to put a cross atop the seal's depiction of the San Gabriel Mission, saying that was historically accurate. The judge said the cross ''places the county's power, prestige and purse behind a single religion, Christianity.'' (AP)
  California: Man With Knife Killed by San Francisco Police
  Two San Francisco police officers shot and killed a man carrying a knife in the Mission District on Thursday, Police Chief Greg Suhr said. He said officers shot the unidentified Latino man after he refused to drop a knife and after he was shot with nonlethal beanbags full of pellets. The incident was the third fatal shooting of a minority suspect not carrying a gun in the last two years and the second since December. The U.S. Department of Justice recently agreed to requests from Chief Suhr and Mayor Ed Lee to review the department's procedures and policies. Officers said the man was charging at them with what was described as a chef's knife. Two witnesses say the man spoke only Spanish and the officers made their command in English. (AP)

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/08/us/national-briefing.html

Load-Date: April 8, 2016


End of Document
For Lack of a Visa...
The New York Times
November 1, 2015 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ED; Column 0; Education Life Supplement; Pg. 18
Length: 912 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Liz Robbins is a Metro reporter for The Times covering immigration.
Body


Decades ago there was a hit song in India, ''Chitthi Aayi Hai,'' a tear-jerking anthem about mothers mourning the loss of sons who went to school abroad and never came back.
The tune has changed. ''It used to be by default students from India and China, in particular, bought one-way tickets over here,'' said Vivek Wadhwa, who has written extensively on international tech talent. ''Now it's a two-way street. They work for a few years and go home.'' 
  Mr. Wadhwa, a fellow at the Rock Center for Corporate Governance at Stanford, suggests a reason: After earning their graduate degrees in the United States, potential entrepreneurs and programmers are unable to get work visas.
  According to a Brookings Institution analysis, in 2010 only 30 percent of foreign graduates of U.S. universities received an H-1B visa, awarded to temporary workers in specialty occupations. And though 64 percent of all international students in science, technology, engineering and math, or STEM, come from India and China, they are still subject to the 7 percent cap per country that immigration law places on green cards. The wait is so long for permanent residency, many simply leave.
  In what they believe will stimulate innovation and the economy, tech companies, lawmakers and universities have been urging the administration to make it easier for international students to stay in the United States. Thus, the fate of foreign graduates has become yet another spark in the contentious debate over immigration reform, prompting a variation on a familiar question: Do foreign graduates get jobs at the expense of American workers?
  That is what a technology workers union out of Washington State argued when it sued the Department of Homeland Security last year over an extension to its Optional Practical Training program. OPT allows international students to work for one year in the United States; in 2008, in response to the recession, the department had granted STEM graduates an additional 17 months. But the Federal District Court hearing the suit has ruled that the department had erred by skipping the formal approval process and has until February to present its plan for public review, and then offer a revised rule. Meanwhile, the union, the Washington Alliance of Technology Workers, has filed an appeal challenging the legality of the department even making such a policy.
  The OPT extension, opponents argue, represents an end-around to the H-1B visa program that makes it easier for companies to hire low-cost foreign labor and for some unaccredited institutions to bring in students for short-term work instead of education. ''I would hope that D.H.S. would say this is a really bad idea and we should phase this out,'' said John Miano, the lawyer representing the union. ''When people are on student visas serving as guest workers, how absurd is that? They are supposed to be students.''
  Ostensibly, an OPT extension improves the long odds of being selected in the H-1B lottery, one of the paths to permanent residency. ''A longer OPT might mean they get two bites of that apple,'' said Ben A. Rissing, a professor at Cornell's School of Industrial and Labor Relations. But chances are still slim. Congress caps H-1B visas yearly at 65,000, with another 20,000 slots for graduates with advanced degrees. Consider the crush every April: Last spring, there were 233,000 petitions for H-1B visas within the first five days of their being offered.
  Amid pleas from Microsoft and other tech companies, two bills were introduced in Congress this year that would eliminate caps on employment-based visas and ease residency restrictions for those with graduate degrees -- the ''green cards for grads'' solution. Both bills are stalled in committees.
  In a letter supporting the Senate bill, 14 associations representing thousands of higher education institutions described an urgent need: ''According to projections, the United States will face a shortfall of more than 200,000 advanced-degree STEM workers by 2018,'' the associations wrote. ''In many STEM areas, foreign students are a majority of the Ph.D. graduates from U.S. universities.'' It went on to say that the ''immigration system forces many of them to leave, sacrificing the innovation and economic growth they would create here.''
  Or, as one prominent immigration lawyer, Stephen Yale-Loehr, put it: ''Imagine if the next Google or Facebook were to be developed in India or China. All those jobs that could have been in the United States instead are being developed overseas and competing against our best companies.''
  For labor proponents, that is far too simplistic. ''Basing immigration policy on something as unpredictable as entrepreneurship is one of the things that sounds good,'' Mr. Miano said, ''but it just doesn't make sense.''
  For graduates working under OPT, the uncertainty is frightening. ''You're gambling your whole career based on some lottery,'' said Venkatesh, 27, who did not want his last name published for fear of its affecting job prospects. Having graduated from New York University in 2014 with a master's in computer science, he now works as a programmer for a large financial institution.
  Venkatesh, who is from Hyderabad, India, says that 12 months is not enough time to pay back university loans or to gain sufficient work experience.
  ''I would probably prefer to find a way to do something better in India,'' he said, ''because you can't rely on a broken immigration system.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/education/edlife/should-foreign-graduates-get-a-visa-edge.html

Load-Date: November 1, 2015


End of Document
One Face of Immigration in America Is a Family Tree Rooted in Asia
The New York Times 
September 16, 2018 Sunday 16:24 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1885 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Sabrina Tavernise
Highlight: More of the United States population is foreign-born now than at any time since 1910. Many immigrants came through family reunification policies that the Trump administration hopes to scale back.
Body


LAS VEGAS — The young engineer arrived in America when he was 23 with a good education and little else. He landed a job at a nuclear test site, and built a home in Nevada. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, he brought his wife, mother, five sisters and a brother over from India, his native land.
In later years, his siblings sponsored family members of their own, and their clan now stretches from Nevada to Florida, New Jersey to Texas — more than 90 Americans nurtured on the strength of one ambitious engineer, Jagdish Patel, 72.
In late June, four generations of Patels assembled for a reunion in Las Vegas, a gathering that included a venture capitalist, a network engineer, physicians, dentists and students.
“I am so glad that I came to America,” Mr. Patel said recently, sitting in the custom-designed house he built in Las Vegas, complete with a home theater where he hosts Super Bowl parties and a marble-lined Hindu temple room. “I brought everyone here,” he said, “and we have provided valuable service to this country.”
The share of the United States population that is foreign-born has reached its highest level since 1910, according to government data released last week. But in recent years, the numbers have been soaring not so much with Latin Americans sweeping across the border, but with educated people from Asia obtaining visas — families like the Patels, who have taken advantage of “family reunification” provisions that have been a cornerstone of federal immigration law for half a century.
Since the Patels began flocking to America in the 1970s, millions of other Indians have arrived to work as programmers and engineers in Silicon Valley, doctors in underserved rural areas and researchers at universities. The majority were sponsored by relatives who came before them. Others arrived on work visas and were later sponsored for legal residency, or green cards, by their employers.
The Trump administration has framed immigration as a threat to the nation’s security and to American workers, a drastic departure from the longtime consensus that immigration was a net positive for the country. The president’s public priorities have often focused on fortifying the southwest border, but his administration is also working to scale back decades of legal migration that have led to Asians, not Latin Americans, becoming the largest group of new foreign-born residents since 2010.
Already, the administration has quietly begun taking steps to cut back legal immigration, under the banner of “Buy American and Hire American,” which the president framed in an executive order last year. Some experts predict that the number of immigrants granted permanent legal residency in the 2018 fiscal year, which ends on Sept. 30, will show a rare decline.
Without passing new legislation, the administration has pursued a number of policies that are slowing legal immigration. It has reduced refugee admissions; narrowed who is eligible for asylum; made it more difficult to qualify for permanent residency or citizenship; and tightened scrutiny of applicants for high-skilled worker visas, known as H-1Bs.
A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had jumped by 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the previous quarter. Government requests for additional information on applications doubled in the same period.
Green-card applicants sponsored by an employer now must undergo in-person interviews, a step that previously was taken only in cases that raised concerns.
The Trump administration is pushing policies supposedly intended to favor immigrants who have valuable skills at a time when newcomers already are, on average, at their most educated. Nearly half of all foreign-born people who have arrived since 2010 have college degrees, compared with about 30 percent of native-born residents.
“We are having this debate about getting our system to be merit-based, but it really in effect already is one,” said David Bier, an immigration policy analyst at the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C. “The least-known fact about legal immigration to the U.S. is that it’s much more educated than the general U.S. population.”
Of the 1.1 million green cards granted in 2017, about two-thirds went to people sponsored by relatives, compared to just 12 percent who were sponsored through employment.
Immigration has taken center stage in many Republican election campaigns this year. Representative Ron DeSantis, the party’s candidate for governor of Florida, released a video in which he tells his daughter to “build the wall” as she plays with blocks. Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor of Georgia, ran an ad saying he would “round up criminal illegals” in his pickup truck.
“The big story here is just the massive misperception about the nature of immigration in the U.S.,” said Edward Alden, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who specializes in immigration policy. “The lion’s share of public attention is focused on what is now a very small number of people coming here illegally and showing up at the border seeking asylum.
“The reality is that a growing percentage of immigrants coming to the U.S. are highly educated, and are exactly the sort of people we want to be attracting.”
Supporters of Mr. Trump’s position say that this trend is an incidental result of a policy that does not guarantee such an outcome.
“We need to construct a system that discourages endless chains of relatives coming in,” said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which supports curbs on immigration. “We have an immigration system that rewards people who have relatives in the United States, rather than people who have skills and education.”
Michael Bars, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency which is focusing most of the new scrutiny on legal immigration, said the government’s aim is not to close the borders but to protect against fraud, human trafficking and gang activity, “defending our system from those seeking to exploit it at the expense of U.S. workers, lawful-abiding applicants and petitioners.”
There are still an estimated 11 million people in the country illegally, and that represents a major political issue.
“Eleven million people is not a small number,” said Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer at the Pew Research Center “But it is certainly the case that unauthorized immigration from Mexico is getting a lot more attention than the numbers seem to warrant.” Mr. Passel said fewer Mexicans were caught at the border in fiscal 2017, which ended on Sept. 30, than in any year since the late 1960s.
Under the Trump administration’s plan, the number of family-based green cards issued would be reduced from the 804,793 granted in 2016 to about 487,000 a year, according to an analysis by Julia Gelatt and Sarah Pierce of the Migration Policy Institute — a 40 percent reduction in family-tied green cards and a 27 percent reduction overall.
“Trump is the first of any modern president to advocate for reducing legal immigration,” Ms. Pierce said.
Currently, American citizens like Mr. Patel can sponsor minor children, unmarried and married adult children, and spouses, parents and brothers and sisters. Green-card holders are limited to sponsoring minor children and unmarried adult children.
Under the new proposal, Americans would lose the right to petition for their parents, adult or married children, or siblings; they could sponsor only spouses and minor children. Green-card holders would be limited further, to sponsoring minor children only, not adult children.
The current system dates to 1965, when Congress passed the Immigration and Nationality Act, which wiped away the old system of country quotas established in the 1920s that many considered racist. The idea was to treat people from all countries equally, and the law’s central pillar was to give American citizens the ability to invite family members who were still abroad. It also allowed for some immigration based on skills.
Some experts argue that the real implications of the 1965 law are only now dawning on the wider population, as the face of the country changes — and that realization is what has been driving much of the emotion in politics.
“The 1965 act really changed the look and feel of the country in a fundamental way, but it took 50 years for the country to come to terms with that,” said Muzaffar Chishti, director of the New York office of the Migration Policy Institute.
Madeline Hsu, a professor of Asian-American studies at the University of Austin, Texas, said there were only about 12,000 Indian immigrants in the United States in 1960. The foreign-born Indian population last year stood at about 2.6 million, according to the Brookings Institution, and it had risen by almost half since 2010.
The 1965 law opened up the United States to people from India like Jagdish Patel.
He recalls that at his engineering college back in the Indian state of Gujarat, “when America started to allow people from different countries to come, we all decided to get ready to go.”
Mr. Patel immigrated in 1968 and enrolled at Youngstown State University in Ohio, where he earned a master’s degree in structural engineering. He returned in 1971 to marry, and because he had a green card, he was able to sponsor his wife, Amita.
In 1977, he became a United States citizen, and sponsored his brother Jay and Jay’s wife for green cards. By 1985, he had also sponsored his mother, five sisters and their husbands and children, most of whom settled in the New York-New Jersey area.
And he had American-born children of his own. His son, Satya, is now a venture capitalist in San Francisco, after working as an executive at Google and at Twitter; his daughter, Sita Montgomery, is an interior designer in Salt Lake City with 140,000 followers on Instagram.
Now retired, Mr. Patel savors time to play golf and to travel — so far, he has visited 50 countries. He devoted a year to planning the Patel reunion in June.
The eldest Patel to attend the event, which included bowling, banquet dinners and a talent show, was 88; the youngest was nine months old. Mr. Patel gave each attendee a royal-blue booklet, its cover emblazoned with a crown and the words “Royal Patel Family Reunion.” Its pages depict the sprawling Patel family tree, starting in India.
“In America, you can still succeed as an immigrant, irrespective of skin color, religion or country of origin,” said Mr. Patel, who likes to point out that President Trump’s wife, Melania, sponsored her parents to come to the country she has adopted.
“All this Twitter and campaign stuff is mostly just talk,” he said. “Trump knows in his mind that immigration works. Family reunification will stay.”
PHOTO: Jagdish Patel at his home in Las Vegas. He moved to the United States in 1968, when he was 23, and later sponsored family members to join him. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Roger Kisby for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Melania Trump’s Parents Become U.S. Citizens, Using ‘Chain Migration’ Trump Hates
    • What Is ‘Chain Migration’? Here’s the Controversy Behind It
    • Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy

Load-Date: November 2, 2018


End of Document
Changes to Tech Visas Are Cosmetic for Now
The New York Times
April 4, 2017 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 747 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL and NICK WINGFIELD
Body


The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced on Friday that it was reversing its previous guidance that entry-level computer programming jobs automatically qualify as a ''specialty occupation'' -- a basic requirement for receiving an H-1B work visa. And on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would look closely at any employer who discriminates against American workers by showing a preference for hiring H-1B workers.
The announcements came as the government began accepting applications on Monday for H-1B visas that will be issued for the next fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1. 
  How do the announcements change the government's policies toward foreign workers?
  The changes are more cosmetic than substantive. Visas for entry-level computer jobs have already been getting more scrutiny from immigration officials, and the Justice Department is reminding companies to follow the law.
  Still, critics of the H-1B program say the Justice Department's warning to companies not to discriminate against Americans might lead to enforcement action.
  ''If the Department of Justice concludes that these companies are discriminating against Americans, the entire outsourcing model becomes deeply suspect,'' said Russell Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, a group that represents American tech workers.
  Why is the H-1B program important? 
  H-1B visas are commonly used by companies to bring foreign workers to the United States to fill technical positions like software developers. Some tech companies say they need foreign workers because they cannot find enough Americans with the skills for these jobs.
  There's a lot of controversy around H-1Bs. Some of the biggest users of these work visas are outsourcing firms, many of them based in India. These firms often bring foreign workers to the United States at low wages to fill jobs once held by higher-paid Americans.
  How do the new policies affect Microsoft, Facebook and other big American technology companies? 
  The large tech companies are unlikely to be affected much in the near term, immigration lawyers and technology executives said. Technology companies usually apply for H-1B visas when they need to fill a job with higher-skilled workers holding bachelor's or master's degrees.
  William Moss, a spokesman for Intel, said the chip maker does not expect any impact from the change. ''Intel's foreign national population in the U.S. is largely comprised of individuals possessing unique and difficult to find skills which can only be acquired through advanced-degree, university-level education,'' Mr. Moss said.
  What about the Indian outsourcing firms? 
  Indian outsourcing firms like Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Infosys get a large number of H-1B visas, as do outsource companies that are based in America, such as I.B.M. and Cognizant.
  Although they do hire some entry-level programmers, they have been shifting their hiring to higher-skilled and better paid workers.
  Benjamin Trounson, a spokesman for Tata Consultancy Services, said the company has cut back on its use of H-1B visas in the past few years, receiving only 1,500 in 2016.
  Why is this happening now?
  On Monday, the federal government began accepting applications for next year's visas. Demand for the H-1B visas so far exceeds the supply that the government is likely to cut off applications within a week, and visas will be awarded by lottery. Congress allows for 65,000 H-1Bs each year, with an additional 20,000 for workers possessing a master's degree or higher.
  The Trump administration may be using the moment to discourage what they see as abuse of the work visa.
  ''The timing is not coincidental,'' said Ted Ruthizer, an immigration lawyer with Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel in New York. ''It's an attempt to show a mastery of the situation, that they know what companies are up to with H-1Bs and they're not going to let them get away with any shenanigans.''
  Are more changes coming that could affect the technology sector? 
  Probably. Companies like Amazon and Expedia took a leading position in opposing President Trump's first executive order banning travel to the United States from seven majority Muslim countries, saying that it restricted the movement of employees and hindered their ability to attract talent.
  The industry is also awaiting a possible executive order from Mr. Trump that could further change how H-1Bs and other visas used by the tech industry are issued.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/technology/tech-worker-h-1b-visas-changes.html

Load-Date: April 4, 2017


End of Document
Trump and Turnbull in New York: A Chance to Make U.S.-Australia Ties Shipshape
The New York Times 
May 3, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 873 words
Byline: NOAH REMNICK
Highlight: President Trump and Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, who clashed over refugees, will be at a commemoration on the Intrepid of their nations’ 1942 battle against Japan.
Body


Among the many people President Trump has antagonized during his brief yet turbulent time in office, few were quite as surprised to receive his ire as the Australians. Though the United States and            Australia have long been allied in war and trade, Mr. Trump            abruptly ended a phone call with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in late January after the Australian leader urged him to honor an agreement to accept 1,250 refugees from an Australian detention center.
Things only soured further when Mr. Trump took to Twitter to excoriate the agreement. “I will study this dumb deal!” he declared in a post a few days later.
On Thursday, the president will have a chance for reconciliation when he boards the hangar deck of the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum for a dinner commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea, in which United States and Australian naval and air forces fought Japan during World War II. The conflict is often remembered as “the battle that saved Australia.”
“There’s a deep and broad connection between the two countries that most people don’t know enough about,” said John Berry, a former United States ambassador to Australia and the president of the American Australian Association, which is hosting the event. “I’m glad we’re taking a moment to really celebrate that.”
The American Australian Association, a little-known yet industrious nonprofit organization with offices in the Financial District of Manhattan, has been working for decades to strengthen relations between the countries. Founded in 1948 by the journalist Keith Murdoch, the association was intended to spark American governmental and business interests in Australia after World War II. Since then, the scope of its ambitions has expanded to include cultural, educational and philanthropic activity. Its Education Fund, for example, has financed the participation of more than 200 fellows in postgraduate study between Australia and the United States since 2002.
The dinner on Thursday will raise money to start a new fund for veterans. It will also be the first time an American president has met with the association, Mr. Berry said, and the first in-person encounter between Mr. Trump and Mr. Turnbull.
Perhaps nowhere is that burgeoning cultural kinship more apparent than New York, which has experienced a surge of Australian immigration in recent years. The Australian Consulate now estimates that there are approximately 20,000 Australians in New York; a decade ago, a census survey estimatedthat there were fewer than 6,000.
With those immigrants has come a swell of Australian culture in a city already rich with international life. New Yorkers have taken notice. In 2014, the website Gothamist posted an article asking, “What’s the Deal With All These Australians in NYC?” The upswing, as it noted, can be attributed in part to the            E-3 program, a class of visa introduced under President George W. Bush in 2005 exclusively for Australians that is easier and less expensive to obtain than the conventional H-1B work visa. Every year, more than 10,000 E-3 visas are reserved for Australian nationals.
“Australians focus not only on work but on vacation and quality of life, so when they come it’s for six weeks or six months, not just six days like most tourists,” Mr. Berry said. “And if you look around the city, you’re starting to see their impact.”
A healthy collection of Australian bars, restaurants, and clothing stores have taken root in a stretch of NoLIta, around Mulberry Street, that some people call Little Australia. Now, alongside the typical Manhattan fare, Australians can find comfort in the familiar taste of flat whites and chants of “Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi!” As time has passed, more and more longtime New Yorkers have also begun to better understand their antipodal counterparts.
“Back when we first got here, everyone used to think we were all Crocodile Dundee with kangaroos in our backyards,” said Tim Sykes, 32, a co-owner of Ruby’s Cafe, an Australian restaurant on Mulberry Street. “But now that we’re all over the place, Aussie life is kind of taking hold.”
The transformation has been evident in at least one crucial way for Mr. Sykes. “Now you can actually find Vegemite in some restaurants,” he said.
Still, that sense of comfort was upended by Mr. Trump’s clash with Mr. Turnbull. In late April, Vice President Mike Pence helped smooth over relations when during a visit to Australia, he confirmed the countries’ “strong and historic alliance.”
Since Mr. Trump’s comments, Mr. Sykes said, he and many of his Australian friends have been calling their immigration lawyers, worried that their status might shift. For now, Mr. Sykes is counting on the meeting Thursday to help return a sense of normalcy.
“That’d be ripper, mate,” he said.
PHOTO: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia in April. He will meet President Trump in person on Thursday in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICK TSIKAS/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)
Related Articles
    • Trump Is Returning to New York City, Just Not to Sleep
    • What to Watch For: Turnbull’s First Meeting With President Trump
    • Trump’s Volatility in Asia Distresses a Longtime U.S. Ally: Australia
    • Mike Pence, on Charm Offensive in Australia, Confirms ‘Historic Alliance’

Load-Date: May 5, 2017


End of Document
In Turnabout, Indian Outsourcing Company Promises U.S. Jobs
The New York Times
May 3, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1332 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL and PAUL MOZUR; Nelson D. Schwartz contributed reporting from New York. Vindu Goel reported from San Francisco and Paul Mozur from Hong Kong.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Facing new corporate demands and political pressure from a Trump administration that wants to curb immigrant work visas, Infosys, one of India's leading tech outsourcing companies, said Tuesday that it will hire up to 10,000 Americans to serve its clients in the United States.
The move makes Infosys the latest Asian technology company to portray itself as a jobs creator as President Trump threatens to take action against companies he sees as hurting American workers. 
  Last month, Mr. Trump signed an executive order directing government agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote ''Hire American'' policies. That included offering suggestions for how to reform the H-1B visa program, which operates as a lottery to bring skilled foreign laborers to the United States each year -- usually tech workers.
  But Infosys is also making its move to hire American driven by other forces. Its home base of India has become a less appealing place to do the grunt work of programming as wages rise there and skilled labor has become more difficult to find. A study of 36,000 engineering students at 500 Indian colleges released last month found that only 5 percent could write software code correctly.
  ''Building talent pools that define the future of America is what we want to do,'' said Ravi Kumar S., Infosys's president, in a phone interview from Indiana.
  Indiana, the home state of Vice President Mike Pence, will be the first beneficiary of Infosys's hire-American efforts. The company intends to open a new technology and innovation office in or near Indianapolis in August, recruiting 100 new workers this year and several hundred more next year, with a goal of adding a total of 2,000 employees by 2021.
  Infosys said it would seek out three other sites for American expansion, looking for places that are close to clients and universities and where state and local governments are willing to offer significant economic incentives. The company already has an innovation hub in Silicon Valley.
  The majority of Infosys's business is in the United States, and it typically receives several thousand H-1B visas every year to bring in mostly entry-level Indian programmers who move from project to project at companies in industries like banking, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing and energy.
  Infosys has hired more American college graduates in the last couple of years, said Mr. Kumar. And now clients in the United States want the company to have even more people on site locally. So it must expand its American work force significantly, he said.
  ''We polled our customers and a lot of our newest locations require a lot of presence,'' Mr. Kumar said. ''This year, we are taking it to scale.''
  Mr. Kumar declined to say whether Mr. Trump's attacks on immigrant workers had influenced its decisions.
  Whether Infosys follows through on its ambitious goal of hiring 10,000 Americans in the next two years remains to be seen. The company, which employs more than 200,000 people globally, has slowed its overall hiring to a trickle as revenue growth has stalled. Mr. Kumar said the American expansion plans depend on expected client demand, as well as whether it can find and train enough college graduates with skills in artificial intelligence and other technical fields that it needs.
  Indiana's governor, Eric Holcomb, aggressively pursued Infosys, the company said at a news conference with Mr. Holcomb. Infosys already had a small work force of about 140 people in the state.
  In February, Indiana state officials were approached about a potential investment by Infosys executives via the Indiana India Business Council, a local business group, according to Jim Schellinger, the state's secretary of commerce.
  Mr. Schellinger and his team traveled to India in mid-March, meeting with Infosys's senior leadership and visiting its campuses in Bangalore and Mysore to make their pitch for the state. At the end of the month, Infosys representatives sat down with Mr. Holcomb and agreed to go ahead with plans to invest in the state.
  ''They're going to hire a wide variety of people including people with four year degrees as well as two-year ones,'' said Mr. Schellinger. ''These are high wage jobs, including software developers and architects.''
  Mr. Holcomb was ebullient at Tuesday's announcement in Indianapolis, thanking Infosys for showing confidence in the state's tech work force.
  ''You can't even spell Indiana without starting with India,'' he said. ''Today is just the beginning of a great partnership.''
  The state is offering Infosys incentives worth up to $31 million for the project. Indiana intends to give the company $500,000 in training funds and $15,250 in conditional tax credits per new job created.
  Infosys argues that it saves money for major American companies and allows them to operate more efficiently.
  Critics say that companies like Infosys have taken advantage of the H-1B program, which is designed to complement the American skilled labor force, by bringing in workers who ultimately undercut it by taking lower wages. While the program is relatively small, accounting for about 85,000 visas per year, it has become a lightning rod in the debate about large companies outsourcing American jobs.
  The proposed changes to the H-1B visa program have alarmed Indian companies and government officials, since Indians receive about two-thirds of those visas. The country's prime minister, Narendra Modi, discussed the visa issue with Mr. Trump in February, and Indian tech executives raised it with members of Congress during a visit to Washington about two months ago.
  ''Our objective was to make sure that a well-thought-out process was put in place,'' said R. Chandrashekhar, president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, India's leading tech trade group, in a phone interview after Mr. Trump's executive order.
  Like American tech companies, the Indian outsourcers have trouble finding enough qualified Americans to fill jobs, he said. ''If the Indian companies are not able to get the skills that are needed in the U.S. and not bring in skilled workers from somewhere else, then the only option is to move the job out of the United States or leave the job undone,'' he said.
  As one of the largest beneficiaries of the H-1B program, Infosys could be hit hard by changes to the system. Major American technology companies like Facebook and Qualcomm also use the program to hire foreign talent, arguing that they cannot find enough skilled workers in the United States. Still, outsourcing companies like Infosys have caused the most controversy.
  One suggestion -- that H-1B visas be given to companies paying the highest wages -- could particularly affect outsourcing companies like Infosys, which usually do not offer wages as high as the likes of Facebook. To that end, new operations in America could help offset those difficulties.
  Mr. Trump's nationalistic approach to business puts international companies in a difficult position. But for many Asian companies, it is a position they are familiar with, with the rhetoric reminiscent of the politics of business in their home countries. In recent years, India has introduced a so-called Make in India industrial policy to push companies like Apple to build out manufacturing plants in the country. Both Japan and China often exhibit the kind of economic nationalism that the Trump administration has championed.
  In response to Mr. Trump's approach, Alibaba Group of China and SoftBank of Japan have similarly made vows to hire large numbers of Americans. In Alibaba's case, it has said its businesses will help create one million jobs. The promises are so large that many experts doubt all the jobs will materialize.
  Still, their pledges won an endorsement from Mr. Trump. It is not clear whether such moves will ultimately help win political advantages from a president who has been skeptical about the benefits of trade agreements.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/02/business/infosys-hire-10000-american-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Vishal Sikka, chief executive of Infosys, at the company's headquarters in India in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) (B6)       

Load-Date: May 3, 2017


End of Document
In One Family Tree, a Reflection of Immigration
The New York Times
September 17, 2018 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1833 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN and SABRINA TAVERNISE
Body


LAS VEGAS -- The young engineer arrived in America when he was 23 with a good education and little else. He landed a job at a nuclear test site, and built a home in Nevada. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, he brought his wife, mother, five sisters and a brother over from India, his native land.
In later years, his siblings sponsored family members of their own, and their clan now stretches from Nevada to Florida, New Jersey to Texas -- more than 90 Americans nurtured on the strength of one ambitious engineer, Jagdish Patel, 72. 
  In late June, four generations of Patels assembled for a reunion in Las Vegas, a gathering that included a venture capitalist, a network engineer, physicians, dentists and students.
  ''I am so glad that I came to America,'' Mr. Patel said recently, sitting in the custom-designed house he built in Las Vegas, complete with a home theater where he hosts Super Bowl parties and a marble-lined Hindu temple room. ''I brought everyone here,'' he said, ''and we have provided valuable service to this country.''
  The share of the United States population that is foreign-born has reached its highest level since 1910, according to government data released last week. But in recent years, the numbers have been soaring not so much with Latin Americans sweeping across the border, but with educated people from Asia obtaining visas -- families like the Patels, who have taken advantage of ''family reunification'' provisions that have been a cornerstone of federal immigration law for half a century.
  Since the Patels began flocking to America in the 1970s, millions of other Indians have arrived to work as programmers and engineers in Silicon Valley, doctors in underserved rural areas and researchers at universities. The majority were sponsored by relatives who came before them. Others arrived on work visas and were later sponsored for legal residency, or green cards, by their employers.
  The Trump administration has framed immigration as a threat to the nation's security and to American workers, a drastic departure from the longtime consensus that immigration was a net positive for the country. The president's public priorities have often focused on fortifying the southwest border, but his administration is also working to scale back decades of legal migration that have led to Asians, not Latin Americans, becoming the largest group of new foreign-born residents since 2010.
  Already, the administration has quietly begun taking steps to cut back legal immigration, under the banner of ''Buy American and Hire American,'' which the president framed in an executive order last year. Some experts predict that the number of immigrants granted permanent legal residency in the 2018 fiscal year, which ends on Sept. 30, will show a rare decline.
  Without passing new legislation, the administration has pursued a number of policies that are slowing legal immigration. It has reduced refugee admissions; narrowed who is eligible for asylum; made it more difficult to qualify for permanent residency or citizenship; and tightened scrutiny of applicants for high-skilled worker visas, known as H-1Bs.
  A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had jumped by 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the previous quarter. Government requests for additional information on applications doubled in the same period.
  Green-card applicants sponsored by an employer now must undergo in-person interviews, a step that previously was taken only in cases that raised concerns.
  The Trump administration is pushing policies supposedly intended to favor immigrants who have valuable skills at a time when newcomers already are, on average, at their most educated. Nearly half of all foreign-born people who have arrived since 2010 have college degrees, compared with about 30 percent of native-born residents.
  ''We are having this debate about getting our system to be merit-based, but it really in effect already is one,'' said David Bier, an immigration policy analyst at the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C. ''The least-known fact about legal immigration to the U.S. is that it's much more educated than the general U.S. population.''
  Of the 1.1 million green cards granted in 2017, about two-thirds went to people sponsored by relatives, compared to just 12 percent who were sponsored through employment.
  Immigration has taken center stage in many Republican election campaigns this year. Representative Ron DeSantis, the party's candidate for governor of Florida, released a video in which he tells his daughter to ''build the wall'' as she plays with blocks. Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor of Georgia, ran an ad saying he would ''round up criminal illegals'' in his pickup truck.
  ''The big story here is just the massive misperception about the nature of immigration in the U.S.,'' said Edward Alden, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who specializes in immigration policy. ''The lion's share of public attention is focused on what is now a very small number of people coming here illegally and showing up at the border seeking asylum.
  ''The reality is that a growing percentage of immigrants coming to the U.S. are highly educated, and are exactly the sort of people we want to be attracting.''
  Supporters of Mr. Trump's position say that this trend is an incidental result of a policy that does not guarantee such an outcome.
  ''We need to construct a system that discourages endless chains of relatives coming in,'' said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which supports curbs on immigration. ''We have an immigration system that rewards people who have relatives in the United States, rather than people who have skills and education.''
  Michael Bars, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency which is focusing most of the new scrutiny on legal immigration, said the government's aim is not to close the borders but to protect against fraud, human trafficking and gang activity, ''defending our system from those seeking to exploit it at the expense of U.S. workers, lawful-abiding applicants and petitioners.''
  There are still an estimated 11 million people in the country illegally, and that represents a major political issue.
  ''Eleven million people is not a small number,'' said Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer at the Pew Research Center ''But it is certainly the case that unauthorized immigration from Mexico is getting a lot more attention than the numbers seem to warrant.'' Mr. Passel said fewer Mexicans were caught at the border in fiscal 2017, which ended on Sept. 30, than in any year since the late 1960s.
  Under the Trump administration's plan, the number of family-based green cards issued would be reduced from the 804,793 granted in 2016 to about 487,000 a year, according to an analysis by Julia Gelatt and Sarah Pierce of the Migration Policy Institute -- a 40 percent reduction in family-tied green cards and a 27 percent reduction overall.
  ''Trump is the first of any modern president to advocate for reducing legal immigration,'' Ms. Pierce said.
  Currently, American citizens like Mr. Patel can sponsor minor children, unmarried and married adult children, and spouses, parents and brothers and sisters. Green-card holders are limited to sponsoring minor children and unmarried adult children.
  Under the new proposal, Americans would lose the right to petition for their parents, adult or married children, or siblings; they could sponsor only spouses and minor children. Green-card holders would be limited further, to sponsoring minor children only, not adult children.
  The current system dates to 1965, when Congress passed the Immigration and Nationality Act, which wiped away the old system of country quotas established in the 1920s that many considered racist. The idea was to treat people from all countries equally, and the law's central pillar was to give American citizens the ability to invite family members who were still abroad. It also allowed for some immigration based on skills.
  Some experts argue that the real implications of the 1965 law are only now dawning on the wider population, as the face of the country changes -- and that realization is what has been driving much of the emotion in politics.
  ''The 1965 act really changed the look and feel of the country in a fundamental way, but it took 50 years for the country to come to terms with that,'' said Muzaffar Chishti, director of the New York office of the Migration Policy Institute.
  Madeline Hsu, a professor of Asian-American studies at the University of Austin, Texas, said there were only about 12,000 Indian immigrants in the United States in 1960. The foreign-born Indian population last year stood at about 2.6 million, according to the Brookings Institution, and it had risen by almost half since 2010.
  The 1965 law opened up the United States to people from India like Jagdish Patel.
  He recalls that at his engineering college back in the Indian state of Gujarat, ''when America started to allow people from different countries to come, we all decided to get ready to go.''
  Mr. Patel immigrated in 1968 and enrolled at Youngstown State University in Ohio, where he earned a master's degree in structural engineering. He returned in 1971 to marry, and because he had a green card, he was able to sponsor his wife, Amita.
  In 1977, he became a United States citizen, and sponsored his brother Jay and Jay's wife for green cards. By 1985, he had also sponsored his mother, five sisters and their husbands and children, most of whom settled in the New York-New Jersey area.
  And he had American-born children of his own. His son, Satya, is now a venture capitalist in San Francisco, after working as an executive at Google and at Twitter; his daughter, Sita Montgomery, is an interior designer in Salt Lake City with 140,000 followers on Instagram.
  Now retired, Mr. Patel savors time to play golf and to travel -- so far, he has visited 50 countries. He devoted a year to planning the Patel reunion in June.
  The eldest Patel to attend the event, which included bowling, banquet dinners and a talent show, was 88; the youngest was nine months old. Mr. Patel gave each attendee a royal-blue booklet, its cover emblazoned with a crown and the words ''Royal Patel Family Reunion.'' Its pages depict the sprawling Patel family tree, starting in India.
  ''In America, you can still succeed as an immigrant, irrespective of skin color, religion or country of origin,'' said Mr. Patel, who likes to point out that President Trump's wife, Melania, sponsored her parents to come to the country she has adopted.
  ''All this Twitter and campaign stuff is mostly just talk,'' he said. ''Trump knows in his mind that immigration works. Family reunification will stay.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/16/us/immigration-family-chain-migration-foreign-born.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Jagdish Patel at home in Las Vegas. He moved to the United States in 1968 and later sponsored relatives in India to join him. At left are photos from his wedding, as well as his two children's. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROGER KISBY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12)       

Load-Date: September 17, 2018


End of Document
At a Funeral Pyre in India, Anger Over a Death in Kansas
The New York Times
March 1, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 695 words
Byline: By SRIRAM KARRI and ELLEN BARRY
Follow Ellen Barry on Twitter @EllenBarryNYT .
Body


HYDERABAD, India -- Just after 2 p.m. Indian Standard Time on Tuesday, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, an Indian immigrant fatally shot in a bar outside Kansas City, Kan., was placed on a pyre made of logs.
Grains of rice were placed around his mouth, as per Hindu tradition, to signify his last earthly meal, and his forehead was smeared with sandalwood paste. His father poured clarified butter on his head, as a sign of purification, and used a burning stick to light the fire. 
  But before the ancient rituals could be completed, a cluster of young mourners -- mostly information technology professionals or engineers, like the dead man -- began shouting. ''Trump, down, down!'' they said. ''Down with racism! Down with hatred!''
  Here in Hyderabad, a city so immigration-minded that a particular temple deity is believed to help grant United States visas, Mr. Kuchibhotla's violent death is seen by many as a harbinger of rising anti-immigrant sentiment in the United States.
  Last Wednesday, a 51-year-old white Navy veteran confronted Mr. Kuchibhotla, 32, and another Indian patron at a bar in Olathe, Kan., questioned them belligerently about their visa status and, after being asked to leave, returned with a gun and shot them.
  ''Hate has a way of growing, and becoming a trend,'' said Kiran Kumar, a software engineer who attended the funeral, holding a handmade sign condemning hate crimes.
  On Tuesday night during his address to Congress., President Trump condemned the attack on the two men.
  Earlier in the day, the White House issued a statement that called the shooting ''an act of racially motivated hatred.''
  In the days since Mr. Kuchibhotla's death, most of India's major daily newspapers had published angry editorials over what they saw as the Trump administration's silence on the killing.
  On Tuesday, as Mr. Kuchibhotla's body was carried to the cremation ground, dozens of regional camera crews followed, their anchormen staging on-air debates on whether Indian immigrants should return home.
  India's minister of labor, Bandaru Dattatreya, attended, as did a major movie star in the Telugu language, and Chukka Ramaiah, a 91-year-old mathematics teacher who is celebrated for sending students to top-ranked Indian institutions and onward to the United States.
  ''It is heartbreaking for any teacher to see a student die, at such an age, before having lived his fullest life,'' Mr. Ramaiah said. ''How much has America lost, too, for this single act of hatred?'' After the ceremony, Mr. Dattatreya publicly recommended that Indian students speak only in English for the duration of their time in the United States, as a safety measure.
  The last rites on Tuesday coincided with the arrival of India's foreign secretary, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, in Washington. He is expected to press the Trump administration to ensure the safety of immigrants -- and to preserve the annual distribution of 65,000 temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which are overwhelmingly used by Indians.
  The immigration story for Mr. Kuchibhotla's family seemed to be ending. His mother, Parvatha Vardhini, said she had once been ''happy that one of the Kuchibhotla family went to the U.S. for a better future.'' But this week, after her older son's death, she demanded that her younger son, who is also employed in the United States, give up his job and stay in India.
  ''I will not allow my younger son to return to the U.S. again,'' she told The Hindustan Times. ''I want him and his family to return to Hyderabad for good.''
  As the rites reached their conclusion, a cousin, Venu Madhav, described Mr. Kuchibhotla as ''a typical immigrant American success story,'' and said he and his wife had recently bought their first home.
  ''He considered Kansas home,'' he said. ''He had American friends, was part of that society.''
  Mr. Madhav had already turned from the pyre, which had burst into crackling, five-foot flames. According to tradition, mourners are expected to turn their backs from the body when it begins to burn. They should be gone before they can hear the sound of the skull cracking, which is believed to signify the soul breaking free.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/28/world/asia/at-a-funeral-pyre-in-india-anger-over-a-shooting-in-kansas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sunayana Dumala mourned on Tuesday in Hyderabad, India, near the body of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHESH KUMAR A./ASSOCIATED PRESS)       

Load-Date: March 1, 2017


End of Document
Infosys, an Indian Outsourcing Company, Says It Will Create 10,000 U.S. Jobs
The New York Times 
May 2, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1399 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL and PAUL MOZUR
Highlight: The pledge, light on details, follows big promises by other Asian employers to create American jobs in the era of President Trump.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — Facing new corporate demands and political pressure from a Trump administration that wants to curb immigrant work visas, Infosys, one of India’s leading tech outsourcing companies, said Tuesday that it will hire up to 10,000 Americans to serve its clients in the United States.
The move makes Infosys the latest Asian technology company to portray itself as a jobs creator as President Trump threatens to take action against companies he sees as hurting American workers.
Last month, Mr. Trump signed an executive order directing government agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote “Hire American” policies. That included offering suggestions for how to reform the H-1B visa program, which operates as a lottery to bring skilled foreign laborers to the United States each year — usually tech workers.
But Infosys is also making its move to hire American driven by other forces. Its home base of India has become a less appealing place to do the grunt work of programming as wages rise there and skilled labor has become more difficult to find. A study of 36,000 engineering students at 500 Indian colleges released last month found that only 5 percent could write software code correctly.
“Building talent pools that define the future of America is what we want to do,” said Ravi Kumar S., Infosys’s president, in a phone interview from Indiana.
Indiana, the home state of Vice President Mike Pence, will be the first beneficiary of Infosys’s hire-American efforts. The company intends to open a new technology and innovation office in or near Indianapolis in August, recruiting 100 new workers this year and several hundred more next year, with a goal of adding a total of 2,000 employees by 2021.
Infosys said it would seek out three other sites for American expansion, looking for places that are close to clients and universities and where state and local governments are willing to offer significant economic incentives. The company already has an innovation hub in Silicon Valley.
The majority of Infosys’s business is in the United States, and it typically receives several thousand H-1B visas every year to bring in mostly entry-level Indian programmers who move from project to project at companies in industries like banking, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing and energy.
Infosys has hired more American college graduates in the last couple of years, said Mr. Kumar. And now clients in the United States want the company to have even more people on site locally. So it must expand its American work force significantly, he said.
“We polled our customers and a lot of our newest locations require a lot of presence,” Mr. Kumar said. “This year, we are taking it to scale.”
Mr. Kumar declined to say whether Mr. Trump’s attacks on immigrant workers had influenced its decisions.
Whether Infosys follows through on its ambitious goal of hiring 10,000 Americans in the next two years remains to be seen. The company, which employs more than 200,000 people globally, has slowed its overall hiring to a trickle as revenue growth has stalled. Mr. Kumar said the American expansion plans depend on expected client demand, as well as whether it can find and train enough college graduates with skills in artificial intelligence and other technical fields that it needs.
Indiana’s governor, Eric Holcomb, aggressively pursued Infosys, the company said at a news conference with Mr. Holcomb. Infosys already had a small work force of about 140 people in the state.
In February, Indiana state officials were approached about a potential investment by Infosys executives via the Indiana India Business Council, a local business group, according to Jim Schellinger, the state’s secretary of commerce.
Mr. Schellinger and his team traveled to India in mid-March, meeting with Infosys’s senior leadership and visiting its campuses in Bangalore and Mysore to make their pitch for the state. At the end of the month, Infosys representatives sat down with Mr. Holcomb and agreed to go ahead with plans to invest in the state.
“They’re going to hire a wide variety of people including people with four year degrees as well as two-year ones,” said Mr. Schellinger. “These are high wage jobs, including software developers and architects.”
Mr. Holcomb was ebullient at Tuesday’s announcement in Indianapolis, thanking Infosys for showing confidence in the state’s tech work force.
“You can’t even spell Indiana without starting with India,” he said. “Today is just the beginning of a great partnership.”
The state is offering Infosys incentives worth up to $31 million for the project. Indiana intends to give the company $500,000 in training funds and $15,250 in conditional tax credits per new job created.
Infosys argues that it saves money for major American companies and allows them to operate more efficiently.
Critics say that companies like Infosys have taken advantage of the H-1B program, which is designed to complement the American skilled labor force, by bringing in workers who ultimately undercut it by taking lower wages. While the program is relatively small, accounting for about 85,000 visas per year, it has become a lightning rod in the debate about large companies outsourcing American jobs.
The proposed changes to the H-1B visa program have alarmed Indian companies and government officials, since Indians receive about two-thirds of those visas. The country’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, discussed the visa issue with Mr. Trump in February, and Indian tech executives raised it with members of Congress during a visit to Washington about two months ago.
“Our objective was to make sure that a well-thought-out process was put in place,” said R. Chandrashekhar, president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, India’s leading tech trade group, in a phone interview after Mr. Trump’s executive order.
Like American tech companies, the Indian outsourcers have trouble finding enough qualified Americans to fill jobs, he said. “If the Indian companies are not able to get the skills that are needed in the U.S. and not bring in skilled workers from somewhere else, then the only option is to move the job out of the United States or leave the job undone,” he said.
As one of the largest beneficiaries of the H-1B program, Infosys could be hit hard by changes to the system. Major American technology companies like Facebook and Qualcomm also use the program to hire foreign talent, arguing that they cannot find enough skilled workers in the United States. Still, outsourcing companies like Infosys have caused the most controversy.
One suggestion — that H-1B visas be given to companies paying the highest wages — could particularly affect outsourcing companies like Infosys, which usually do not offer wages as high as the likes of Facebook. To that end, new operations in America could help offset those difficulties.
Mr. Trump’s nationalistic approach to business puts international companies in a difficult position. But for many Asian companies, it is a position they are familiar with, with the rhetoric reminiscent of the politics of business in their home countries. In recent years, India has introduced a so-called Make in India industrial policy to push companies like Apple to build out manufacturing plants in the country. Both Japan and China often exhibit the kind of economic nationalism that the Trump administration has championed.
In response to Mr. Trump’s approach, Alibaba Group of China and SoftBank of Japan have similarly made vows to            hire           large           numbers of Americans. In Alibaba’s case, it has said its businesses will help create one million jobs. The promises are so large that            many experts doubt all the jobs will materialize.
Still, their pledges won an endorsement from Mr. Trump. It is not clear whether such moves will ultimately help win political advantages from a president who has been skeptical about the benefits of trade agreements.
Nelson D. Schwartz contributed reporting from New York. Vindu Goel reported from San Francisco and Paul Mozur from Hong Kong.
PHOTO: Vishal Sikka, chief executive of Infosys, at the company’s headquarters in India in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) (B6)
Related Articles
    • Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Asian Tech Titans Take a Page From Trump’s Book

Load-Date: May 4, 2017


End of Document
Teacher Pay Is So Low in Some U.S. School Districts That They’re Recruiting Overseas
The New York Times 
May 2, 2018 Wednesday 19:11 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 2710 words
Byline: Dana Goldstein
Highlight: Citing a dearth of qualified local candidates, schools are increasingly turning to foreign educators in the Philippines to fill core teaching jobs.
Body


GLENDALE, Ariz. — The latest wave of foreign workers sweeping into American jobs brought Donato Soberano from the Philippines to Arizona two years ago. He had to pay thousands of dollars to a job broker and lived for a time in an apartment with five other Filipino workers. The lure is the pay — 10 times more than what he made doing the same work back home.
But Mr. Soberano is not a hospitality worker or a home health aide. He is in another line of work that increasingly pays too little to attract enough Americans: Mr. Soberano is a public school teacher.
As walkouts by teachers protesting low pay and education funding shortfalls spread across the country, the small but growing movement to recruit teachers from overseas is another sign of the difficulty some districts are having providing the basics to public school students.
Among the latest states hit by the protests is Arizona, where teacher pay is more than $10,000 below the national average of $59,000 per year. The Pendergast Elementary School District, where Mr. Soberano works, has recruited more than 50 teachers from the Philippines since 2015. They hold J-1 visas, which allow them to work temporarily in the United States, like au pairs or camp counselors, but offer no path to citizenship. More than 2,800 foreign teachers arrived on American soil last year through the J-1, according to the State Department, up from about 1,200 in 2010.
“In these times, you have to be innovative and creative in recruiting,” said Patricia Davis-Tussey, Pendergast’s head of human resources. “We embrace diversity and really gain a lot from the cultural exchange experience. Our students do as well.”
The district, which covers parts of Glendale, Avondale and north Phoenix, is a hotbed of activism in the teacher walkout movement, known as #RedforEd. Picketing educators say they have had to move in with their parents, apply for food stamps and pay out of pocket for classroom essentials like graph paper and science supplies. They argue that taxes are too low to adequately fund schools, or for teachers to secure a middle-class lifestyle.
In response to the teacher walkout, Republican lawmakers introduced a budget that provides new funding for salaries and classrooms. But leaders of the #RedForEd movement said the bill fell far short of their demands, and would restore only about a quarter of the $1.1 billion in annual cuts that they say schools have weathered since the last recession.
[Read: Teacher strikes are illegal in many of the walkout states. That hasn’t stopped educators.]
In Pendergast, where salaries of around $40,000 are a source of pain and protest for the district’s American educators, Mr. Soberano is thankful for the pay.
Much like other foreign workers, he went into debt to find a job in the United States. He said he used savings and a bank loan to pay $12,500, about three years’ worth of his salary in the Philippines, to Petro-Fil Manpower Services. That is a Filipino company of Ligaya Avenida, a California-based consultant who recruits and screens teachers for the J-1.
The payment covered Mr. Soberano’s airfare and rent for his first few months in Arizona, as well as a $2,500 fee for Ms. Avenida and a fee of several thousand dollars to Alliance Abroad Group, a Texas-based company that is an official State Department sponsor for J-1 visa holders. The J-1 lasts three years, with the option for two one-year extensions. For each year he works in the United States, Mr. Soberano will owe Alliance Abroad an additional $1,000 visa renewal fee.
“You have to make some sacrifices to leave your family way back home,” Mr. Soberano said. Every night, he prepares lessons for his seventh- and eighth-grade science students, and every morning, he wakes up at 4 a.m. to video chat with his wife and two teenage daughters, who are ending their day in Manila. Despite their separation, he said the experience has been rewarding, “teaching in a different culture, but also, financially.”
The school districts that recruit teachers like Mr. Soberano say that they have few other options, because they can’t find enough American educators willing to work for the pay that’s offered. They say that the foreign teachers are being given valuable opportunities, and that American students are enriched by learning from them. But critics argue the teachers are being taken advantage of in a practice that helps keep wages low and perpetuates yearslong austerity policies.
[Read: Why are teachers walking out? What’s the difference between a walkout and a strike?]
Though J-1 teachers account for only a tiny share of Arizona’s 60,000 public schoolteachers, international recruitment has spread quickly in recent years, as sponsor companies market themselves to districts facing shortages and word spreads among administrators. According to the State Department, 183 Arizona teachers were granted new J-1 visas last year, up from 17 in 2010.
“Rather than increase salaries, districts may once again resort to recruiting internationally as a way to solve the teacher shortage,” Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, a national teachers’ union, said in a statement. She added that while her union “will fight for everyone working in our communities and educating our kids to have fair wages, rights and workplace protections regardless of where they’re from, the use of the J-1 visa program to fill long-term shortages is an abuse of an exchange program.”
Administrators and researchers say experienced foreign educators can be a better option for students than the substitutes who would otherwise fill these positions. But research is clear that teacher churn negatively impacts academic achievement. J-1 teachers are, because of the visa’s limitations, temporary; and without higher pay and regular raises, administrators in these districts say it will be impossible to attract enough American teachers and keep them in the classroom.
 Recruiting in Manila
During the recession, districts found it easier to hire American workers, since more of them were looking to teach. But as the economy picked back up, hiring became difficult in states like Arizona, which have pursued years of tax cuts that have dampened school budgets and teacher pay. The Pendergast district has lost $1.6 million over the past five years because of state and local cuts, according to administrators.
The superintendent, Lily Matos DeBlieux, has sought private donations to fund a Spanish-English dual-language program, a monthly lunch discussion to help parents navigate their children’s education and many other efforts. “With the little we have, we have done an incredible job,” she said.
But hiring remains a challenge. Even with 48 J-1 visa-holders teaching this year, Pendergast has still had to rely on 20 long-term substitutes, said Ms. Davis-Tussey, the chief of human resources.
In addition to interviewing international candidates via Skype, district staff members have traveled to Manila several times since 2015 to interview teachers. Mr. Soberano met with the district there in June 2016, and just two months later, arrived in Arizona to teach at Sunset Ridge Elementary School in Glendale. The Philippines was the top sender of J-1 teachers to the United States in 2017, followed by Jamaica and China.
The 15,000-mile round-trips made sense, Ms. Davis-Tussey said. Many short-staffed schools turn to Teach for America, which recruits recent college graduates and career-changers for two-year stints in the classroom. But to hire a Teach for America recruit, who may have no teaching experience or coursework in education, the district must pay $5,000 per teacher, in addition to salaries.
For a similar amount, a single trip to the Philippines can net dozens of candidates, all of whom, as required by the J-1 program, have degrees in education or the subjects they teach, and at least two years of experience in a Filipino school.
Mr. Soberano holds one bachelor’s degree in education, with a focus on physics, and another in philosophy. He has also studied theology. He has over 20 years of classroom experience.
Mukul Bakhshi, director of the Alliance for Ethical International Recruitment Practices, in Philadelphia, said the Philippines purposefully trains teachers, nurses and other workers “in a way that it’s easy for them to pass muster from licensing authorities here. They obviously speak English, and they are willing to work.” Remittances from foreign workers account for about 10 percent of the Philippines’ gross domestic product.
The Pendergast district did not owe any money to the companies that connected it with recruits in Manila. Those costs were borne by the Filipino teachers.
James Bell, president of Alliance Abroad, the visa sponsor, said a financial arrangement like Mr. Soberano’s is just one of several models the company uses, and that in some cases, school districts pay visa3,5 renewal fees. Alliance Abroad sponsors several hundred J-1 visa holders each year, according to Mr. Bell, working primarily in Arizona, California, Nevada, Texas and Utah. He said the biggest demand was for special-education teachers, though districts also looked to hire in science, math and foreign languages.
In Gila Bend, a small town 70 miles southwest of Phoenix, 11 Filipino teachers who room together in several shared apartments commute to work by van 100 miles round-trip each day, according to Peggy Perry, a secretary in the district’s central office. In Casa Grande, halfway between Phoenix and Tucson, about 25 Filipino teachers with J-1 visas are teaching science, math, special education and English, said Mary Ann Amerson, head of human resources for the Casa Grande Union High School District.
The district works with Ms. Avenida, the California-based consultant, to find the teachers and interview them via Skype. “We don’t pay any money for it,” Ms. Amerson said. The recruits pay the fees.
Ms. Avenida said her company, which uses the name Avenida International Consultants in the United States, recruited 250 Filipino teachers with J-1 visas in 2017. According to State Department data, that would account for more than half the total number of J-1 visa holders who arrived from the Philippines last year.
Ms. Avenida joined union representatives in a working group, assembled by the Alliance for Ethical International Recruitment Practices, that drafted a 2015 code of conduct for international teacher recruitment. The code calls for districts to bear all recruitment and legal costs, and for foreign educators not to be charged more than a nominal application processing fee, under $150. It has not been widely adopted, and Ms. Avenida said she disagreed with the group’s conclusions.
“Somebody has to foot the bill,” she said — and in a climate of tight school budgets, that somebody is the teacher.
[Read: How will the protests against education cuts affect the midterm elections?]
Lessons and Challenges
In Mr. Soberano’s case, it was not until his second year on the job that he had paid back the money he owed and was able to begin sending some home to his family. He has had to live austerely. In his first year in Arizona, he shared an apartment with five other Filipino teachers, and he now rents a room in the home of a Filipino-American family.
Still, he said he was nothing but grateful for the opportunity. “The district is very supportive,” he said. Pendergast created a welcome committee to assist the Filipino teachers, and colleagues pitched in by buying groceries and driving the newcomers to work.
In addition to financial challenges, foreign educators face instructional ones. Administrators across the country who work with J-1 visa holders say the teachers must learn the federal requirement for inclusion, which requires that disabled children be taught alongside nondisabled peers, in the least restrictive environment possible.
And classroom management techniques differ across cultures. “In the Philippines, the teacher there is really an authority figure,” Mr. Soberano said. “Once I stood in front of the class, everybody kept quiet.” That wasn’t the case in Arizona.
“One thing I also learned is to be friends with the students,” Mr. Soberano added, “to know more about each one and especially their family. How are they doing? When you understand them, I remove that kind of problem.”
State Department regulations require J-1 teachers to engage in cultural exchange activities with their students. The J-1 program was created by the 1961 Fulbright-Hayes Act, with the purpose of fostering understanding between nations. Mr. Soberano said that once a month, he teaches a lesson on Filipino culture, and that his students have been most interested in discussing the differences between the Filipino and American education systems. In the Philippines, Mr. Soberano tells them, school is stricter and more academically challenging.
New regulations from the State Department, which went into effect in 2016, require J-1 holders to return to their home countries for at least two years after their visas expire before reapplying. Mr. Soberano said he may do that. But his wish is to reside legally in the United States and work long-term as a teacher. “I would love to bring my family here,” he said.
Ms. Weingarten, the union president, suggested that the H-1B visa for high-skilled immigrants, which offers a pathway toward permanent residence, would be a more appropriate visa for a teacher like Mr. Soberano. But Pendergast and other school districts say long wait times and high legal costs can make the H-1B prohibitive. The Trump administration has also tightened oversight of that program.
In Denver public schools, 20 bilingual education teachers hold H-1Bs and about three hold J-1s. But in the future, the district said, it may expand its use of the J-1.
“We still don’t have enough people to fill the openings,” said Bart Muller, the managing director of employee and labor relations for the system. “The political environment has been a little challenging over the last year and a half. The bottom line is there are a lot more hoops to jump through with H-1B, while J-1 is fairly simple. You can do it expeditiously.”
Lora Bartlett, an education professor who has written a book about migrant teachers, argued that there should be a new visa category that meets the needs of public schools while allowing effective teachers to achieve legal residency. But, she added, “there are people who have a vested interest in not finding a long-term solution. There is a whole industry that makes money every time a new teacher comes into the country. They don’t make money when a teacher stays.”
[Read:  How our reporter came across this story.]
And in Arizona, where many teachers are expected to improve test scores using aging textbooks inside buildings in need of repair, districts worry that a modest increase in teacher salaries and school funding won’t be enough to persuade more local candidates to enter the profession.
“Quite frankly, for a lot of the teachers, some of the fun and creativity has been taken out of it with mandates,” said Ms. Amerson, the head of human resources in Casa Grande. “It seems like we spend the whole entire second semester testing kids.”
In Pendergast, Ms. Davis-Tussey agreed that higher pay alone would not be enough to fill the empty jobs that have forced her to look to the Philippines.
“That respect for the profession is just as important as the money,” she said. “And for a long time, teachers have felt, not only did they not have money, but what they were doing was being brushed aside and not respected.”
PHOTO: Donato Soberano, center, and his seventh-grade science students at Sunset Ridge Elementary School in Arizona. Budget cuts and stagnant salaries have prompted his district and others to recruit educators in his native Philippines to fill core teaching jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Deanna Alejandra Dent for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • How a Times Education Reporter Discovered a Pipeline of Foreign Teachers
    • Teacher Walkouts: What to Know and What to Expect
    • Their Pay Has Stood Still. Now Oklahoma Teachers Could Be the Next to Walk.
    • Teachers in Arizona and Colorado Walk Out Over Education Funding
    • Teacher Walkouts Threaten Republican Grip on Conservative States

Load-Date: January 24, 2020


End of Document
International Readers Ponder Trump
The New York Times
November 13, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 24
Length: 1320 words
Byline: By THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


David Parting, a reader in Germany, wrote that a Donald J. Trump presidency could mend ties between the United States and Russia, which would ''overall reduce the potential for international conflicts.''
Nadim Kobeissi, a Lebanese immigrant living in France, said he feared personal ramifications from the election of Mr. Trump. 
  ''My partner and I, both Arab immigrants, already witness enough xenophobia, and there is a fear that Trump's victory only further legitimizes this sort of discourse around the world,'' he wrote to The Times.
  We asked our readers outside of the United States to tell us how the election might affect their family and country. We received more than 800 responses. Nearly every region of the world was represented, but almost 40 percent came from Western Europe and almost 20 percent from Canada.
  A large group of readers focused on how the new administration would affect trade and their nation's -- and family's -- economic prospects. Many others discussed security issues. And some people of color and women raised questions about how Mr. Trump's inflammatory language might change discourse worldwide and possibly lead to more hate crimes.
  Here is a selection of the responses; they have been edited and condensed.
  Security and Aid
  ''Trump's antiterror policies might give Pakistan a jolt and help us curb terror and save many hundreds of lives that are lost to these terrorists from across the border.''
  Kartikey, India
  ''The impact shall be likely on the scaling down of humanitarian aid.''
  Simon Ruwuke Hove, Zimbabwe
  ''I think the most tangible is that we as NATO allies should start to take our own security more serious. I believe that is only fair, so we should prepare to pay our share of the bill.''
  Peter Hendrikx, the Netherlands
  ''When it comes to relations to Russia, which are a bit tense, I'm quite sure Trump is better than Clinton. In my opinion the attitude toward Russia has been way too negative here in Europe. Of course, there are a lot of problems with Russia not being a democracy and all, but that big country in the East has been in far worse condition and extremely more dangerous in the past than it is now.''
  Sven Jans, Sweden
  ''I hope he can apply his skill in bullying people this time for good -- and his own place in history -- by getting Netanyahu and the Palestinians to make peace for their people's future and the world's stability. My husband, son and daughter have served in the army; I hope my grandchildren will never be in danger in the same way.''
  Elinore Liebersohn Koenigsfeld, Israel
  ''I am deeply concerned with president-elect Mr. Trump for obvious reasons, but I am honestly relieved that Ms. Clinton couldn't get the job. Her foreign policy frightened me in terms of going back to the Cold War era. She is, unlike Mr. Obama, an interventionist, who would have inflamed international tensions, leaving Germany (and Europe) in an acid test between the West and East, facing armament.''
  Christian Weidner, Germany
  ''I think it brings hard time and aggression from Washington as Mr. Trump is unpredictable.''
  Khawar Mehmood, Pakistan
  ''It will be good for Europe, once President Trump is clear about his policy in fighting ISIS alongside Russia, holding a strong position in the region just like Russia, by doing the right thing, killing terrorists.''
  Maria da Graça, Portugal
  Economic Impact
  ''His plan to send back migrants will have a very deep impact in the social and economic conditions of my home country, place of origin of thousands of migrant workers.''
  Otton Solis, Costa Rica
  ''It has already take down the value of our currency.''
  Jose Franco, Mexico
  ''Heads of state who succeed in generating wealth are rare. When that happens everyone is benefited, unfortunately the world lacks leaders with this ability, but there is no doubt that Donald Trump is one of these men. It will surely bring great progress to the United States and to the world.''
  George Monteiro, Brazil
  ''If America proceeds with protectionism and nixes Nafta, it might force Canada to seek out other trade partners. This would be painful in the short-term, but could potentially be beneficial in the future, where we are not so dependent on the U.S.''
  Jia Lu, Chinese Canadian
  ''Locals are concerned that Trump will stir up trouble with China, and destabilize the region. China is easily Australia's largest trading partner, and a lot of our economic prosperity rests on stable relations with them.''
  James King, Australia
  ''Trump has called Nafta a disaster, the worst trade deal ever. Presumably, he will revoke it, or try to renegotiate its terms. Trade deals don't work as zero-sum equations. Nafta works because it has benefited all three of our North American economies. The Canadian market for consumer goods is relatively small and spread out along an east-west axis. If north-south trade is disrupted in both manufactured goods and agricultural products, the impact on the Canadian economy will be devastating.''
  Wally Seccombe, Canada
  ''Our economy might benefit if Trump and the Republicans manage to get the Keystone XL pipeline built. However, I doubt this would offset the many negative effects his presidency could have on the Canadian economy generally and Alberta's nonoil industries, such as agriculture and forestry.''
  Robert Bott, Canada
  Access to the United States
  ''I have two kids studying in the U.S. and an ex-spouse who holds H-1B visa. If he insists on deporting people with certain religious backgrounds and clamping down on the said visa, of course the future will be bleak for my family.''
  Zunaibi Abdullah, Malaysia
  Political Repercussions
  ''I believe it is highly likely that Mr. Trump's election will contribute [to] fueling the ambition of outsiders and would-be populist candidates in my country Chile, and the entire Latin American region for that matter.
  ''Populism, mostly left-wing oriented populism, is already getting traction among Chileans, most notably among the youngest generations. The whole idea that with your vote you can now actually shake the status quo and bring about deep changes across the board is becoming stronger within the Chilean society.''
  Luis Alberto Pino, Chile
  ''In Africa in general and Central Africa in particular, we are afraid that Trump policy will be concentrated only on the United States. There will be no African policy at all. This situation will advantage dictators who are presently ruling.''
  Gabriel Nyangwile, Democratic Republic of Congo
  Climate Change
  ''Me and my family's biggest immediate fear is a reversal of the climate-change agreement. That would make it so much easier for other countries around the world to also neglect the treaty. It scares us to think about the consequences for the next generations.''
  Dr. Jan-Ulrich Sobisch, Germany
  Xenophobia and Misogyny
  ''My son studies in the U.S. If xenophobia and racism become acceptable behavior, life will certainly become unpleasant for him.
  ''Economically, a lot of employment is created by the I.T. industry, which relies heavily on the U.S. demand for services. This would be impacted negatively if he clamps down on outsourcing and free trade.''
  Bala Sathiapalan, India
  ''Being a young ambitious woman in Russia means being routinely subjected to misogynism, harassment and patronizing remarks both at work and in life. I was hoping that by electing the first woman president the United States would show the world and especially the girls who grow up in Russia that a woman should never, ever be simplified to an object of desire or hate, a kitchen gadget who gives birth to children and watches men make decisions for her concerning her health, her future, and her life. Now, with Donald J. Trump, it would be as hard as ever to explain these things to them.''
  Ann, Russia
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/world/americas/international-readers-on-how-a-trump-presidency-could-affect-them.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Television screens in Seoul, South Korea, show a news broadcast after the election. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ED JONES/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)       

Load-Date: November 13, 2016


End of Document
A U.S. Hiring Plan Falls Short of Reform; Editorial
The New York Times 
May 5, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 492 words
Byline: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Highlight: A giant Indian staffing firm will hire 10,000 American tech workers. But major changes are still needed in the visa it usually uses to import workers.
Body


Infosys, the giant Indian company that supplies American businesses with foreign technology workers, has announced that it will hire 10,000 Americans in the United States in the next two years. This might seem like an early victory in President Trump’s “           Hire American” campaign, but it’s less of a cause for celebration than it appears.
Mr. Trump has condemned the loss of Americans’ jobs to foreign replacements. And Infosys has been one of the biggest users of H-1B visas — intended for specially talented foreigners — to bring in cheaper labor to fill American jobs or replace Americans, often in entry-level positions.
But individual corporate measures like Infosys’ hiring of Americans, no matter how headline-grabbing, are no substitute for true reform to eliminate systemic abuses. Worse, by creating the appearance of change, they may actually entrench those problems. Rather than say what he wants to see changed about a system he has pilloried, Mr. Trump has simply told executive agencies to recommend reforms in the H-1B program.
Infosys is, in effect, getting out in front of presidential criticism of outsourcing in a way that makes Mr. Trump’s plan appear effective — even though no real reforms have been broached. The situation is akin to what happened last year at Carrier, when the company blunted criticism from Mr. Trump, then the president-elect, by keeping 800 jobs in the United States rather than offshoring them to Mexico as planned. The workers were happy and Mr. Trump declared victory. But the populist appeal of the deal has far outweighed its practical effect, not just because that deal involved only one plant, but because the Trump administration has shown no interest in or aptitude for addressing the underlying trends in technology, anti-unionism and public policy that undermine blue-collar jobs.
Similarly, the Infosys pledge to hire 10,000 American workers pales in comparison to roughly 85,000 H-1B visas that are granted each year — and the hundreds of thousands of jobs that could go to Americans over the years if the H-1B system were reformed. Will Mr. Trump follow through? If recent history is any guide, the answer is no.
A fair H-1B system would require companies seeking foreign workers to prove that they have actively tried and failed to find American workers with the requisite skills. It would require higher wages for H-1B workers to ensure that they cannot be used as cheaper substitute labor. It would also include an enforcement system of random audits and steep penalties for noncompliance. Most important — and most unlikely given the demonstrated corporate-friendly bias of the Trump administration — the rules would apply to American companies like Facebook and Qualcomm that use H-1B visas, as well as to foreign staffing firms.
The United States needs comprehensive reform of the H-1B system more than it needs Infosys’ pledge of 10,000 new jobs. It also needs a president who understands that.

Load-Date: May 7, 2017


End of Document
Tech Industry Frets Over Visa Program
The New York Times
January 28, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 936 words
Byline: By NICK WINGFIELD and MIKE ISAAC; Cecilia Kang contributed reporting from Washington.
Body


SEATTLE -- American technology companies for years have relied on a steady stream of skilled engineers from overseas to help them create their products.
Now many of those companies and their workers are girding for expected changes to immigration policy under President Trump that the companies say could hurt their ability to tap the technical talent they need to stay competitive. 
  Mr. Trump, who has signed a series of executive orders related to immigration, is expected to soon take similar action on visa programs for foreign workers.
  A draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked this week. While it is not clear how the final order will look and the draft contains some changes many in the technology industry support, some language alarmed people in Silicon Valley.
  The technology industry relies heavily on the H-1B visa program, through which highly skilled workers like software engineers are permitted to work in the United States for companies like Microsoft, Google and Intel.
  The draft proposed a regulation to ''restore the integrity of employment-based nonimmigrant worker programs'' and to consider options for modifying the H-1B program to ''ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.''
  That language rattled some executives and lawyers representing technology companies because of its implication of sweeping changes.
  ''You'd be shocked at the number of people who are feeling fear, calling our firm alarmed based on what's coming out,'' said Priya Alagiri, an immigration lawyer based in the Bay Area who has tech clients. ''It's not just the undocumented. Even people who are here on green cards, legally. Citizens. They're scared.''
  Some technology companies have started warning their investors of potential threats to their business from the changes. In a filing on Thursday with securities regulators related to its quarterly financial results, Microsoft included new language related to immigration.
  ''Changes to U.S. immigration policies that restrain the flow of technical and professional talent may inhibit our ability to adequately staff our research and development efforts,'' the company said in the filing.
  Brad Smith, Microsoft's president, said in a statement that the company believes ''in a strong and balanced high-skilled immigration system and in broader immigration opportunities for talented and law-abiding young people like the Dreamers,'' a reference to young people who entered the country illegally as children but were allowed to remain by President Barack Obama.
  On Friday, Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, waded into the broader immigration debate with a post in which he said he was concerned about Mr. Trump's actions. Mr. Zuckerberg said his great-grandparents came from Germany, Austria and Poland, while his wife's arrived from China and Vietnam.
  ''We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here,'' Mr. Zuckerberg wrote. ''I hope we find the courage and compassion to bring people together and make this world a better place for everyone.''
  The technology industry is open to changes that have been proposed by members of Congress to better enforce the skilled worker program and adjust limits on the number of visas. But the companies see skilled worker visas as a signature policy issue that they have fought to protect and expand.
  They fear Jeff Sessions, the nominee for attorney general, and others in the administration will take a more severe approach to immigration and sweep up H-1B visas into prohibitions on refugees and stronger border protection.
  ''The effect would end up being exactly the opposite of what Trump wants. Companies would go offshore like Microsoft did with Vancouver, Canada'' to seek talent, said Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a research group sponsored by several tech firms.
  Mr. Zuckerberg has been an outspoken proponent of immigration issues and how they may affect those inside and outside of Silicon Valley. In 2013, with other tech leaders, Mr. Zuckerberg backed Fwd.us, a nonprofit group dedicated to comprehensive immigration change.
  But Mr. Trump has made it increasingly clear that immigration policy may change drastically.
  Any changes to the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, program, initiated under the Obama administration, could have significant effects on current tech employees who fear for their status.
  ''Right now, we are focused on making sure for protections for 750,000 Dreamers who have DACA stay in place,'' said Todd Schulte, president of Fwd.us, in an interview. ''If the goal is to increase public safety and prevent future illegal immigration, the way to do that is to modernize the legal immigration process. That's radically different than a large-scale ramp-up of rapid deportation.''
  The White House did not respond to a request for comment.
  On Friday, Mr. Trump signed a separate executive order that imposes a temporary ban on visas to people from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
  The Computing Research Association, a nonprofit organization that represents computing professionals in academia, government laboratories and other areas, said in a statement that the order ''creates uncertainty and potential hardship among current students and researchers already here making important contributions and endangers our leadership role in a key field.''
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/business/technology-h-1b-visa-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mark Zuckerberg expressed concern over immigration policies. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: January 28, 2017


End of Document
Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes
The New York Times 
January 27, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 958 words
Byline: NICK WINGFIELD and MIKE ISAAC
Highlight: Silicon Valley relies on the H-1B visa system, which gives skilled workers permission to work in the United States, but it could be altered under Trump.
Body


SEATTLE - American technology companies for years have relied on a steady stream of skilled engineers from overseas to help them create their products.
Now many of those companies and their workers are girding for expected changes to immigration policy under President Trump that the companies say could hurt their ability to tap the technical talent they need to stay competitive.
Mr. Trump, who has signed a series of executive orders related to immigration, is expected to soon take similar action on visa programs for foreign workers.
A draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked this week. While it is not clear how the final order will look and the draft contains some changes many in the technology industry support, some language alarmed people in Silicon Valley.
The technology industry relies heavily on the H-1B visa program, through which highly skilled workers like software engineers are permitted to work in the United States for companies like Microsoft, Google and Intel.
The draft proposed a regulation to "restore the integrity of employment-based nonimmigrant worker programs" and to consider options for modifying the H-1B program to "ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest."
That language rattled some executives and lawyers representing technology companies because of its implication of sweeping changes.
"You'd be shocked at the number of people who are feeling fear, calling our firm alarmed based on what's coming out," said Priya Alagiri, an immigration lawyer based in the Bay Area who has tech clients. "It's not just the undocumented. Even people who are here on green cards, legally. Citizens. They're scared."
Some technology companies have started warning their investors of potential threats to their business from the changes. In a filing on Thursday with securities regulators related to its quarterly financial results, Microsoft included new language related to immigration.
"Changes to U.S. immigration policies that restrain the flow of technical and professional talent may inhibit our ability to adequately staff our research and development efforts," the company said in the filing.
Brad Smith, Microsoft's president, said in a statement that the company believes "in a strong and balanced high-skilled immigration system and in broader immigration opportunities for talented and law-abiding young people like the Dreamers," a reference to young people who entered the country illegally as children but were allowed to remain by President Barack Obama.
On Friday, Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of            Facebook, waded into the broader immigration debate with a            post in which he said he was concerned about Mr. Trump's actions. Mr. Zuckerberg said his great-grandparents came from Germany, Austria and Poland, while his wife's arrived from China and Vietnam.
"We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here," Mr. Zuckerberg wrote. "I hope we find the courage and compassion to bring people together and make this world a better place for everyone."
The technology industry is open to changes that have been proposed by members of Congress to better enforce the skilled worker program and adjust limits on the number of visas. But the companies see skilled worker visas as a signature policy issue that they have fought to protect and expand.
They fear Jeff Sessions, the nominee for attorney general, and others in the administration will take a more severe approach to immigration and sweep up H-1B visas into prohibitions on refugees and stronger border protection.
"The effect would end up being exactly the opposite of what Trump wants. Companies would go offshore like Microsoft did with Vancouver, Canada" to seek talent, said Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a research group sponsored by several tech firms.
Mr. Zuckerberg has been an outspoken proponent of immigration issues and how they may affect those inside and outside of Silicon Valley. In 2013, with other tech leaders, Mr. Zuckerberg backed Fwd.us, a nonprofit group dedicated to comprehensive immigration change.
But Mr. Trump has made it increasingly clear that immigration policy may change drastically.
Any changes to the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, program, initiated under the Obama administration, could have significant effects on current tech employees who fear for their status.
"Right now, we are focused on making sure for protections for 750,000 Dreamers who have DACA stay in place," said Todd Schulte, president of Fwd.us, in an interview. "If the goal is to increase public safety and prevent future illegal immigration, the way to do that is to modernize the legal immigration process. That's radically different than a large-scale ramp-up of rapid deportation."
The White House did not respond to a request for comment.
On Friday, Mr. Trump signed a separate executive order that imposes a temporary ban on visas to people from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
The Computing Research Association, a nonprofit organization that represents computing professionals in academia, government laboratories and other areas, said in a statement that the order "creates uncertainty and potential hardship among current students and researchers already here making important contributions and endangers our leadership role in a key field."
Cecilia Kang contributed reporting from Washington.
PHOTO: Mark Zuckerberg expressed concern over immigration policies. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Google, in Post-Obama Era, Aggressively Woos Republicans
    • Peter Thiel, Trump Adviser, Has a Backup Country: New Zealand

Load-Date: January 29, 2017


End of Document
Some Tech Workers See Visas as Threat
The New York Times
February 6, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1435 words
Byline: By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NELSON D. SCHWARTZ
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- The ''knowledge transfer sessions'' started a few months after Jeff Tan received notice last summer that he and about 80 co-workers would be laid off by the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February.
At daily two-hour meetings with employees from HCL Technologies, an Indian tech services company that had landed the outsourcing contract from U.C.S.F., Mr. Tan trained HCL staff members in India by videoconference and employees brought to the United States on H-1B visas how to do his job. 
  More than any other industry, tech companies depend on the 85,000 foreign workers allowed into the United States annually under the H-1B visa program. The H-1B is a temporary visa intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. Technology giants like Microsoft and Google have pressed for increases in the annual quotas, saying there are not enough Americans with the skills they need.
  But for tech workers like Mr. Tan, the program has had very negative consequences.
  ''I thought the purpose of H-1B visas was to give America a competitive edge, not help companies ship American jobs abroad,'' said Mr. Tan, who had worked for the university as an information technology systems administrator for 20 years. ''This is now standard practice in the technology industry.''
  The debate over H-1B visas has gained new urgency as employers prepare for President Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program. It is not clear what action Mr. Trump plans to take, but a draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked last week. It included a passage saying options for modifying the H-1B program would be considered to ''ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.''
  The H-1B program's critics say the system provides a way for American companies to turn over technology departments to outsourcing companies. These are gaming the system to snap up the visas so they can replace American workers with less expensive, temporary staff members.
  A research report by Goldman Sachs estimates that 900,000 to a million H-1B visa holders now reside in the United States, and that they account for up to 13 percent of American technology jobs.
  In 2014, 13 outsourcing firms accounted for one-third of all H-1B visas. They use a loophole in the current first-come, first-served lottery system to flood the applicant pool with their candidates. In many cases, those candidates are paid slightly more than the $60,000-a-year minimum salary required by the program for dependent companies seeking a waiver from having to recruit Americans first -- but less than what American technology workers make.
  Audrey Hatten-Milholin, 54, was notified in July that she would be laid off from the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February after 17 years in its technology department. Along with eight others, she filed a complaint in November with California's Department of Fair Employment and Housing, charging that replacing her and others with ''significantly younger, male'' workers ''who will then perform the work overseas'' was discriminatory.
  ''We are at a disadvantage as Americans,'' Ms. Hatten-Milholin said. ''They look at it like, where can we get it cheaper? And for U.C., it's not here.''
  Proponents of the H-1B system argue that it is an important vehicle to attract top talent to America. After coming to the United States, these visa holders may apply their skills to start new companies or create new, innovative products -- leading to more jobs in America.
  The debate over who wins and who loses as a result of the H-1B visa program echoes similar discussions of how free trade helps or hurts the economy. While the benefits are spread broadly throughout the economy, the costs are much more concentrated and easy to identify.
  In other words, it's true that cheaper labor helps employers increase profits and grow, and having more skilled workers in the United States contributes to economic innovation. But at the same time, individual American employees do face more salary pressure from newcomers who will work for less. And in some cases, they risk losing their jobs entirely, especially older employees who earn higher salaries.
  After 11 years working in the I.T. department of Northeast Utilities, a Connecticut-based company now named Eversource Energy, Craig Diangelo was among 220 employees laid off in 2014. Before leaving the company, he was told he needed to train his replacement if he wanted to receive his severance.
  Mr. Diangelo, who is now 64 and was receiving $130,000 a year in salary and bonus, said he trained an employee from the Indian outsourcing firm Infosys who was an H-1B visa holder making $60,000 a year. There was also a team of workers in India making $6,000 a year that shadowed him on the computer.
  ''The problem,'' he said, ''is that my job is still there. I went away. The American worker went away.''
  A representative of Infosys declined to comment. Al Lara, a spokesman for Eversource Energy, said in a statement: ''We made changes to our I.T. department three years ago during a period of transition and change to support the merger of our two companies while under much regulatory scrutiny. We are proud of the new I.T. organization.'' Mr. Lara was referring to a merger with NStar in 2012.
  In other instances, the jobs are filled only temporarily by H-1B workers -- before the outsourcing firm moves the job permanently to a lower-cost country.
  ''That's the endgame,'' said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing former employees of Walt Disney Company, Abbott Laboratories and other companies in discrimination claims pertaining to tech-job outsourcing.
  Some economists are skeptical about the claimed lack of qualified workers, especially an oft-cited 500,000 open positions in technology that cannot be filled.
  ''I'm sure employers might not have as much choice as they would like, but if the shortage story were true, we'd see wages rising more rapidly than they are,'' said Dean Baker, co-director of the liberal Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington. There is substantial unemployment, Mr. Baker said, even among workers in so-called STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) fields.
  Lawrence F. Katz, a prominent labor economist at Harvard, said companies like the H-1B visa program because it expands the pool of applicants. That means having to pay less in salary and retaining more control over employees.
  ''From the point of view of an economist, there are two big winners,'' he added. ''The workers who come here with H-1B visas and the companies that employ them.''
  While it remains to be seen what Mr. Trump will do, various members of Congress have proposed measures to change the H-1B system. One idea is to raise the minimum salary the $60,000-salary threshold for some H-1B workers to $100,000 or more. The hope is that this will narrow the gap between the standard pay for an American tech worker and that of a foreign worker.
  Another proposed measure is to change the current first-come, first-served lottery system that is benefiting outsourcing firms. Yet another idea is for a salary bidding system, in which companies bid on what they would be willing to pay an applicant, potentially making it more difficult to flood the applicant pool with lower-cost workers.
  According to the University of California, San Francisco, technology costs to run U.C.S.F. Health, which encompasses the university's hospital, medical center and patient care facilities, have tripled from 2011 to 2016. Outsourcing technology jobs will save the university more than $30 million over the next five years.
  But this argument has not spared the university from criticism for outsourcing the jobs because -- as a public institution -- it receives taxpayer funds and is a nonprofit organization.
  The university said neither it nor HCL would replace the laid-off employees with H-1B workers, although it acknowledges that HCL brought in some H-1B workers initially to understand the institution's technology needs. Those workers, U.C.S.F. said, are no longer working on the account.
  Mr. Tan, 55, said he was not worried about returning to the job market in a few weeks and understood why the university took such measures. However, he is concerned about what his children will do when they start looking for work.
  ''Today it's me, but tomorrow it's going to be a doctor or an engineer,'' he said. ''At what point do you draw the line?''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/05/business/h-1b-visa-tech-cheers-for-foreign-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Hank Nguyen, Audrey Hatten-Milholin and Margaret Horn lost their jobs at University of California, San Francisco. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)       

Load-Date: February 6, 2017


End of Document
Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
February 5, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1517 words
Byline: DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NELSON D. SCHWARTZ
Highlight: Tech companies say the H-1B program is needed to find highly skilled employees. But it has also been used to lower labor costs and cut jobs.
Body


Correction Appended
SAN FRANCISCO — The “knowledge transfer sessions” started a few months after Jeff Tan received notice last summer that he and about 80 co-workers would be laid off by the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February.
At daily two-hour meetings with employees from HCL Technologies, an Indian tech services company that had landed the outsourcing contract from U.C.S.F., Mr. Tan trained HCL staff members in India by videoconference and employees brought to the United States on H-1B visas how to do his job.
More than any other industry, tech companies dependon the 85,000 foreign workers allowed into the United States annually under the H-1B visa program. The H-1B is a temporary visa intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. Technology giants like Microsoft and Google have pressed for increases in the annual quotas, saying there are not enough Americans with the skills they need.
But for tech workers like Mr. Tan, the program has had very negative consequences.
“I thought the purpose of H-1B visas was to give America a competitive edge, not help companies ship American jobs abroad,” said Mr. Tan, who had worked for the university as an information technology systems administrator for 20 years. “This is now standard practice in the technology industry.”
The debate over H-1B visas has gained new urgency as employers prepare for President Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program. It is not clear what action Mr. Trump plans to take, but a draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked last week. It included a passage saying options for modifying the H-1B program would be considered to “ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.”
The H-1B program’s critics say the system provides a way for American companies to turn over technology departments to outsourcing companies. These are gaming           the system to snap up the visas so they can replace American workers with less expensive, temporary staff members.
A research report by Goldman Sachs estimates that 900,000 to a million H-1B visa holders now reside in the United States, and that they account for up to 13 percent of American technology jobs.
In 2014, 13 outsourcing firms accounted for one-third of all H-1B visas. They use a loophole in the current first-come, first-served lottery system to flood the applicant pool with their candidates. In many cases, those candidates are paid slightly more than the $60,000-a-year minimum salary required by the program for dependent companies seeking a waiver from having to recruit Americans first — but less than what American technology workers make.
Audrey Hatten-Milholin, 54, was notified in July that she would be laid off from the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February after 17 years in its technology department. Along with eight others, she filed a complaint in November with California’s Department of Fair Employment and Housing, charging that replacing her and others with “significantly younger, male” workers “who will then perform the work overseas” was discriminatory.
“We are at a disadvantage as Americans,” Ms. Hatten-Milholin said. “They look at it like, where can we get it cheaper? And for U.C., it’s not here.”
Proponents of the H-1B system argue that it is an important vehicle to attract top talent to America. After coming to the United States, these visa holders may apply their skills to start new companies or create new, innovative products — leading to more jobs in America.
The debate over who wins and who loses as a result of the H-1B visa program echoes similar discussions of how free trade helps or hurts the economy. While the benefits are spread broadly throughout the economy, the costs are much more concentrated and easy to identify.
In other words, it’s true that cheaper labor helps employers increase profits and grow, and having more skilled workers in the United States contributes to economic innovation. But at the same time, individual American employees do face more salary pressure from newcomers who will work for less. And in some cases, they risk losing their jobs entirely, especially older employees who earn higher salaries.
After 11 years working in the I.T. department of Northeast Utilities, a Connecticut-based company now named Eversource Energy, Craig Diangelo was among 220 employees laid off in 2014. Before leaving the company, he was told he needed to train his replacement if he wanted to receive his severance.
Mr. Diangelo, who is now 64 and was receiving $130,000 a year in salary and bonus, said he trained an employee from the Indian outsourcing firm Infosys who was an H-1B visa holder making $60,000 a year. There was also a team of workers in India making $6,000 a year that shadowed him on the computer.
“The problem,” he said, “is that my job is still there. I went away. The American worker went away.”
A representative of Infosys declined to comment. Al Lara, a spokesman for Eversource Energy, said in a statement: “We made changes to our I.T. department three years ago during a period of transition and change to support the merger of our two companies while under much regulatory scrutiny. We are proud of the new I.T. organization.” Mr. Lara was referring to a merger with NStar in 2012.
In other instances, the jobs are filled only temporarily by H-1B workers — before the outsourcing firm moves the job permanently to a lower-cost country.
“That’s the endgame,” said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing former employees of Walt Disney Company, Abbott Laboratories and other companies in discrimination claims pertaining to tech-job outsourcing.
Some economists are skeptical about the claimed lack of qualified workers, especially anoft-cited 500,000 open positions in technology that cannot be filled.
“I’m sure employers might not have as much choice as they would like, but if the shortage story were true, we’d see wages rising more rapidly than they are,” said Dean Baker, co-director of the liberal Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington. There is substantial unemployment, Mr. Baker said, even among workers in so-called STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) fields.
Lawrence F. Katz, a prominent labor economist at Harvard, said companies like the H-1B visa program because it expands the pool of applicants. That means having to pay less in salary and retaining more control over employees.
“From the point of view of an economist, there are two big winners,” he added. “The workers who come here with H-1B visas and the companies that employ them.”
While it remains to be seen what Mr. Trump will do, various members of Congress have proposed measures to change the H-1B system. One idea is to raise the $60,000-salary threshold for some H-1B workers to $100,000 or more. The hope is that this will narrow the gap between the standard pay for an American tech worker and that of a foreign worker.
Another proposed measure is to change the current first-come, first-served lottery system that is benefiting outsourcing firms. Yet another idea is for a salary bidding system, in which companies bid on what they would be willing to pay an applicant, potentially making it more difficult to flood the applicant pool with lower-cost workers.
According to the University of California, San Francisco, technology costs to run U.C.S.F. Health, which encompasses the university’s hospital, medical center and patient care facilities, have tripled from 2011 to 2016. Outsourcing technology jobs will save the university more than $30 million over the next five years.
But this argument has not spared the university from criticism for outsourcing the jobs because — as a public institution — it receives taxpayer funds and is a nonprofit organization.
The university said neither it nor HCL would replace the laid-off employees with H-1B workers, although it acknowledges that HCL brought in some H-1B workers initially to understand the institution’s technology needs. Those workers, U.C.S.F. said, are no longer working on the account.
Mr. Tan, 55, said he was not worried about returning to the job market in a few weeks and understood why the university took such measures. However, he is concerned about what his children will do when they start looking for work.
“Today it’s me, but tomorrow it’s going to be a doctor or an engineer,” he said. “At what point do you draw the line?”
Correction: February 6, 2017, Monday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated the H-1B program’s minimum salary requirement. The minimum salary is for dependent companies that seek a waiver from having to recruit Americans first, not for all companies hiring H-1B candidates.
PHOTO: Hank Nguyen, Audrey Hatten-Milholin and Margaret Horn lost their jobs at University of California, San Francisco. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)
Related Articles
    • Silicon Valley’s Ambivalence Toward Trump Turns to Anger

Load-Date: February 7, 2017


End of Document
President Signs Executive Order to Help U.S. Manufacturers and 'Trump People'
The New York Times
February 1, 2019 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 765 words
Byline: By KATIE ROGERS
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Trump signed an executive order on Thursday that will push for federal dollars spent on infrastructure projects to be put toward American companies and bolster workers his top trade adviser described as ''blue-collar Trump people'' the administration has focused on helping.
That description, given to reporters by Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, was a small but telling glimpse at how the administration has sought to carry out the president's ''America First'' policy. The executive order is meant to be an economic shot in the arm for workers held up as symbols of the president's tough-on-trade stance, even as some have faced shaky economic prospects over the administration's decisions to impose high tariffs on imported goods and to start several global disputes, including a damaging trade war with China. 
  Flanked by officials including Mr. Navarro and Labor Secretary Alexander Acosta in his first public appearance since the government reopened on Friday, Mr. Trump said during a 40-minute session with reporters that the reasoning behind the order was that ''we don't get treated great by many countries in terms of our trade deals.'' The president added that he wanted infrastructure projects to be built with ''American steel,'' ''American iron'' and ''American hands.''
  The executive order, ''Strengthening Buy-American Preferences for Infrastructure Projects,'' will recommend but not outright require that what the administration said was $700 billion in federal financial assistance doled out by some 30 agencies each year go toward American-manufactured products, including aluminum, steel, concrete and iron. The order will also seek to tamp down on waivers that agencies have used to bypass American products in favor of foreign-made ones.
  The order is a continuation of the ''Buy American'' strategy that Mr. Trump unveiled within his first few months in office. In April 2017, the president signed an executive order that would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the H-1B visa program for foreign technical workers, a move that led Democrats to say that the administration would curb the hiring of qualified foreign workers, particularly in the technology industry.
  He has since used the H-1B program as a target in his campaign rallies, often highlighting the stories of laid-off workers who were told to train their replacements. In early January, Mr. Trump promised again that changes to the program were coming, but did not offer a concrete timeline.
  The administration has framed both executive orders as ''strong presidential guidance'' that expects government agencies to examine ways in which American resources can be directed toward American products and people. Mr. Navarro said federal spending on foreign goods was at its lowest point in 10 years, and spending on American-made products had increased by $24 billion.
  ''That's pure Donald J. Trump,'' Mr. Navarro said.
  The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on where it had gotten those figures.
  But the move comes amid uncertainty posed by the administration's tariff policies and the trade war with China. Attempts to break an impasse are underway in Washington between American and Chinese officials, but so far there is little optimism that either side will concede. In the 10 months since the Trump administration imposed 25 percent tariffs on steel imports, prices in the United States have now fallen back to levels last seen before the tariffs were announced on March 1.
  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, called the executive order another empty promise to American workers.
  The order also comes one day after Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics company, said it was rethinking its plans to build a $10 billion Wisconsin plant to make flat-screen televisions, citing what it said were new economic and manufacturing obstacles in the United States since the agreement was made in July 2017. Some economists were long skeptical that the project, which has promised 13,000 jobs, would ever come to fruition.
  Mr. Navarro, who declined to answer questions on any uncertainties raised by the administration's tariff policy, later changed his comment about the administration's policies benefiting ''Trump people.''
  He said that ''every American is a Trump person'' but added that the bulk of manufacturing jobs go to people without college degrees and ''exactly the type of people that the Trump administration has so much focus on: American men and women who work with their hands.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/31/us/politics/trump-executive-order-manufacturing.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The order requires agencies to favor American-made products, including steel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID J. PHILLIP/ASSOCIATED PRESS)       

Load-Date: February 1, 2019


End of Document
International Readers on How a Trump Presidency Could Affect Them
The New York Times 
November 12, 2016 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; americas
Length: 1434 words
Byline: HANNA INGBER
Highlight: We asked our readers outside the United States to tell us how the election might affect their family and country. We received more than 800 responses.
Body


David Parting, a reader in Germany, wrote that a Donald J. Trump presidency could mend ties between the United States and Russia, which would "overall reduce the potential for international conflicts."
Nadim Kobeissi, a Lebanese immigrant living in France, said he feared personal ramifications from the election of Mr. Trump.
"My partner and I, both Arab immigrants, already witness enough xenophobia, and there is a fear that Trump's victory only further legitimizes this sort of discourse around the world," he wrote to The Times.
We asked our readers outside of the United States to tell us how the election might affect their family and country. We received more than 800 responses. Nearly every region of the world was represented, but almost 40 percent came from Western Europe and almost 20 percent from Canada.
A large group of readers focused on how the new administration would affect trade and their nation's - and family's - economic prospects. Many others discussed security issues. And some people of color and women raised questions about how Mr. Trump's inflammatory language might change discourse worldwide and possibly lead to more hate crimes.
Here is a selection of the responses; they have been edited and condensed, and some have been translated into English.
Security and Aid
"Trump's antiterror policies might give Pakistan a jolt and help us curb terror and save many hundreds of lives that are lost to these terrorists from across the border."
Kartikey, India
"The impact shall be likely on the scaling down of humanitarian aid."
Simon Ruwuke Hove, Zimbabwe
"I think the most tangible is that we as NATO allies should start to take our own security more serious. I believe that is only fair, so we should prepare to pay our share of the bill."
Peter Hendrikx, the Netherlands
"When it comes to relations to Russia, which are a bit tense, I'm quite sure Trump is better than Clinton. In my opinion the attitude toward Russia has been way too negative here in Europe. Of course, there are a lot of problems with Russia not being a democracy and all, but that big country in the East has been in far worse condition and extremely more dangerous in the past than it is now."
Sven Jans, Sweden
"I hope he can apply his skill in bullying people this time for good - and his own place in history - by getting Netanyahu and the Palestinians to make peace for their people's future and the world's stability. My husband, son and daughter have served in the army; I hope my grandchildren will never be in danger in the same way."
Elinore Liebersohn Koenigsfeld, Israel
"I am deeply concerned with president-elect Mr. Trump for obvious reasons, but I am honestly relieved that Ms. Clinton couldn't get the job. Her foreign policy frightened me in terms of going back to the Cold War era. She is, unlike Mr. Obama, an interventionist, who would have inflamed international tensions, leaving Germany (and Europe) in an acid test between the West and East, facing armament."
Christian Weidner, Germany
"I think it brings hard time and aggression from Washington as Mr. Trump is unpredictable."
Khawar Mehmood, Pakistan
"It will be good for Europe, once President Trump is clear about his policy in fighting ISIS alongside Russia, holding a strong position in the region just like Russia, by doing the right thing, killing terrorists."
Maria da Graça, Portugal
Economic Impact
"His plan to send back migrants will have a very deep impact in the social and economic conditions of my home country, place of origin of thousands of migrant workers."
Otton Solis, Costa Rica
"It has already take down the value of our currency."
Jose Franco, Mexico
"Heads of state who succeed in generating wealth are rare. When that happens everyone is benefited, unfortunately the world lacks leaders with this ability, but there is no doubt that Donald Trump is one of these men. It will surely bring great progress to the United States and to the world."
George Monteiro, Brazil
"If America proceeds with protectionism and nixes Nafta, it might force Canada to seek out other trade partners. This would be painful in the short-term, but could potentially be beneficial in the future, where we are not so dependent on the U.S."
Jia Lu, Chinese-Canadian
"Locals are concerned that Trump will stir up trouble with China, and destabilize the region. China is easily Australia's largest trading partner, and a lot of our economic prosperity rests on stable relations with them."
James King, Australia
"Trump has called Nafta a disaster, the worst trade deal ever. Presumably, he will revoke it, or try to renegotiate its terms. Trade deals don't work as zero-sum equations. Nafta works because it has benefited all three of our North American economies. The Canadian market for consumer goods is relatively small and spread out along an east-west axis. If north-south trade is disrupted in both manufactured goods and agricultural products, the impact on the Canadian economy will be devastating."
Wally Seccombe, Canada
"Our economy might benefit if Trump and the Republicans manage to get the Keystone XL pipeline built. However, I doubt this would offset the many negative effects his presidency could have on the Canadian economy generally and Alberta's nonoil industries, such as agriculture and forestry."
Robert Bott, Canada
Access to the United States
"I have two kids studying in the U.S. and an ex-spouse who holds H-1B visa. If he insists on deporting people with certain religious backgrounds and clamping down on the said visa, of course the future will be bleak for my family."
Zunaibi Abdullah, Malaysia
Political Repercussions
"One of the major impacts on my country is many people are going to highlight the flaws of democracy and we are going back to an era of strongman politics. This is the last thing I want to see and it is actually happening. And I don't think Trump's election means the failure of democracy."
Young, Beijing
"I believe it is highly likely that Mr. Trump's election will contribute [to] fueling the ambition of outsiders and would-be populist candidates in my country Chile, and the entire Latin American region for that matter.
"Populism, mostly left-wing oriented populism, is already getting traction among Chileans, most notably among the youngest generations. The whole idea that with your vote you can now actually shake the status quo and bring about deep changes across the board is becoming stronger within the Chilean society."
Luis Alberto Pino, Chile
"In Africa in general and Central Africa in particular, we are afraid that Trump policy will be concentrated only on the United States. There will be no African policy at all. This situation will advantage dictators who are presently ruling."
Gabriel Nyangwile, Democratic Republic of Congo
"I just would want to tell him one thing: It's been hundreds of years and we still don't even know what a ballot looks like. Can you make sure the American beacon of freedom continues to shine brightly enough for us to see it all the way from China? Can you do your job so that one day China is forced to let us elect our leader too, even if it means we have a leader like you?"
Li Dashan, China
Climate Change
"Me and my family's biggest immediate fear is a reversal of the climate-change agreement. That would make it so much easier for other countries around the world to also neglect the treaty. It scares us to think about the consequences for the next generations."
Dr. Jan-Ulrich Sobisch, Germany
Xenophobia and Misogyny
"My son studies in the U.S. If xenophobia and racism become acceptable behavior, life will certainly become unpleasant for him.
"Economically, a lot of employment is created by the I.T. industry, which relies heavily on the U.S. demand for services. This would be impacted negatively if he clamps down on outsourcing and free trade."
Bala Sathiapalan, India
"Being a young ambitious woman in Russia means being routinely subjected to misogynism, harassment and patronizing remarks both at work and in life. I was hoping that by electing the first woman president the United States would show the world and especially the girls who grow up in Russia that a woman should never, ever be simplified to an object of desire or hate, a kitchen gadget who gives birth to children and watches men make decisions for her concerning her health, her future, and her life. Now, with Donald J. Trump, it would be as hard as ever to explain these things to them."
Ann, Russia
Follow Hanna Ingber on Twitter @hannaingber.
PHOTO: Television screens in Seoul, South Korea, show a news broadcast after the election. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ED JONES/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - GETTY IMAGES)

Load-Date: November 30, 2016


End of Document
A Chance to Make U.S.-Australia Ties Shipshape
The New York Times
May 4, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 805 words
Byline: By NOAH REMNICK
Body


Among the many people President Trump has antagonized during his brief yet turbulent time in office, few were quite as surprised to receive his ire as the Australians. Though the United States and Australia have long been allied in war and trade, Mr. Trump abruptly ended a phone call with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in late January after the Australian leader urged him to honor an agreement to accept 1,250 refugees from an Australian detention center.
Things only soured further when Mr. Trump took to Twitter to excoriate the agreement. ''I will study this dumb deal!'' he declared in a post a few days later. 
  On Thursday, the president will have a chance for reconciliation when he boards the hangar deck of the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum for a dinner commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea, in which United States and Australian naval and air forces fought Japan during World War II. The conflict is often remembered as ''the battle that saved Australia.''
  ''There's a deep and broad connection between the two countries that most people don't know enough about,'' said John Berry, a former United States ambassador to Australia and the president of the American Australian Association, which is hosting the event. ''I'm glad we're taking a moment to really celebrate that.''
  The American Australian Association, a little-known yet industrious nonprofit organization with offices in the Financial District of Manhattan, has been working for decades to strengthen relations between the countries. Founded in 1948 by the journalist Keith Murdoch, the association was intended to spark American governmental and business interests in Australia after World War II. Since then, the scope of its ambitions has expanded to include cultural, educational and philanthropic activity. Its Education Fund, for example, has financed the participation of more than 200 fellows in postgraduate study between Australia and the United States since 2002.
  The dinner on Thursday will raise money to start a new fund for veterans. It will also be the first time an American president has met with the association, Mr. Berry said, and the first in-person encounter between Mr. Trump and Mr. Turnbull.
  Perhaps nowhere is that burgeoning cultural kinship more apparent than New York, which has experienced a surge of Australian immigration in recent years. The Australian Consulate now estimates that there are approximately 20,000 Australians in New York; a decade ago, a census survey estimated that there were fewer than 6,000.
  With those immigrants has come a swell of Australian culture in a city already rich with international life. New Yorkers have taken notice. In 2014, the website Gothamist posted an article asking, ''What's the Deal With All These Australians in NYC?'' The upswing, as it noted, can be attributed in part to the E-3 program, a class of visa introduced under President George W. Bush in 2005 exclusively for Australians that is easier and less expensive to obtain than the conventional H-1B work visa. Every year, more than 10,000 E-3 visas are reserved for Australian nationals.
  ''Australians focus not only on work but on vacation and quality of life, so when they come it's for six weeks or six months, not just six days like most tourists,'' Mr. Berry said. ''And if you look around the city, you're starting to see their impact.''
  A healthy collection of Australian bars, restaurants, and clothing stores have taken root in a stretch of NoLIta, around Mulberry Street, that some people call Little Australia. Now, alongside the typical Manhattan fare, Australians can find comfort in the familiar taste of flat whites and chants of ''Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi!'' As time has passed, more and more longtime New Yorkers have also begun to better understand their antipodal counterparts.
  ''Back when we first got here, everyone used to think we were all Crocodile Dundee with kangaroos in our backyards,'' said Tim Sykes, 32, a co-owner of Ruby's Cafe, an Australian restaurant on Mulberry Street. ''But now that we're all over the place, Aussie life is kind of taking hold.''
  The transformation has been evident in at least one crucial way for Mr. Sykes. ''Now you can actually find Vegemite in some restaurants,'' he said.
  Still, that sense of comfort was upended by Mr. Trump's clash with Mr. Turnbull. In late April, Vice President Mike Pence helped smooth over relations when during a visit to Australia, he confirmed the countries' ''strong and historic alliance.''
  Since Mr. Trump's comments, Mr. Sykes said, he and many of his Australian friends have been calling their immigration lawyers, worried that their status might shift. For now, Mr. Sykes is counting on the meeting Thursday to help return a sense of normalcy.
  ''That'd be ripper, mate,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/03/nyregion/trump-malcolm-turnbull-australia-new-york.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia in April. He will meet President Trump in person on Thursday in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICK TSIKAS/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)       

Load-Date: May 4, 2017


End of Document
President Signs Order to Help U.S. Manufacturers and ‘Trump People’
The New York Times 
January 31, 2019 Thursday 10:24 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 788 words
Byline: Katie Rogers
Highlight: The order is meant to be a shot in the arm for “blue-collar Trump people,” one official said, even as they face shaky economic prospects from disputes such as a trade war with China.
Body


WASHINGTON — President Trump signed an executive order on Thursday that will push for federal dollars spent on infrastructure projects to be put toward American companies and bolster workers his top trade adviser described as “blue-collar Trump people” the administration has focused on helping.
That description, given to reporters by Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, was a small but telling glimpse at how the administration has sought to carry out the president’s “America First” policy. The executive order is meant to be an economic shot in the arm for workers held up as symbols of the president’s tough-on-trade stance, even as some have faced shaky economic prospects over the administration’s decisions to impose high tariffs on imported goods and to start several global disputes, including a damaging trade war with China.
Flanked by officials including Mr. Navarro and Labor Secretary Alexander Acosta in his first public appearance since the government reopened on Friday, Mr. Trump said during a 40-minute session with reporters that the reasoning behind the order was that “we don’t get treated great by many countries in terms of our trade deals.” The president added that he wanted infrastructure projects to be built with “American steel,” “American iron” and “American hands.”
The executive order, “Strengthening Buy-American Preferences for Infrastructure Projects,” will recommend but not outright require that what the administration said was $700 billion in federal financial assistance doled out by some 30 agencies each year go toward American-manufactured products, including aluminum, steel, concrete and iron. The order will also seek to tamp down on waivers that agencies have used to bypass American products in favor of foreign-made ones.
The order is a continuation of the “Buy American” strategy that Mr. Trump unveiled within his first few months in office. In April 2017, the president signed an executive order that would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the H-1B visa program for foreign technical workers, a move that led Democrats to say that the administration would curb the hiring of qualified foreign workers, particularly in the technology industry.
He has since used the H-1B program as a target in his campaign rallies, often highlighting the stories of laid-off workers who were told to train their replacements. In early January, Mr. Trump promised again that changes to the program were coming, but did not offer a concrete timeline.
The administration has framed both executive orders as “strong presidential guidance” that expects government agencies to examine ways in which American resources can be directed toward American products and people. Mr. Navarro said federal spending on foreign goods was at its lowest point in 10 years, and spending on American-made products had increased by $24 billion.
“That’s pure Donald J. Trump,” Mr. Navarro said.
The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on where it had gotten those figures.
But the move comes amid uncertainty posed by the administration’s tariff policies and the trade war with China. Attempts to break an impasse are underway in Washington between American and Chinese officials, but so far there is little optimism that either side will concede. In the 10 months since the Trump administration imposed 25 percent tariffs on steel imports, prices in the United States have now fallen back to levels last seen before the            tariffs were announced on March 1.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, called the executive order another empty promise to American workers.
The order also comes one day after Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics company, said it was rethinking its plans to build a $10 billion Wisconsin plant to make flat-screen televisions, citing what it said were new economic and manufacturing obstacles in the United States since the agreement was made in July 2017. Some economists were long skeptical that the project, which has promised 13,000 jobs, would ever come to fruition.
Mr. Navarro, who declined to answer questions on any uncertainties raised by the administration’s tariff policy, later changed his comment about the administration’s policies benefiting “Trump people.”
He said that “every American is a Trump person” but added that the bulk of manufacturing jobs go to people without college degrees and “exactly the type of people that the Trump administration has so much focus on: American men and women who work with their hands.”
PHOTO: President Trump signed an executive order with American manufacturing workers on Thursday at the White House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tom Brenner for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: February 2, 2019


End of Document
The Open-Door Bailout
The New York Times
February 11, 2009 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 830 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Dateline: Bangalore, India 
Body


  Leave it to a brainy Indian to come up with the cheapest and surest way to stimulate our economy: immigration. 
  ''All you need to do is grant visas to two million Indians, Chinese and Koreans,'' said Shekhar Gupta, editor of The Indian Express newspaper. ''We will buy up all the subprime homes. We will work 18 hours a day to pay for them. We will immediately improve your savings rate  --  no Indian bank today has more than 2 percent nonperforming loans because not paying your mortgage is considered shameful here. And we will start new companies to create our own jobs and jobs for more Americans.'' 
  While his tongue was slightly in cheek, Gupta and many other Indian business people I spoke to this week were trying to make a point that sometimes non-Americans can make best: ''Dear America, please remember how you got to be the wealthiest country in history. It wasn't through protectionism, or state-owned banks or fearing free trade. No, the formula was very simple: build this really flexible, really open economy, tolerate creative destruction so dead capital is quickly redeployed to better ideas and companies, pour into it the most diverse, smart and energetic immigrants from every corner of the world and then stir and repeat, stir and repeat, stir and repeat, stir and repeat.'' 
  While I think President Obama has been doing his best to keep the worst protectionist impulses in Congress out of his stimulus plan, the U.S. Senate unfortunately voted on Feb. 6 to restrict banks and other financial institutions that receive taxpayer bailout money from hiring high-skilled immigrants on temporary work permits known as H-1B visas.
  Bad signal. In an age when attracting the first-round intellectual draft choices from around the world is the most important competitive advantage a knowledge economy can have, why would we add barriers against such brainpower  --  anywhere? That's called ''Old Europe.'' That's spelled: S-T-U-P-I-D.
  ''If you do this, it will be one of the best things for India and one of the worst for Americans, [because] Indians will be forced to innovate at home,'' said Subhash B. Dhar, a member of the executive council that runs Infosys, the well-known Indian technology company that sends Indian workers to the U.S. to support a wide range of firms. ''We protected our jobs for many years and look where it got us. Do you know that for an Indian company, it is still easier to do business with a company in the U.S. than it is to do business today with another Indian state?'' 
  Each Indian state tries to protect its little economy with its own rules. America should not be trying to copy that. ''Your attitude,'' said Dhar, should be '' 'whoever can make us competitive and dominant, let's bring them in.' ''
  If there is one thing we know for absolute certain, it's this: Protectionism did not cause the Great Depression, but it sure helped to make it ''Great.'' From 1929 to 1934, world trade plunged by more than 60 percent  --  and we were all worse off.
  We live in a technological age where every study shows that the more knowledge you have as a worker and the more knowledge workers you have as an economy, the faster your incomes will rise. Therefore, the centerpiece of our stimulus, the core driving principle, should be to stimulate everything that makes us smarter and attracts more smart people to our shores. That is the best way to create good jobs.
  According to research by Vivek Wadhwa, a senior research associate at the Labor and Worklife Program at Harvard Law School, more than half of Silicon Valley start-ups were founded by immigrants over the last decade. These immigrant-founded tech companies employed 450,000 workers and had sales of $52 billion in 2005, said Wadhwa in an essay published this week on BusinessWeek.com. 
  He also cited a recent study by William R. Kerr of Harvard Business School and William F. Lincoln of the University of Michigan that ''found that in periods when H-1B visa numbers went down, so did patent applications filed by immigrants [in the U.S.]. And when H-1B visa numbers went up, patent applications followed suit.''
  We don't want to come out of this crisis with just inflation, a mountain of debt and more shovel-ready jobs. We want to -- we have to --  come out of it with a new Intel, Google, Microsoft and Apple. I would have loved to have seen the stimulus package include a government-funded venture capital bank to help finance all the start-ups that are clearly not starting up today  --  in the clean-energy space they're dying like flies  --  because of a lack of liquidity from traditional lending sources.
  Newsweek had an essay this week that began: ''Could Silicon Valley become another Detroit?'' Well, yes, it could. When the best brains in the world are on sale, you don't shut them out. You open your doors wider. We need to attack this financial crisis with green cards not just greenbacks, and with start-ups not just bailouts. One Detroit is enough. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: February 11, 2009


End of Document
Wooing in Silicon Valley
The New York Times
June 6, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1230 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- A bold new billboard looms over U.S. 101, the highway that runs through the heart of the global technology industry. ''H-1b problems?'' it reads. ''Pivot to Canada.''
That sassy invitation is directed at the thousands of foreigners having trouble getting temporary visas, known as H-1b's, to work in the United States. Canada's new so-called start-up visa offers them the prospect of permanent residency and with it, the country's relatively low business taxes and public health insurance.
Canada is not alone in reaching out to foreign entrepreneurs. In a bid to create their own versions of Silicon Valley, Britain and Australia have dangled start-up visas like this too. Chile is even offering seed money to lure foreigners to come to Santiago and get their start-ups off the ground.
But the seductions of this Silicon Valley are hard to resist for the men and women who dream of building the next Google (or at least being the next Google acquisition). This is where they want to be.
''It's like being in Florence during the Renaissance,'' is how Xavier Lasa, a Spanish computer coder, put it recently. He sounded dead serious. He had come to Mountain View, just south of San Francisco, on a short-term business visa to join a technology incubator program called 500 Startups. He was building a tool for brands to advertise on the Web.
Like many foreign tech entrepreneurs angling to stay here, he had his eyes on Washington, not Ottawa. The landmark immigration bill that the full Senate is to take up next week includes a provision that Silicon Valley investors have pressed hard for: a new visa category for entrepreneurs who have persuaded American investors to back them with at least $100,000 in financing.
Never mind that immigrants don't need special visas to be entrepreneurial; research shows that they are far more likely than native-born Americans to start businesses. Start-up visas are an easy political sell, which also explains Canada's latest gamble.
When Canada's immigration minister, Jason T. Kenney, came to visit 500 Startups recently, on a gloriously sunny Friday afternoon, he got a taste of what attracts foreigners. Dave McClure, a co-founder of the incubator, took him straight to the wall-to-wall 12th-floor window.
''Facebook is that way,'' Mr. McClure said, pointing to the 360-degree view. ''You can see Apple over there.''
''There's Sand Hill Road,'' he continued cheerfully, motioning toward the wide boulevard lined on both sides with big-name venture capital firms. ''Stanford is just up that way.''
The room was full of foreign entrepreneurs, huddled over laptops or sketching out business plans on whiteboards.
Julian Garcia, a programmer from Chile who was building a tool for marketers to target potential customers by location, explained his view of the Valley. ''Here, you build something incredible, in two years, you get acquired.''
Aditya Sahay, the founder of a men's fashion site, from India, retorted, ''Even if you build something not incredible, you still get acquired -- in four months!''
Mr. Kenney kept his game face on as Mr. McClure waxed about the attractions of the Valley. In an interview later, he said he was certain that some of the foreign entrepreneurs, uncertain about their immigration status in the United States, could be tempted by, say, Manitoba. He called them ''a captive audience,'' and said he hoped to take advantage of what could be a short window of opportunity for his country while Congress argues over how to fix its own immigration law.
The new Canadian visa is not for tech entrepreneurs per se, but the venture capital requirements favor technology start-ups over more traditional immigrant businesses, like corner shops and restaurants. And the offer is far more generous than its American counterpart.
Anyone with one year of college and 75,000 Canadian dollars from an approved Canadian angel investor, or 200,000 Canadian dollars from an approved Canadian venture capitalist, can apply for the visa. Applicants need to be able to speak basic English or French. They need not prove they will create any jobs.
Mr. Kenney said he believed that investors, rather than workers in his ministry, were more capable of vetting who would be good for his country.
''The kind of rigorous assessment made by investors will ensure that the qualified applicants have really a high level of human capital and they are going to be able to move around the economy,'' the minister said.
Asked what happens if their businesses fail, he said he was confident that skilled, entrepreneurial foreigners would dust themselves off and find jobs in Canada's technology industry. ''It's a risk we're willing to take,'' he said.
American lawmakers have opted for a more cautious approach. The proposed Senate bill would grant temporary visas valid for three years, unlike Canada, which would grant permanent residency. The Department of Homeland Security would have to report to Congress every three years on what kinds of businesses the recipients create, how many jobs they produce, and how much revenue.
It is not geared toward entrepreneurs in any specific industry, though the rhetoric around it has centered mainly on technology. Technology investors, like Mr. McClure, have been actively pushing for it.
''From a political perspective, the goal of the start-up visas is to demonstrate they're bringing in the sexiest, highest-value people,'' said Madeleine Sumption, assistant director for research at the Washington-based Migration Policy Institute, who has studied start-up visa programs worldwide.
But, she pointed out, most immigrant entrepreneurs -- Google's co-founder, Sergey Brin, included -- come in on other visas. ''You don't need an entrepreneur visa to have entrepreneurs,'' she added. ''You would have to let in a lot of people before you guarantee some Sergey Brins.''
Australia offers its version of a green card to those who secure 1 million Australian dollars in financing from approved Australian venture capitalists. Britain offers temporary visas to those who procure £50,000 from a venture backer. Chile doles out $40,000 in equity-free seed capital to foreign visitors who want to start a technology business.
Ayan Barua, from India, has already spent six months in Chile and taken advantage of its offer. Even though his girlfriend, who is Australian, has tried to persuade him to apply for her country's start-up visa, he has resisted. Instead, he and his business partner, Vamshi Mokshagundam, have returned to Silicon Valley repeatedly to develop their business, a recommendation engine for businesses shopping for software.
Their funders are here, they said, as are their initial customers. So too are other entrepreneurs whose guidance they seek. ''It's hard to find advice and mentorship anywhere else,'' Mr. Mokshagundam said. ''That's a big deal for us.''
Mr. Barua described California as the N.B.A. of the start-up world. ''The adrenaline rush you need as an entrepreneur is here,'' he said.
If the omnibus immigration bill winding its way through the Senate were to become law, he said, he would absolutely apply.
If it did not, he and his partner said they might consider the Canadian visa. They would still want to come to Silicon Valley as often as possible. But they could use Canada as their base, as they use Bangalore, India, now. ''It would be a shorter flight,'' Mr. Mokshagundam said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/technology/wishing-you-and-your-start-up-were-here.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A billboard invitation from Canada to foreign entrepreneurs working in Silicon Valley. (B1)
 Jason T. Kenney, Canada's immigration minister, is trying to persuade foreign entrepreneurs to start their companies up north. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER DASILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B7)        

Load-Date: June 6, 2013


End of Document
Gender Bias Seen in Visas for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
March 19, 2013 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Washington; Pg. 
Length: 1153 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Senate Judiciary Committee heard testimony Monday afternoon arguing that the H-1B visa program, which covers highly skilled temporary foreign workers, often in high-tech fields, discriminates against women.
The hearing, which was devoted to issues women face in the immigration process, also focused on family reunification, and ways to help families -- and women specifically -- integrate into the legal immigration system.
''I don't think we should be setting up an either-or proposition -- even the most highly skilled immigrants, they have families, too,'' said Senator Mazie Hirono, Democrat of Hawaii, referring to what she described as a false, ''either-or'' choice between family-based immigration and high-skilled immigration. ''This is all about doing the kind of immigration reform that really supports the values we have in this country, and one of the values we have in this country is that family is important.''
Karen Panetta, the vice president for communications and public awareness for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in the United States of America, testified in her prepared remarks that ''the vast majority of H-1B workers are men.''
Ms. Panetta's prepared testimony pointed to ''a serious gender imbalance in science, technology, engineering and math,'' as part of the reason that these H-1B visas in high-tech fields skew disproportionately toward men. But she noted: ''If a major immigration program effectively discriminated based on race or national origin, would that be O.K.?''
''The I.E.E.E.-U.S.A. represents more American high-tech workers than anybody else, so we have sources,'' Ms. Panetta said Monday afternoon. ''One from inside the industry, looking at the offshoring companies that dominate the H-1B program, is that their global hiring is 70 percent men.'' But in the United States, where outsourcing companies get more than half of the limited number of H-1B visas, she added, ''the ratio is more like 85 percent men.''
Ms. Panetta, whose organization has filed a Freedom of Information Act request with the Department of Homeland Security to get data on the gender breakdown of H-1B visas, accused the government in her written testimony of ''stonewalling'' on their request.
''How many women get H-1B visas?'' she said Monday.
A spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security said that there is not a gender-based cap for H-1B visas and that gender is not taken into account when deciding who qualifies for the program, so the department does not have this data readily available.
Ai-jen Poo, the director of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, emphasized the need for domestic care workers who are illegal immigrants -- ''a growing workforce of mainly immigrant women who take care of our children, our aging loved ones and our homes,'' as she described them -- to be allowed some flexibility in proving that they have been living and working in the United States.
A nanny who is an illegal immigrant, Ms. Poo said, most likely does not have pay stubs or tax forms to prove she worked for her employer because she largely exists in ''a paperless world.'' She called on the senators to accept ''proofs of presence as opposed to proof of employment'' when it comes to providing a work history for domestic care workers -- many of whom are female.
Another issue of concern is that immigration legislation that is likely to emerge from the Senate might eliminate the ability for United States citizens to sponsor their married adult children, as well as their siblings, on an immigrant visa. Currently, these two groups represent the third and fourth preference categories when it comes to family immigration, but there is some discussion that they might be reshuffled and ultimately cut during the coming immigration overhaul.
''Our family is what permits us to be able to set root and really begin to build a life in this country,'' said Mee Moua, the president of the Asian American Justice Center. ''If those two categories were eliminated, unless some alternative version was put on the table, I think that it would just unfortunately affect women and their families.''
Ms. Moua argued that large, extended families can be critical to helping immigrants become a productive and integrated part of American society.
''Family immigration is critical to our economy, and we know that our communities and all Americans benefit when we're able to provide immigrants with an opportunity to set roots,'' she said. ''We know that siblings provide immigrants an immediate social support system, that is able to help them with child care or if they fall on hard times, or instances where they need some help to start a business. The family network is what has helped our immigrants, regardless of how you come to this country, survive and start a life in this country.
''Children will always be our children, whether they're over the age of 21 or not.'' she said. ''For us to start to think about which members of our family we're going to trade away is a dramatic and drastic departure from the core values of what has been driving this country since our founding days.''
Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, however, was not so convinced that all family members of immigrants deserved special consideration, simply because they have family in the United States.
''Because a person chooses to leave their home country and come to the United States does not necessarily mean they have the right to demand that their father or their other extended family members be allowed to come if they don't otherwise meet the standard,'' he said.
Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, on Monday also introduced legislation that, he said, would help overhaul the H-1B visa system.
''Somewhere along the line, the H-1B program got side-tracked,'' Mr. Grassley said in an e-mail statement. ''The program was never meant to replace qualified American workers, but it was instead intended as a means to fill gaps in highly specialized areas of employment. When times are tough, like they are now, it's especially important that Americans get every consideration before an employer looks to hire from abroad. The legislation will benefit the American worker, while still ensuring that U.S. companies get the specialized workers they need.''
Only four members of the committee -- Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota; Mr. Grassley; Ms. Hirono; and Mr. Sessions -- attended Monday's hearing. None of the committee members who are also part of the bipartisan group of eight senators working on comprehensive immigration legislation showed up.
Monday's hearing also kicked off a weeklong series of events on Capitol Hill as part of the ''We Belong Together'' campaign, in which hundreds of women from 24 states will call for an immigration overhaul that specifically addresses the challenges that female immigrants face.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/19/us/politics/gender-bias-seen-in-visas-for-skilled-workers.html

Load-Date: March 20, 2013


End of Document
Visa Application Period Opens for Highly Skilled Workers
The New York Times
April 1, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 844 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The annual sweepstakes for visas for highly skilled temporary foreign workers begins on Tuesday, the opening day for applications to the vastly oversubscribed immigration program that is the center of a growing controversy in Congress.
  The federal authorities will accept petitions from employers for 65,000 temporary work visas, known as H-1Bs, that are available for the year that starts Oct. 1. Last year, the agency received enough petitions to cover the annual quota on the first day applications were accepted. About half of the total petitions filed were rejected because the supply of visas had run out. 
  Technology companies have urged Congress to raise the annual limit, saying they face damaging shortages of the computer engineers and software technicians that these visas attract. 
  But a number of lawmakers, led by Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, say  foreign companies have used the program to import workers who compete against Americans and lower wage rates. The senators oppose increasing the number of H-1B visas without closing loopholes in the program.
  Citizenship and Immigration Services has said that it will accept H-1B visa petitions over five business days, ending April 7. Last year the agency closed the application period after one day because the quota had already been surpassed. In mid-April, the agency will run a computerized lottery to choose about 65,000 petitions. 
  ''We want to make sure everyone has the opportunity to get their petition in to make the process as fair as possible,'' said Christopher S. Bentley, a spokesman for the immigration agency.
  For the first time, the agency this year has explicitly prohibited companies from filing more than one petition for the same worker. 
  Technology companies have become increasingly frustrated and vocal about the H-1B visa limits and the lottery selection method. In March, Bill Gates of Microsoft told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the current system ''makes attracting and retaining high-skilled immigrants exceptionally challenging for U.S. firms.'' 
  Mr. Gates said Microsoft and other American companies had been forced to export jobs that could have been done in the United States to countries more welcoming to skilled foreign workers.
  A study in March by the National Foundation for American Policy, an immigration research group in Washington, concluded that H-1B workers helped United States technology companies generate jobs for American workers. The companies increased their employment by five workers for every H-1B visa they sought, the study found. 
  The H-1B visas bring foreign workers, preferably with master's degrees or doctorates, for an initial period of three years, renewable for another three years. The visas are intended to help American companies fill shortages of employees with sophisticated skills. 
  But official figures released by Mr. Grassley show that the three biggest users of the H-1B program in 2007 were three companies based in India that perform computer and software contract work here using foreign workers, mainly Indian. 
  The three companies -- Infosys Technologies and Wipro Limited of Bangalore, and Satyam Computer Services of Hyderabad -- accounted for more than 8,500 of the H-1B visas that received preliminary approval in 2007, figures show.
  Mr. Durbin, the Senate's second-ranking Democrat, said in an interview on Monday that these companies had distorted the program's purpose. 
  ''They are H-1B brokers,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''For a fee, they are moving these engineers to the United States for three or six years, training them and then moving them back to India to work for companies that compete with America.''
  Ron Hira, a professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology, said that gaps in the rules had allowed technology companies, including American ones, to misuse the program. 
  ''Basically, H-1B has been thoroughly corrupted,'' Mr. Hira said. ''Under H-1B you could be forced to train your own replacement,'' he said, speaking of American workers.
  Mr. Hira pointed out that current rules do not require employers to prove a labor shortage by advertising jobs or recruiting in the United States. He said wages established for H-1B technology workers were below market levels in this country, allowing companies that use the visas to gain a competitive advantage and lowering wages over all. 
  Mr. Durbin and Mr. Grassley have proposed requiring companies to advertise jobs with the Labor Department before applying for visas, and giving the department new monitoring authority. 
  Infosys, in a statement, said that about 30 percent of its work for American employers was performed ''at the client's location'' in this country. It said it used H-1B visas to bring in ''our trained resources'' for several years or less. 
  Wipro said that 20 percent of its workers in the United States were ''local employees.'' It said it used H-1B visas to bring in workers ''for a short duration.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
CHART: Importing the Work Force: Among the top 10 companies that filed petitions last year for H-1B visas for high-skilled temporary workers, six were technology firms based in India. All India-based companies are highlighted below.(Source: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services) Chart details various statistics for petitions approved and headquarters.                                  

Load-Date: April 1, 2008


End of Document
Immigration Ban, Betsy DeVos, Tom Brady: Your Tuesday Briefing
The New York Times 
February 7, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1040 words
Byline: SEAN ALFANO and MARK A. WALSH
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
 Court showdown looms for immigration ban.
Oral arguments on the legality of President Trump’s executive order are set to be heard today in a U.S. Court of Appeals in San Francisco. On Monday night, the Justice Department urged the court to reinstate the measure, which bars all refugees as well as visitors from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
Here are the main points in the case.
The court plans to begin the session at 3 p.m. Pacific and will live-stream it. The ruling is likely to be followed by an appeal to the Supreme Court.
 Tensions in Senate over confirmation vote.
Democrats continue to protest the nomination of the billionaire philanthropist Betsy DeVos as education secretary, whose confirmation vote is set for today.
Critics say that Ms. DeVos favors voucher programs over repairing public schools — her defenders say she advocates giving parents choices. Two Republican senators have said they will not support her, setting up a possible 50-50 tie that Vice President Mike Pence would have to break.
Separately, the nomination of Mr. Trump’s choice to run the Labor Department, Andrew F. Puzder, may be in peril. Mr. Puzder has acknowledged that he once employed an undocumented immigrant to clean his house.
 Cautionary tale about rebuilding America’s roads.
Mr. Trump is seeking to spend a trillion dollars on infrastructure, but attempting such major projects can be unwieldy.
A case in point: the traffic choke point in Breezewood, Pa. “It shows how legal quirks, powerful politicians and opaque bureaucratic procedures can influence decisions about how to spend taxpayer dollars,” our reporter writes.
 A “milestone” of corruption.
Somalia has languished without a functioning central government for more than 25 years, but it is holding a presidential election this week.
Investigators, though, suggest that outside forces like Qatar, Sudan, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates have been buying off candidates to get business deals, spread a harsh version of Islam or spy on American forces.
 Public health breakthrough.
Scientists may have found the tools to stop cholera, which rose from the swamps of Bangladesh two centuries ago, killing tens of millions of people over the years.
A research center in Dhaka, the capital, has developed treatments that save 99.9 percent of all victims. And a vaccine accepted by the W.H.O. is being stockpiled for epidemics.
 Introducing The Daily, your audio news report.
Our reporter Michael Barbaro runs down the big stories and the big ideas. Fifteen minutes a day, five days a week.
Listen here if you’re on a computer,            here if you have an iOS device or            here for an Android device.
Business
 Net neutrality rules  intended to ensure equal access to content on the internet are being rolled           back by the new chairman of the Federal Communications Commission.
 Technology companies rely heavily on the 85,000 foreign workers allowed into the U.S. annually under the H-1B visa program. But some critics say the program has been used to lower labor costs and cut jobs.
 A Syrian refugee is suing Facebook in Germany after a selfie he took with Chancellor Angela Merkel was used in fake news reports tying him to terrorist acts.
 U.S. stocks were down on Monday. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
Smarter Living
 We’re all busy in the morning, so here’s how to do the shortest effective workout possible.
 Two brothers and a sister credit a surprising source for their lifelong closeness: their parents’ ugly divorce.
 Recipe of the day: Everyone needs a spicy noodle dish that comes together in less than half an hour. Here’s a great one.
Noteworthy
 Best of late-night TV.
We’re trying out a new feature this week: a rundown of the funniest and most memorable moments from the comedy shows.
Super Bowl jokes dominated Monday night, with Jimmy Kimmel getting into a fight with his special guest, “Tom Brady” — a surprisingly short guy who sounded suspiciously like someone else.
[Video: Super Bowl MVP Tom Brady Makes Surprise Appearance on Kimmel Watch on YouTube.]
 Speaking of Tom Brady …
The quarterback won the big game, but he seems to have lost his jersey.
At some point during the chaos that followed the New England Patriots’ Super Bowl victory on Sunday, part of his uniform disappeared.
 A small town’s stand.
Residents of Yellow Springs, Ohio, a small, predominantly white village, denounced aggressive policing after a black man ended up face down on the ground after a New Year’s celebration.
Not all of their concerns are the same, however.
 The slave who defied George Washington.
Ona Judge, who escaped the presidential residence in Philadelphia in 1796 and defied all efforts to recapture her, is the subject of an exhibition and a new book.
Back Story
The Berlin International Film Festival opens this week with a tale of survival, that of one of the 20th century’s greatest jazz guitarists:            Django Reinhardt.
He was born in Belgium in 1910 to a Roma family that earned a living playing music from town to town.
Reinhardt started off playing the banjo in Paris dance halls. At 18, he lost the use of two fingers on his left hand in a fire, and adapted with a new technique.
He rose to fame in the ’30s. But with World War II and the Nazi occupation of France, Reinhardt tried to flee, fearing that, as a Roma and a jazz musician, he would be detained and killed.
Instead, his fame — and the popularity of an officially discredited art form — may have saved him.
“The Germans used Paris as the base for soldiers to rest and relax,” said Michael Dregni, a Reinhardt biographer. “Jazz was the hot music of the time, so they all want to go out and see jazz, and Django was the biggest star in Europe.”
Reinhardt lived through the war, dying of a sudden stroke in 1953. His legacy lives on in the genre he helped create: Gypsy jazz.
Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and            updated on the web all morning.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
Judge Orders U.S. to Decide If Muslim Scholar Can Enter
The New York Times
June 24, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 468 words
Byline: By ANTHONY RAMIREZ
Body


A federal judge in New York yesterday ordered the Bush administration to decide by September whether to grant an entry visa to a prominent Muslim scholar. The scholar has been barred from entering the United States for nearly two years, first because of supposed ties to terrorism, then for unspecified national security reasons.
  The American Civil Liberties Union filed the suit on behalf of three academic groups, including the PEN American Center, which had invited the scholar, Tariq Ramadan, a Swiss citizen, to speak at its meetings.
In a 34-page ruling, Judge Paul A. Crotty of United States District Court in Manhattan said that while the United States must come to a decision on admitting Mr. Ramadan, the academic groups had not met the legal burden for other demands.
  The groups had sought an order to stop the government from barring Mr. Ramadan under provisions of the Patriot Act and a finding that the government had abridged the free-speech rights of the groups, which also include the American Academy of Religion and the American Association of University Professors.
  Judge Crotty, noting the government's shifting reasons for Mr. Ramadan's exclusion, said, ''While the Government may exclude Ramadan if he poses a legitimate threat to national security, it may not invoke 'national security' as a protective shroud to justify the exclusion of aliens on the basis of their political beliefs.''
  Jameel Jaffer, deputy director of the A.C.L.U.'s national security program, said that ''we're very happy with the decision that we got.''
  Mr. Jaffer added that the decision was significant, ''one, because it clearly rejects the government's contention that Professor Ramadan endorsed terrorism and two, it makes clear that the government cannot use the immigration laws as a means of manipulating political debate inside the United States.''
  The suit was filed against the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Bridget Kelly, a spokeswoman for the United States attorney for the Southern District, said the government's lawyers were reviewing the ruling and would have no immediate comment.
  Mr. Ramadan is a scholar of Arab descent who is now a visiting fellow at Oxford University. He has published more than 20 books, 700 articles, and 170 audiotapes focusing on Islam and the Western world.
  He is also the grandson of Hasan al-Banna, a founder in 1928 of the Muslim Brotherhood, an Egyptian group that opposes Hosni Mubarak, the president of Egypt and an ally of the United States. A group that has been known for violence, the brotherhood recently elected members to Egypt's parliament.
  Mr. Ramadan's troubles began in July 2004 when his work visa, known as H-1B, was revoked and he was later unable to accept a tenured professorship at the University of Notre Dame. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 24, 2006


End of Document
After the Shootings of Two Engineers, Indians Are Wary of Moving to the U.S.
The New York Times
February 27, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 821 words
Byline: By ELLEN BARRY and NIDA NAJAR
Body


NEW DELHI -- Jeena Sharma, 25, was applying for a work visa to the United States when news came that two Indian engineers had been shot in a Kansas bar by a man who drunkenly questioned their immigration status.
News of the shootings, which took place last Wednesday, was quickly eclipsed by other developments in Washington, and even in Kansas, but the same cannot be said of the Sharma household of Mumbai, where Ms. Sharma has received emphatic maternal lectures about her plans to move, starting first thing in the morning. 
  ''She asked me: 'Why do you even need to go to the States? Why do you need to go to a country that doesn't want you? I'm going to be scared for your life every day,''' Ms. Sharma said.
  Even as she endeavored, patiently, to convey to her mother the difference between Kansas and New York City, where she hopes to move, Ms. Sharma felt her own apprehensions growing, as the days passed and President Trump made no statement on the crime.
  ''It's definitely very scary for me at the moment,'' she said. ''It's almost as if a brown person is dead, like it doesn't matter.''
  The body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, the 32-year-old software engineer fatally shot in the Olathe, Kan., bar, was expected to arrive by Monday in Hyderabad, a technology hub where immigration to the United States has long been viewed as the surest path to success.
  Indians were relatively welcoming of Mr. Trump's victory, and many here express admiration for his business empire and promised crackdown on terrorism. But even before Wednesday's shootings, that optimism had been diluted by fears that America might no longer welcome immigrants.
  India is second only to China as a feeder to American colleges, with around 165,000 students enrolled in the 2015-16 school year, according to the Institute of International Education. Indians are the largest recipients of temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which the Trump administration intends to cut back. And close to half a million Indians, who mostly went to the United States legally as students or tourists or on work visas, have stayed on after their visas expired, the Pew Research Center estimates.
  Reports of rising American hostility toward immigrants have stunned many Indians, said Alyssa Ayres, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who visited Hyderabad recently.
  ''I had a guy on a plane sitting next to me, who turned to me and said, 'Is it true, what they say about America under Trump?''' she said. ''There is a kind of confusion: What is happening to the United States? People can't believe what they're reading.''
  Ill treatment of Indian immigrants has, in the past, caused serious damage to bilateral relationships. In 2009 and 2010, reports of racially motivated crimes against Indian students in Australia set off demonstrations outside the Australian Embassy in New Delhi, where Australia's prime minister was burned in effigy. After that, the number of Indians applying for student visas plunged by nearly half, with severe costs to Australian educational institutions.
  The diplomatic effect of the shootings in Kansas has been muted so far. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has not commented on them, though the subject will certainly be raised this week, along with the thorny issue of curtailing H-1B visas, when Foreign Secretary Subrahmanyam Jaishankar visits Washington.
  Some Indians who had planned to go to the United States said they were hesitating. Manavi Das, who is considering several universities, said she was ''constantly looking to see if the school is in a red state, or has witnessed a shooting in recent times.
  ''After a certain event in November,'' she said, ''I have found my apprehensions turned up a notch.''
  Sunny Choudhary, 23, said he had decided not to apply to graduate engineering programs in the United States, because ''recent conditions, they are turning into, I think, hostile conditions.'' After Mr. Trump was elected, he added, ''my parents said: 'No, you should not go there. Now we won't let you go there.' ''
  He said that, like many of his friends, he had narrowed his search to Europe.
  And some Indian parents could use their persuasive talents to encourage their children to return home. ''For this four-year period, after the transfer of regimes, I think Indians can come back and serve their country,'' said Suguna Kadiyala, 73, whose daughter has been in the United States for 20 years.
  Nageswara Rao, 71, whose son and daughter work in the software sector in the United States, said he was ''not much worried,'' though he does dispense regular advice on safety measures.
  ''It is always better to keep away from bars,'' he said. His children are safe, he added, ''because they don't go to these bars where white people are more.''
  He continued, ''I give them advice to be a little bit careful and don't get into a wrangle with anybody. Just have your own peaceful life.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/26/world/asia/after-shootings-indians-are-wary-of-move-to-us-in-age-of-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: A church service in Olathe, Kan., in honor of two immigrants from India who were shot in a bar, one of whom was killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMY STROTH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: February 27, 2017


End of Document
Donald Trump’s Parrot; Op-Ed Columnist
The New York Times 
March 31, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 876 words
Byline: ROGER COHEN
Highlight: Trump’s embrace of Putin is a moral abdication so great it has stripped America’s alliances of their foundation.
Body


A parrot flies out the window in Soviet Russia. The owner rushes to the Moscow offices of the K.G.B., where he tells an agent: “I just want to make clear that any views my parrot expresses are exclusively its own.”
We are not yet worrying about what our parrots might blurt out in Donald Trump’s America. But there are disturbing signs. This presidency is about the fear-driven closing of borders and minds.
In his magisterial novel “Humboldt’s Gift,” Saul Bellow quotes Samuel Daniel: “While timorous knowledge stands considering, audacious ignorance hath done the deed.”
Audacious ignorance is hard at work in the White House. The only solace is that, with Trump, it’s accompanied by paralyzing incompetence.
In 1987, Trump took out a full-page ad in The New York Times. It said: “The world is laughing at America’s politicians as we protect ships we don’t own, carrying oil we don’t need, destined for allies who won’t help.” It concluded: “Let America’s economy grow unencumbered by the cost of defending those who can easily afford to pay us for the defense of their freedom. Let’s not let our great country be laughed at anymore.”
That was three decades ago. Trump won’t change. At 70 he’s what he was at 40 in crankier and bulkier form. His political formula was already clear: mythical American humiliation calls for muscular American nationalism led by a macho American savior. It was not very original, but then forked human nature does not change.
Trump is still demanding that allies pay up. Life has never been more than a zero-sum game for him. He has not grasped that the stability and prosperity of Asian and European allies of the United States contribute to American well-being (like some $1.1 trillion of annual trade between the United States and the            European Union supporting about 2.6 million American jobs           in 2014).
That same day in 1987, The Times ran a story headlined “Trump Gives a Vague Hint of Candidacy.” America-first economic and military nationalism was always going to be his theme. It will define his presidency.
The few adults in his circle, already weary of putting out fires caused by foolishness, may be able to temper excesses here and there, but the president sets the course. Time to start thinking about what a post-American Europe and a post-American Asia will look like. One certainty: They will be less stable. Another: Russia and China will assert broader, more exclusive spheres of influence.
Trump sees moral equivalency between the United States and a Russian regime that murders dissenting politicians in broad daylight, brutalizes its opponents, hacks into the American election, and traffics in the whopping lie. He is so beholden to, or seduced by, Vladimir Putin’s Russia that he will not murmur criticism. Enough said. This is a moral abdication of such proportions that America’s alliances are left without ideological foundation. They must then wither.
At night in the ghostly White House, when Ivanka and Jared have gone home, and Trump’s consiglieri have retired to their Russian salads, the gold-robed president — crazed as Lear on the cliffs “fantastically dressed with wildflowers” — wanders from room to room staring at TV screens, cursing in frustration when he cannot find the remote, hurling abuse at the “enemies of the people” who fail to genuflect daily before his genius, adjusting his hair, making random calls to aides to ensure they have scheduled his next play dates with truckers and coal miners.
It might almost be funny. Almost. But the day will come when the Dow plunges and what the former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan is said to have feared most in politics — “events, dear boy, events” — occurs, perhaps in ghastly terrorist form, and an incoherent administration will be confronted by its first crisis. All that can be said for now is that, in such a moment, illiberalism and xenophobia in the hands of a would-be autocrat will make for a dangerous brew.
Already, in countless small ways, America is narrowing in ways that hurt it. Foreign applications to U.S. colleges have dropped. USA Today reports that “an inhospitable political climate could punch an $18 billion hole in U.S. tourism by international visitors over the next two years.”
A German associate professor of history at Indiana University who has been in the country a couple of years on an H-1B work visa told me the other day how alarmed her 10-year-old son had become because one of the three Muslim children in his class had talked about the possibility of having to leave. Her normally easygoing son had become anxious. Would his family be next? When the class was given an assignment to complete a sentence beginning “Keep calm” he wrote, “Keep calm and don’t kill Donald Trump.”
A “Foreigners Unwelcome” sign now hangs over Trump’s United States. It causes fears even in children. It will not boost American jobs; on the contrary.
A parrot flew in my window and said, “America First! America First!” Its views were exclusively its own, of course. Still, the parrot was so agitated I decided to report the owner.
You can follow me on Twitter (           @NYTimesCohen) or join me on            Facebook.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and            Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the            Opinion Today newsletter. 

Load-Date: April 1, 2017


End of Document
The Parrot in Trump's America
The New York Times
April 1, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 887 words
Byline: By ROGER COHEN
Body


A parrot flies out the window in Soviet Russia. The owner rushes to the Moscow offices of the K.G.B., where he tells an agent: ''I just want to make clear that any views my parrot expresses are exclusively its own.''
We are not yet worrying about what our parrots might blurt out in Donald Trump's America. But there are disturbing signs. This presidency is about the fear-driven closing of borders and minds. 
  In his magisterial novel ''Humboldt's Gift,'' Saul Bellow quotes Samuel Daniel: ''While timorous knowledge stands considering, audacious ignorance hath done the deed.''
  Audacious ignorance is hard at work in the White House. The only solace is that, with Trump, it's accompanied by paralyzing incompetence.
  In 1987, Trump took out a full-page ad in The New York Times. It said: ''The world is laughing at America's politicians as we protect ships we don't own, carrying oil we don't need, destined for allies who won't help.'' It concluded: ''Let America's economy grow unencumbered by the cost of defending those who can easily afford to pay us for the defense of their freedom. Let's not let our great country be laughed at anymore.''
  That was three decades ago. Trump won't change. At 70 he's what he was at 40 in crankier and bulkier form. His political formula was already clear: mythical American humiliation calls for muscular American nationalism led by a macho American savior. It was not very original, but then forked human nature does not change.
  Trump is still demanding that allies pay up. Life has never been more than a zero-sum game for him. He has not grasped that the stability and prosperity of Asian and European allies of the United States contribute to American well-being (like some $1.1 trillion of annual trade between the United States and the European Union supporting about 2.6 million American jobs in 2014).
  That same day in 1987, The Times ran a story headlined ''Trump Gives a Vague Hint of Candidacy.'' America-first economic and military nationalism was always going to be his theme. It will define his presidency.
  The few adults in his circle, already weary of putting out fires caused by foolishness, may be able to temper excesses here and there, but the president sets the course. Time to start thinking about what a post-American Europe and a post-American Asia will look like. One certainty: They will be less stable. Another: Russia and China will assert broader, more exclusive spheres of influence.
  Trump sees moral equivalency between the United States and a Russian regime that murders dissenting politicians in broad daylight, brutalizes its opponents, hacks into the American election, and traffics in the whopping lie. He is so beholden to, or seduced by, Vladimir Putin's Russia that he will not murmur criticism. Enough said. This is a moral abdication of such proportions that America's alliances are left without ideological foundation. They must then wither.
  At night in the ghostly White House, when Ivanka and Jared have gone home, and Trump's consiglieri have retired to their Russian salads, the gold-robed president -- crazed as Lear on the cliffs ''fantastically dressed with wildflowers'' -- wanders from room to room staring at TV screens, cursing in frustration when he cannot find the remote, hurling abuse at the ''enemies of the people'' who fail to genuflect daily before his genius, adjusting his hair, making random calls to aides to ensure they have scheduled his next play dates with truckers and coal miners.
  It might almost be funny. Almost. But the day will come when the Dow plunges and what the former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan is said to have feared most in politics -- ''events, dear boy, events'' -- occurs, perhaps in ghastly terrorist form, and an incoherent administration will be confronted by its first crisis. All that can be said for now is that, in such a moment, illiberalism and xenophobia in the hands of a would-be autocrat will make for a dangerous brew.
  Already, in countless small ways, America is narrowing in ways that hurt it. Foreign applications to U.S. colleges have dropped. USA Today reports that ''an inhospitable political climate could punch an $18 billion hole in U.S. tourism by international visitors over the next two years.''
  A German associate professor of history at Indiana University who has been in the country a couple of years on an H-1B work visa told me the other day how alarmed her 10-year-old son had become because one of the three Muslim children in his class had talked about the possibility of having to leave. Her normally easygoing son had become anxious. Would his family be next? When the class was given an assignment to complete a sentence beginning ''Keep calm'' he wrote, ''Keep calm and don't kill Donald Trump.''
  A ''Foreigners Unwelcome'' sign now hangs over Trump's United States. It causes fears even in children. It will not boost American jobs; on the contrary.
  A parrot flew in my window and said, ''America First! America First!'' Its views were exclusively its own, of course. Still, the parrot was so agitated I decided to report the owner.
  You can follow me on Twitter (@NYTimesCohen) or join me on Facebook.
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. 

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/31/opinion/donald-trumps-parrot.html

Load-Date: April 1, 2017


End of Document
On Sampling of Fiscal Topics, Credit Is Taken and Blame Assigned
The New York Times
October 29, 2015 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19; IN FACT
Length: 977 words
Byline: By STEVE EDER
Body


It is difficult to accurately assign credit for the budget surpluses of the 1990s or blame for the financial crisis of the last decade, but that did not stop candidates at Wednesday night's Republican presidential debate from trying.
Here is a look at how the candidates fared with the facts on these and other fiscal topics: 
  BLAME FOR LEHMAN In the debate's first terse exchange, Donald J. Trump blamed Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio for the financial crisis, citing his work for Lehman Brothers, which collapsed in 2008 and sent the economy into a downward spiral.
  While Mr. Kasich did work for the now-bankrupt Lehman Brothers, the truth is that he was hardly steering the doomed ship in New York. 
  Mr. Trump claimed that Mr. Kasich was on the board, which is not true. Mr. Kasich worked out of a two-man office in Columbus, Ohio, on deals with other bankers. He has said that he shared no blame for the bank's troubles, precipitated by risky mortgage investments.
  ''I was a banker,'' he told The New York Times recently. ''I wasn't offering home loans to anybody.'' STEVE EDER
  SOCIAL SECURITY Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey maintains that the government lied to the American people, telling them that their Social Security payments were in a surplus, even as it pilfered the money and left them a ''pile of i.o.u.s.''
  That is true -- kind of.
  Social Security taxes have generated far more money every year than was spent on benefits. Instead of putting that surplus into a bank account, the government has spent it on other programs, like the military.
  The only time in recent years that hasn't happened was at the very end of the Clinton administration, when the surplus was so large that receipts did not have to be tapped and Vice President Al Gore promised to put it in a ''lockbox.''
  But that i.o.u. pile is not a bunch of scrap paper. It is in federal Treasury notes. And by law, the government must cash them for benefits when they are due. Yes, the cashing of those bonds will cause the deficit to grow, but the i.o.u. pile is good money. JONATHAN WEISMAN
  MEDICARE FIX Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky was right that most Americans pay far less in taxes into the Medicare program than they collect in benefits. 
  According to estimates that researchers at the Urban Institute made in 2013, a single man earning the median income who turns 65 this year will pay in about $70,000 and collect about $197,000 worth of lifetime benefits.
  But his assertion that gradually raising the age of eligibility for the program is ''the only way you fix Medicare'' exaggerates the effects of such a policy.
  Most money spent in the program is spent on older Americans, not those new to the program. 
  Recent estimates from the Congressional Budget Office suggest that raising the eligibility age from 65 to 67 would save only $19 billion over 10 years, a tiny fraction of the program's budget of about $500 billion this year alone. MARGOT SANGER-KATZ
  WOMEN AT WORK Carly Fiorina, the onetime Hewlett-Packard executive, said as part of a discussion of gender differences in compensation that ''92 percent of the jobs lost during Barack Obama's first term belonged to women.''
  This assertion is flawed. When President Obama's first term began, 66.9 million women were employed, according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. When his first term ended, that number had risen slightly, to 67.1 million.
  Overall employment among both women and men rose during Mr. Obama's first term, though very slightly. 
  That said, the jobless rate among both groups was higher at the end of his first term than at the start, with the rate among women rising to 7.8 percent in January 2013 from 7 percent four years earlier, reflecting a growing population. NEIL IRWIN
  BALANCED BUDGET Mr. Kasich said he was the chief architect of the balanced budget in the 1990s. 
  While it is true that Mr. Kasich, then a congressman, was the chairman of the House Budget Committee, most economists say the surpluses of that time were because of a combination of three factors: The ''read my lips'' tax increases and spending cuts of President George Bush in 1991; President Bill Clinton's budget of 1993, which most likely cost Democrats control of Congress; and the gold rush economy of the dot-com bubble.
  Newt Gingrich, Mr. Kasich and Mr. Clinton reached their balanced budget agreement in 1997, but little of it had kicked in when the government's red ink disappeared and surpluses swelled. JONATHAN WEISMAN
  VISA CHANGES Responding to a question about H-1B visas for highly skilled foreign workers, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida said he would require firms to advertise a job for 180 days domestically before it could be filled by a foreign worker with such a visa. And he would require proof that they would pay foreign workers more, so wages for Americans would not be undercut.
  But neither of those proposals are in a bill to increase H-1B visas that Mr. Rubio sponsored this year with other senators.
  That bill, introduced in January, does not add any new protections from the existing H-1B program, which does not have a requirement to recruit American workers first and has led to many Americans being displaced by foreign workers who have such visas. JULIA PRESTON
  JUST SPEAKING Facing questions about his ties to a supplement maker that has been under regulatory scrutiny, Ben Carson quickly distanced himself. But was he, indeed, a pitchman for the company?
  The evidence shows that, at the least, he was paid to give speeches at events hosted by the company, Mannatech Inc., telling how its supplements helped him after a 2002 cancer diagnosis.
  Mr. Carson, though, suggested that Mannatech, on its own, had taken it a step further by posting videos of him on its website.
  Still, Mr. Carson stood by the products, saying he did find them helpful. STEVE EDER

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ben Carson prepared for an interview after Wednesday night's presidential debate in Boulder, Colo., where much of the focus was on financial issues. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY IMAGES)       

Load-Date: October 29, 2015


End of Document
Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
The New York Times
June 4, 2015 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1714 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


ORLANDO, Fla. --  The employees who kept the data systems humming in the vast Walt Disney fantasy fief did not suspect trouble when they were suddenly summoned to meetings with their boss.
While families rode the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train and searched for Nemo on clamobiles in the theme parks, these workers monitored computers in industrial buildings nearby, making sure millions of Walt Disney World ticket sales, store purchases and hotel reservations went through without a hitch. Some were performing so well that they thought they had been called in for bonuses. 
  Instead, about 250 Disney employees were told in late October that they would be laid off. Many of their jobs were transferred to immigrants on temporary visas for highly skilled technical workers, who were brought in by an outsourcing firm based in India. Over the next three months, some Disney employees were required to train their replacements to do the jobs they had lost.
  ''I just couldn't believe they could fly people in to sit at our desks and take over our jobs exactly,'' said one former worker, an American in his 40s who remains unemployed since his last day at Disney on Jan. 30. ''It was so humiliating to train somebody else to take over your job. I still can't grasp it.''
  Disney executives said that the layoffs were part of a reorganization, and that the company opened more positions than it eliminated.
  But the layoffs at Disney and at other companies, including the Southern California Edison power utility, are raising new questions about how businesses and outsourcing companies are using the temporary visas, known as H-1B, to place immigrants in technology jobs in the United States. These visas are at the center of a fierce debate in Congress over whether they complement American workers or displace them.
  According to federal guidelines, the visas are intended for foreigners with advanced science or computer skills to fill discrete positions when American workers with those skills cannot be found. Their use, the guidelines say, should not ''adversely affect the wages and working conditions'' of Americans. Because of legal loopholes, however, in practice, companies do not have to recruit American workers first or guarantee that Americans will not be displaced.
  Too often, critics say, the visas are being used to bring in immigrants to do the work of Americans for less money, with laid-off American workers having to train their replacements.
  ''The program has created a highly lucrative business model of bringing in cheaper H-1B workers to substitute for Americans,'' said Ronil Hira, a professor of public policy at Howard University who studies visa programs and has testified before Congress about H-1B visas.
  A limited number of the visas, 85,000, are granted each year, and they are in high demand. Technology giants like Microsoft, Facebook and Google repeatedly press for increases in the annual quotas, saying there are not enough Americans with the skills they need.
  Many American companies use H-1B visas to bring in small numbers of foreigners for openings demanding specialized skills, according to official reports. But for years, most top recipients of the visas have been outsourcing or consulting firms based in India, or their American subsidiaries, which import workers for large contracts to take over entire in-house technology units -- and to cut costs. The immigrants are employees of the outsourcing companies.
  In 2013, those firms -- including Infosys, Tata Consultancy Services and HCL America, the company hired by Disney -- were six of the top 10 companies granted H-1Bs, with each one receiving more than 1,000 visas.
  H-1B immigrants work for less than American tech workers, Professor Hira said at a hearing in March of the Senate Judiciary Committee, because of weaknesses in wage regulations. The savings have been 25 percent to 49 percent in recent cases, he told lawmakers.
  In a letter in April to top federal authorities in charge of immigration, a bipartisan group of senators called for an investigation of recent ''H-1B-driven layoffs,'' saying, ''Their frequency seems to have increased dramatically in the past year alone.''
  Last year, Southern California Edison began 540 technology layoffs while hiring two Indian outsourcing firms for much of the work. Three Americans who had lost jobs told Senate lawmakers that many of those being laid off had to teach immigrants to perform their functions.
  In a statement, the utility said the layoffs were ''a difficult business decision,'' part of a plan ''to focus on making significant, strategic changes that can benefit our customers.'' It noted that some workers hired by the outsourcing firms were Americans.
  Fossil, a fashion watchmaker, said it would lay off more than 100 technology employees in Texas this year, transferring the work to Infosys. The company is planning ''knowledge sharing'' between the laid-off employees and about 25 new Infosys workers, including immigrants, who will take jobs in Dallas. Fossil is outsourcing tech services ''to be more current and nimble'' and ''reduce costs when possible,'' it said in a statement.
  Among 350 tech workers laid off in 2013 after a merger at Northeast Utilities, an East Coast power company, many had trained H-1B immigrants to do their jobs, several of those workers reported confidentially to lawmakers. They said that as part of their severance packages, they had to sign agreements not to criticize the company publicly.
  In Orlando, Disney executives said the reorganization resulting in the layoffs was meant to allow technology operations to focus on producing more innovations. They said that over all, the company had a net gain of 70 tech jobs.
  ''Disney has created almost 30,000 new jobs in the U.S. over the past decade,'' said Kim Prunty, a Disney spokeswoman, adding that the company expected its contractors to comply with all immigration laws.
  The tech workers laid off were a tiny fraction of Disney's ''cast members,'' as the entertainment conglomerate calls its theme park workers, who number 74,000 in the Orlando area. Employees who lost jobs were allowed a three-month transition with résumé coaching to help them seek other positions in the company, Disney executives said. Of those laid off, 120 took new jobs at Disney, and about 40 retired or left the company before the end of the transition period, while about 90 did not find new Disney jobs, executives said.
  Living in a company town, former Disney workers were reluctant to be identified, saying they feared they could jeopardize their chances of finding new jobs with the few other local tech employers. Several workers agreed to interviews, but only on the condition of anonymity.
  They said only a handful of those laid off were moved directly by Disney to other company jobs. The rest were left to compete for positions through Disney job websites. Despite the company's figures, few people they knew had been hired, they said, and then often at a lower pay level. No one was offered retraining, they said. One former worker, a 57-year-old man with more than 10 years at Disney, displayed a list of 18 jobs in the company he had applied for. He had not had more than an initial conversation on any one, he said.
  Disney ''made the difficult decision to eliminate certain positions, including yours,'' as a result of ''the transition of your work to a managed service provider,'' said a contract presented to employees on the day the layoffs were announced. It offered a ''stay bonus'' of 10 percent of severance pay if they remained for 90 days. But the bonus was contingent on ''the continued satisfactory performance of your job duties.'' For many, that involved training a replacement. Young immigrants from India took the seats at their computer stations.
  ''The first 30 days was all capturing what I did,'' said the American in his 40s, who worked 10 years at Disney. ''The next 30 days, they worked side by side with me, and the last 30 days, they took over my job completely.'' To receive his severance bonus, he said, ''I had to make sure they were doing my job correctly.''
  In late November, this former employee received his annual performance review, which he provided to The New York Times. His supervisor, who was not aware the man was scheduled for layoff, wrote that because of his superior skills and ''outstanding'' work, he had saved the company thousands of dollars. The supervisor added that he was looking forward to another highly productive year of having the employee on the team.
  The employee got a raise. His severance pay had to be recalculated to include it.
  The former Disney employee who is 57 worked in project management and software development. His résumé lists a top-level skill certification and command of seven operating systems, 15 program languages and more than two dozen other applications and media.
  ''I was forced into early retirement,'' he said. The timing was ''horrible,'' he said, because his wife recently had a medical emergency with expensive bills. Shut out of Disney, he is looking for a new job elsewhere.
  Former employees said many immigrants who arrived were younger technicians with limited data skills who did not speak English fluently and had to be instructed in the basics of the work.
  HCL America, a branch of a global company based in Noida, India, won a contract with Disney in 2012. In a statement, the company said details of the agreement were confidential. ''As a company, we work very closely with the U.S. Department of Labor and strictly adhere to all visa guidelines and requirements to be complied with,'' it said.
  The chairman of the Walt Disney Company, Robert A. Iger, is a co-chairman with Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, and Rupert Murdoch, the executive chairman of News Corporation, in the Partnership for a New American Economy, which pushes for an overhaul of immigration laws, including an increase in H-1B visas.
  But Disney directly employs fewer than 10 H-1B workers, executives said, and has not been prominent in visa lobbying. Mr. Iger supports the partnership's broader goals, including increased border security and a pathway to legal status for immigrants here illegally, officials of the organization said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/04/us/last-task-after-layoff-at-disney-train-foreign-replacements.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The Team Disney building in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., which houses most of the company's technology operations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN BLANCO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A15)       

Load-Date: June 4, 2015


End of Document
After Kansas Shootings, Indians Are Wary of Coming to U.S.
The New York Times 
February 26, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 840 words
Byline: ELLEN BARRY and NIDA NAJAR
Highlight: Indians were relatively welcoming of President Trump’s victory, but the killing of an Indian man in Kansas and serious worries about an immigration crackdown were starting to sour that view.
Body


NEW DELHI — Jeena Sharma, 25, was applying for a work visa to the United States when news came that two Indian engineers had been shot in a Kansas bar by a man who drunkenly questioned their immigration status.
News of the shootings, which took place last Wednesday, was quickly eclipsed by other developments in Washington, and even in Kansas, but the same cannot be said of the Sharma household of Mumbai, where Ms. Sharma has received emphatic maternal lectures about her plans to move, starting first thing in the morning.
“She asked me: ‘Why do you even need to go to the States? Why do you need to go to a country that doesn’t want you? I’m going to be scared for your life every day,’” Ms. Sharma said.
Even as she endeavored, patiently, to convey to her mother the difference between Kansas and New York City, where she hopes to move, Ms. Sharma felt her own apprehensions growing, as the days passed and President Trump made no statement on the crime.
“It’s definitely very scary for me at the moment,” she said. “It’s almost as if a brown person is dead, like it doesn’t matter.”
The body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, the 32-year-old software engineer fatally shot in the Olathe, Kan., bar, was expected to arrive by Monday in Hyderabad, a technology hub where immigration to the United States has long been viewed as the surest path to success.
Indians were relatively welcoming of Mr. Trump’s victory, and many here express admiration for his business empire and promised crackdown on terrorism. But even before Wednesday’s shootings, that optimism had been diluted by fears that America might no longer welcome immigrants.
India is second only to China as a feeder to American colleges, with around 165,000 students enrolled in the 2015-16 school year, according to the Institute of International Education. Indians are the largest recipients of temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which the Trump administration intends to cut back. And close to half a million Indians, who mostly went to the United States legally as students or tourists or on work visas,            have stayed on after their visas expired, the Pew Research Center estimates.
Reports of rising American hostility toward immigrants have stunned many Indians, said Alyssa Ayres, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who visited Hyderabad recently.
“I had a guy on a plane sitting next to me, who turned to me and said, ‘Is it true, what they say about America under Trump?’” she said. “There is a kind of confusion: What is happening to the United States? People can’t believe what they’re reading.”
Ill treatment of Indian immigrants has, in the past, caused serious damage to bilateral relationships. In 2009 and 2010, reports of racially motivated crimes against Indian students in Australia set off demonstrations outside the Australian Embassy in New Delhi, where Australia’s prime minister was burned in effigy. After that, the number of Indians applying for            student visas plunged by nearly half, with severe costs to Australian educational institutions.
The diplomatic effect of the shootings in Kansas has been muted so far. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has not commented on them, though the subject will certainly be raised this week, along with the thorny issue of curtailing H-1B visas, when Foreign Secretary Subrahmanyam Jaishankar visits Washington.
Some Indians who had planned to go to the United States said they were hesitating. Manavi Das, who is considering several universities, said she was “constantly looking to see if the school is in a red state, or has witnessed a shooting in recent times.
“After a certain event in November,” she said, “I have found my apprehensions turned up a notch.”
Sunny Choudhary, 23, said he had decided not to apply to graduate engineering programs in the United States, because “recent conditions, they are turning into, I think, hostile conditions.” After Mr. Trump was elected, he added, “my parents said: ‘No, you should not go there. Now we won’t let you go there.’ ”
He said that, like many of his friends, he had narrowed his search to Europe.
And some Indian parents could use their persuasive talents to encourage their children to return home. “For this four-year period, after the transfer of regimes, I think Indians can come back and serve their country,” said Suguna Kadiyala, 73, whose daughter has been in the United States for 20 years.
Nageswara Rao, 71, whose son and daughter work in the software sector in the United States, said he was “not much worried,” though he does dispense regular advice on safety measures.
“It is always better to keep away from bars,” he said. His children are safe, he added, “because they don’t go to these bars where white people are more.”
He continued, “I give them advice to be a little bit careful and don’t get into a wrangle with anybody. Just have your own peaceful life.”
PHOTO: A church service in Olathe, Kan., in honor of two immigrants from India who were shot in a bar, one of whom was killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMY STROTH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: March 1, 2017


End of Document
An Innovation Agenda
The New York Times
December 8, 2009 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 37; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 833 words
Byline: By DAVID BROOKS
Body


The economy seems to be stabilizing, and this has prompted a shift in the public mood. Raw fear has given way to anxiety that the recovery will be feeble and drab. Companies are hoarding cash. Banks aren't lending to small businesses. Private research spending is drifting downward.
  People are asking anxious questions about America's future. Will it take years before the animal spirits revive? Can the economy rebalance so that it relies less on consumption and debt and more on innovation and export? Have we entered a period of relative decline?
  The first thing to say is, let's not get carried away with the malaise. The U.S. remains the world's most competitive economy, the leader in information technology, biotechnology and nearly every cutting-edge sector.
  The American model remains an impressive growth engine, even allowing for the debt-fueled bubble. The U.S. economy grew by 63 percent between 1991 and 2009, compared with 35 percent for France, 22 percent for Germany and 16 percent for Japan over the same period. In 1975, the U.S. accounted for 26.3 percent of world G.D.P. Today, after the rise of the Asian tigers, the U.S. actually accounts for a slightly higher share of world output: 26.7 percent.
  The U.S. has its problems, but Americans would be crazy to trade their problems with those of any other large nation.
  Moreover, there's a straightforward way to revive innovation. In an unfairly neglected white paper on the subject, President Obama's National Economic Council argued that the U.S. should not be in the industrial policy business. Governments that try to pick winners ''too often end up wasting resources and stifling rather than promoting innovation.'' But there are several things the government can do to improve the economic ecology. If you begin with that framework, you can quickly come up with a bipartisan innovation agenda.
  First, push hard to fulfill the Obama administration's education reforms. Those reforms, embraced by Republicans and Democrats, encourage charter school innovation, improve teacher quality, support community colleges and simplify finances for college students and war veterans. That's the surest way to improve human capital.
  Second, pay for basic research. Federal research money has been astonishingly productive, leading to DNA sequencing, semiconductors, lasers and many other technologies. Yet this financing has slipped, especially in physics, math and engineering. Overall research-and-development funding has slipped, too. The U.S. should aim to spend 3 percent of G.D.P. on research, as it did in the 1960s.
  Third, rebuild the nation's infrastructure. Abraham Lincoln spent the first half of his career promoting canals and railroads. Today, the updated needs are just as great, and there's widespread agreement that decisions should be made by a National Infrastructure Bank, not pork-seeking politicians.
  Fourth, find a fiscal exit strategy. If the deficits continue to surge, interest payments on the debt will be stifling. More important, the mounting deficits destroy confidence by sending the message that the American government is dysfunctional. The only way to realistically fix this problem is to appoint a binding commission, already supported by Republicans and Democrats, which would create a roadmap toward fiscal responsibility and then allow the Congress to vote on it, up or down.
  Fifth, gradually address global imbalances. American consumers are now spending less and saving more. But the world economy will be out of whack if the Chinese continue to consume too little. The only solution is slow diplomacy to rebalance exchange rates and other distorting policies.
  Sixth, loosen the so-called H-1B visa quotas to attract skilled immigrants.
  Seventh, encourage regional innovation clusters. Innovation doesn't happen at the national level. It happens within hot spots -- places where hordes of entrepreneurs gather to compete, meet face to face, pollinate ideas. Regional authorities can't innovate themselves, but they can encourage those who do to cluster.
  Eighth, lower the corporate tax rate so it matches international norms.
  Ninth, don't be stupid. Don't make labor markets rigid. Don't pick trade fights with the Chinese. Don't get infatuated with research tax credits and other gimmicks, which don't increase overall research-and-development  spending but just increase the salaries of the people who would be doing it anyway.
  This sort of agenda doesn't rely on politicians who think they can predict the next new thing. Nor does it mean merely letting the market go its own way. (The market seems to have a preference for useless financial instruments and insane compensation packages.)
  Instead, it's an agenda that would steer and spark innovation without controlling it, which is what government has done since the days of Alexander Hamilton. It's the sort of thing the country does periodically, each time we need to recover from one of our binges of national stupidity. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: December 8, 2009


End of Document
Students Say Fake College and the U.S. Duped Them
The New York Times
May 6, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1942 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


For foreign-born students desperate to stay in the United States, the University of Northern New Jersey seemed like the perfect solution: They did not have to go to class, but they could get coveted student visas and still work at their dream jobs.
They just needed to pay a broker anywhere from $3,000 to $12,000. Over the last three and a half years, more than a thousand agreed. 
  That was their mistake.
  On April 5, the government revealed that the university was a fake -- part of an elaborate  sting operation that resulted in the arrest of 22 brokers who arranged for students to enroll. These brokers belonged to an underground network of recruiters operating throughout the country who acted as middlemen between students and fraudulent schools known as visa mills, the government said.
  Twenty-five students were listed as anonymous co-conspirators, but officials say all of them knew they were committing fraud by not going to class. Within days, 1,076 of them were ordered to appear in immigration court, facing deportation or even a lifetime ban from the United States.
  ''They were 100 percent fully aware,'' said Alvin Phillips, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security. ''All purported students are recorded at some point or another fully going along with the pay-to-stay scheme.''
  There are both audio and video recordings from the president's office in New Jersey, when students called or visited, Mr. Phillips said. He personally witnessed some of these exchanges, and heard students admit they knew the university would not have classes.
  But in interviews, more than a dozen students insisted that they were collateral damage in the sting operation, duped by both the brokers and the government.
  In some cases, their efforts to verify the university or even transfer were rebuffed by the brokers, they say. In other instances, the students point to what they say was active deception by the government: in-person meetings with the university's supposed president, letters confirming they could work instead of go to class, and Twitter messages about classes canceled because of bad weather.
  UNNJ will be closed today, March 5, due to bad weather. Stay safe and warm. Dr. B -- Univ of Northern NJ (@UNorthernNJ) March 5, 2015
  In October, A., a young man from Shanghai living in New York City, was so frustrated when the university had not sent a needed eligibility form that he rented a car and drove to the campus. (A., like most of the students, insisted on being identified only by an initial because their immigration cases were still pending or their families back home did not know their situation.)
  T-Shirt From the President
  At the university's office in a nondescript building off the Garden State Parkway in Cranford, a man presenting himself as the institution's president, Steve Brunetti, signed the form. He told A. how proud he was of all ''his students'' and gave him a souvenir.
  It was a slick T-shirt with the letters UNNJ on the front. On the left sleeve was an American flag.
  A. said he did not think the experience was odd. ''I just figured that was the way it was done,'' he said.
  Winona Sun, an art therapist in Brooklyn, learned of the sting operation while she was in China visiting her parents, when her visa to re-enter the United States was revoked. ''I feel it's over-punishment,'' she said in a telephone interview from China. ''If the target is for the brokers, why do they want to tear people down and lie to me?''
  The federal government accredits 8,687 educational institutions in the United States to enroll international students; 1.18 million are currently studying here. The students enrolled at the University of Northern New Jersey had all come to the United States legally and had earned degrees from schools including the University of Chicago, the University of Michigan and Fordham.
  But after graduation, the clock was ticking for those who wanted to stay in the country. A program called Optional Practical Training lets foreign-born graduates remain for 12 or 36 months, depending on their field. Companies can apply for a temporary skilled worker visa, known as an H-1B, for employees, but around 230,000 people apply annually for the 85,000 visas given out.
  A number of the students failed to get an H-1B and seemed out of options -- with jobs at Facebook, Google and Morgan Stanley on the line. Others were seeking to transfer from colleges they heard were under investigation to stay one step ahead of immigration officials.
  That is when the University of Northern New Jersey beckoned.
  According to some students, brokers assured them that they could immediately earn credit hours for their work experience in a program called Curricular Practical Training, without taking classes.
  ''It is very much like a honey trap because you have a very, very great temptation being waved in front of these young men and women,'' said David Grunblatt, co-head of the immigration and nationality group in the labor and employment law department at Proskauer Rose in New Jersey. He represents companies concerned about hiring foreign graduates for practical training.
  Most of the students were from China and India, where working with brokers is a familiar way of doing business. But in retrospect, they seem to have ignored what should have been red flags, whether because they were overly trusting, willfully ignorant or willing participants in visa fraud.
  Corey Lee, an immigration lawyer in Manhattan, said: ''If you didn't go to a class for a year, you should expect something is going on.''
  Ms. Sun, 29, earned a master's degree in art therapy at a Massachusetts college and moved to New York to work for a nonprofit social services agency. (She declined to name the college or the organization because she did not want to endanger her application for a waiver to return to the United States.)
  Her employer applied for an H-1B visa for her, but she faced a gap of several months before it would come through.
  Ms. Sun said her broker told her she could work instead of taking classes, but referred her to the university. In February 2015, after she enrolled, Ms. Sun said she called there approximately 20 times; no one responded.
  ''If one person called me back and told me it was fake, I would not have gone to the University of Northern New Jersey,'' Ms. Sun said. ''What else can I do? I don't know the American system.''
  Louis Farrell, the director of the Student and Exchange Visitor Program, part of United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said academic nonimmigrant student visas require the holder ''to enroll in a full course of study and attend and pass all their classes'' and that ''they should be wary of any recruiter who promises they can work without restrictions while attending school.''
  Listed on Official Sites
  But there seem to be inconsistencies in the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services' definition of a ''full course of study.'' In one entry on its website, it says that the designated school officer can determine a full course of study. Farther down, it says that a student must complete at least 18 hours of classroom study.
  Ultimately, the students said that because the Department of Homeland Security's website certified the University of Northern New Jersey, they believed the institution was legitimate. In addition, the website of the New Jersey Education Department listed it as approved. So did the website of the Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges, a national body. Its director, Michale S. McComis, later said he had certified the university in order to cooperate with the government's investigation.
  Z., who is 27 and also from China, did not win the H-1B lottery. He found the University of Northern New Jersey online without a broker. ''How risky will it be for obtaining full-time C.P.T. without attending any classes?'' he wrote to the university in an email he showed to The New York Times, referring to Curricular Practical Training.
  The response, from the generic info@unnj.edu: ''If you are not comfortable with what we have offered, I ask you to try another university in the New Jersey area.''
  Without a direct answer, Z. said he fell back on the university's government accreditation. A year passed.
  When he asked how he would provide evidence for another H-1B application, the university suggested making up classes from a template, and to send it in with $620.
  That was the final flag. Unlike students who were listed as co-conspirators, Z. did not fabricate school transcripts. Instead, he transferred.
  But on April 5, his student status was terminated because he had been enrolled at the fake university for more than 45 days.
  K., a 30-year-old from China who earned an M.B.A. in New England, began to suspect something about the university after he had worked for a year and did not hear about the start of classes. ''I was wondering if there was a lecture or something I could attend,'' he said. His broker told him online classes were coming soon.
  K. said that he, too, relied on the university's accreditations. ''If the government is not trustworthy, who should we trust?'' he said.
  His girlfriend, S., 26, whom he met at business school, was accepted to the university the next year, in January 2016. But she said the broker told her that her authorization form and the school schedule would be delayed while the university expanded to two more campuses.
  The couple went to the campus in Cranford in March, only to find the doors locked, supposedly because it was spring break.
  Then at 8:20 a.m. on April 5, Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents knocked on the door of their rural New England home.
  K. and S. were detained in separate cells for several hours. The next day, K. resigned from his job at a local company. They are both waiting for hearing dates.
  Reputations Tainted
  Like the other students, they were notified that they needed to leave the country or apply for reinstatement of their student visas. But students have said that few colleges, if any, have been willing to sponsor them after they were tainted by the University of Northern New Jersey. Reinstatement ultimately depends on the government's approval.
  The students say they have been put in an untenable position financially. They paid thousands of dollars either to brokers or directly to the university. Eight students alone said they spent a combined $46,000. Some paid the university via PayPal or cash, with the money going to a holding company listed on some students' invoices: Waterfall Properties.
  As they wait for a hearing in immigration court that could take a year or longer, they cannot legally work.
  ''Typically in any fraud investigation, it is our policy that we do not refund any money,'' Mr. Phillips, the Homeland Security spokesman, said.
  ''Absolutely there was a message,'' Mr. Phillips added. ''We welcome international students in America, but they must do so according to the standards, the right way.''
  But Barmak Nassirian, the director of federal relations and policy analysis for the American Association of State Colleges and Universities, wondered why government officials bothered to create a fake university when such places already existed. Several fraudulent universities have been shut down in previous years.
  The brokers may have recognized the University of Northern New Jersey as a visa mill, Mr. Nassirian said, but he could see how some students could be deceived by its certifications. ''Can you really blame a student,'' he said, ''even if they are a little greedy, a little gullible, or a little too hopeful?''

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/06/nyregion/students-at-fake-university-say-they-were-collateral-damage-in-sting-operation.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A T-shirt given to a student at the University of Northern New Jersey, a fake institution created by the government. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAM HODGSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)
 ''If the government is not trustworthy, who should we trust?'' said K., with his girlfriend, S. Both are awaiting hearing dates. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JACOB HANNAH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)       

Load-Date: May 6, 2016


End of Document
Waiting and Waiting for Green Cards
The New York Times
April 12, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1187 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Vishal Sankhla, an Indian engineer, is among those at the center of a storm over how to fix the nation's immigration system.
Mr. Sankhla got a master's degree in electrical engineering nine years ago from the University of Southern California, followed by a job at Cisco, then at a start-up that attracted $4.5 million in financing from Silicon Valley investors. There was only one wrinkle: he was in the country on a temporary work visa, with no idea whether or when he would get permanent residence.
He remains in limbo, which preoccupies him almost as much as running his business. ''It's a constant distraction,'' said Mr. Sankhla, who is 32. ''You can't really settle down because your visa status is uncertain.''
Silicon Valley is battling in Washington to make the immigration process easier for thousands of people like Mr. Sankhla, many of them Indian engineers, while also pushing to hire many more guest workers from abroad.
Rarely has the industry been so single-mindedly focused on a national policy issue, with executives like Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and John T. Chambers of Cisco personally involved. Its efforts seem to be paying off, as a group of eight senators negotiate details of a comprehensive immigration deal to be announced early next week.
Several lobbyists and advocates who have spoken to Senate staff members say they are optimistic about at least two items high on their wish list: a fast-track green card line for math and science graduates like Mr. Sankhla, no matter which country they come from, and a near doubling of the visas for temporary workers.
''I think we are going to get a balanced outcome, which takes advantage of the value that immigrants bring to the economy and be protective of U.S. workers,'' said Scott Corley, director of Compete America, an industry coalition that includes Google and Intel.
The contentious piece of this is the potential increase in temporary workers from abroad. Critics fear that is a ruse for lowering wages. Those critics are likely to get at least one boon from a revamped law: a requirement that companies try to find qualified American workers before hiring from abroad. The law may also make it more expensive to bring in guest workers.
The new immigration measure will almost certainly fix a situation that keeps people like Mr. Sankhla stuck in limbo for so long. The current law limits how many green cards can be issued to people from any single country, no matter how populous.
That effectively means that applicants from countries like India and China, with a large supply of young engineers often educated in American universities, wait far longer for permanent residence than those from almost every other country. The temporary employment visa, usually an H-1B, has become a kind of way station for them.
The Senate is considering eliminating the per-country quotas for those who graduate from United States universities with math, science and engineering degrees. The debate in Congress perfectly illustrates how immigration law, codified in 1965 and last revamped substantially in 1990, has lagged behind the demands of a rapidly changing economy. Unemployment in the technology industry hovers below 4 percent, far less than the national average.
In that climate, temporary visas are in such heavy demand that the total number available for the coming year -- 65,000 for skilled workers and 20,000 for those with a master's degree or higher -- were snatched up in less than five days. The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said Monday that it had received 124,000 applications in that time and had resorted to a lottery to make the final cut.
The measure being considered by lawmakers could nearly double the H-1B visas allotted yearly and possibly admit more temporary workers during periods of high demand, said several advocates who have discussed the matter with Congressional staff members and who declined to be named because the final language has not yet been released.
''If you were the human resources vice president of the United States, you would want to have a rule that says if things get busy and you need skilled people you can bring in people,'' said Dan Siciliano, a law professor at Stanford. ''At the same time you would want a way to bring highly skilled people in and perhaps at your choosing convert them to status that lets them stay much longer.''
A vast range of American organizations seek H-1B workers for technical jobs, from the Boston Red Sox baseball team to the chain store Nordstrom to technology companies like Google and Microsoft. Some of the largest blocs of H-1B petitions are taken by outsourcing companies, which makes them even more contentious, and critics say those firms import engineers with basic skills and pay them poorly.
''It invites employers to play a game of wage arbitrage,'' said Ron Hira, assistant professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology and a critic of the program. By Mr. Hira's calculation, nine out of the 10 largest chunks of H-1B petitions went to outsourcing companies, including Cognizant, which is based in New Jersey, followed by the Indian firm Tata Consultancy Services.
Guest workers themselves can be subject to unfair labor practices under American law. In one of the largest cases, Tata Consultancy Services recently settled a $29 million class-action lawsuit in California, in which it was accused of seizing the federal tax refunds of about 12,800 temporary workers from 2002 to 2005.
The settlement will award an average of $1,600 to each worker. Tata did not admit to any wrongdoing. A company spokesman declined to comment on its use of H-1B visas, citing forthcoming quarterly earnings.
A 2011 report by the Government Accountability Office found that half of all H-1Bs were brought in at entry-level wages. The new bill may require companies to pay higher wages for temporary workers. It is unclear whether that would apply only to outsourcing firms.
Supporters of the program point out that new H-1B workers admitted every year represent less than 1 percent of the total American work force, and that outsourcing firms represent a minority of employers. Stuart Anderson, executive director of the National Foundation for American Policy, concluded that in the last five years, the 25 largest outsourcing firms accounted for 7 percent to 27 percent of all new H-1Bs issued.
As for the rest, many are used by would-be immigrants to find jobs and then wait for green cards.
Mr. Sankhla switched from an H-1B to another temporary category reserved for people of ''extraordinary ability,'' which allowed him to continue with his start-up, Viralheat, which is based in San Mateo, Calif., and mines consumer sentiment on social media platforms like Facebook. Among his 16 employees, nearly half are on temporary visas while they wait for green cards. Mr. Sankhla's own green card application was rejected once. He is trying again.
A new immigration law will have a great impact on his entire family. His wife, an engineer at Netflix, is on an H-1B visa, and his brother, headed here from Bombay, has one, too.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/12/technology/tech-firms-push-to-hire-more-workers-from-abroad.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Vishal Sankhla, center, has a temporary work visa. He said: ''It's a constant distraction. You can't really settle down because your visa status is uncertain.'' (B1)
Vishal Sankhla is the founder of the start-up Viralheat
both he and his wife, who works for Netflix, have temporary work visas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Scott Corley, center, of Compete America, and Rebecca Peters of American Council on International Personnel with Enrique Gonzalez of Marco Rubio's office. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL ROSENBAUM FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)       

Load-Date: April 12, 2013


End of Document
Whistle-Blower Claiming Visa Fraud Keeps His Job, but Not His Work
The New York Times
April 13, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 1253 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


It has been 17 months since Jack B. Palmer first made a quiet complaint through internal channels at Infosys, the giant Indian outsourcing company he works for, saying he suspected some managers were committing visa fraud. Since then, Mr. Palmer says, he has been harassed by superiors and co-workers, sidelined with no work assignment, shut out of the company's computers, denied bonuses and hounded by death threats.
But what has driven him nearly crazy, with bouts of depression alternating with rage, Mr. Palmer said, is the silence. Since last April, Mr. Palmer has been stewing day after day in his home near Montgomery, Ala., contemplating a blank Infosys screen on his computer and agonizing over whether his whistle-blowing was worth it.
''They did the worst thing they could do to someone who is used to working 80 hours a week,'' Mr. Palmer said. ''They sit me at home and cut me off from everything. My life is floating in Infosys purgatory.''
Mr. Palmer's experience since he filed his first report in October 2010 alleging misuse of business visitor visas for Indian workers is a cautionary tale about the perils of confronting a big corporation. Mr. Palmer's travails have been compounded because he is in a small minority of Americans employed by the huge company, which has $6.8 billion in annual revenues and about 15,000 employees in the United States alone, most from India.
A lawsuit Mr. Palmer filed against Infosys in February 2011 prompted federal prosecutors in Plano, Tex., where the company has offices, to open a criminal investigation that is still expanding. Federal investigators are looking into whether the company used workers from India for certain kinds of jobs here that were not allowed under their temporary visas, known as B-1. They are also examining numerous irregularities in the company's hiring practices and documents, federal officials said.
Infosys, a fast-growing global business that has carefully built a reputation for integrity, vigorously denies Mr. Palmer's accusations and is fighting his lawsuit in federal court in Montgomery.
''Any allegation or assertion that there is or was a corporate policy of evading the law in conjunction with the B-1 visa program is simply not accurate,'' Ted Bockius, an Infosys spokesman, said Thursday. Infosys has been in discussions with the federal authorities, he said, and has complied with a subpoena they issued. He added that fewer than 2 percent of the company's workers in the United States at any time are on B-1 visitor visas.
Mr. Palmer, 44, a software project manager for Infosys since August 2008, said he decided to sue the company, claiming he was punished for reporting corporate misdeeds, after executives pressured him to drop his complaints. But even as the months have crawled by, Mr. Palmer has not quit his Infosys job, fearing he will not get another one now that he is known as the guy who went up against the Indian company.
''The mental and physical challenge one takes on after blowing the whistle is excruciating,'' Mr. Palmer, who is known as Jay, wrote in a recent e-mail. After what he has seen, he said, ''It will be hard for me to advise anyone to blow the whistle.''
In Senate testimony and court documents, Mr. Palmer charged that Infosys brought Indian workers on short-term visitor visas, known as B-1, instead of longer-term temporary visas, known as H-1B, which are more costly and time-consuming to obtain. Infosys and other Indian technology outsourcing companies are consistently among the top users of H-1B visas, but in recent years intensified scrutiny by the State Department has made those visas more difficult to get.
The B-1 is for foreigners coming for conferences or to conduct training, consulting or contract negotiations who continue as employees of the company abroad. They are paid at the generally lower wage rates of the home country.
''This was totally about profit and not hiring Americans for jobs in the U.S. due to higher salary requirements,'' Mr. Palmer told the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on immigration in July. Besides Mr. Palmer, at least two other Infosys managers have provided information to investigators about alleged visa abuses.
Mr. Palmer is still on the Infosys payroll, but with no work and little communication from the company, and his moods swing erratically, he said. He has struggled with drinking, gained and lost 20 pounds and taken medication for anger and depression.
''You're around people every day, and then all of a sudden you are staring at four walls,'' Mr. Palmer wrote in an e-mail. ''No one will hire me and I can't quit, so they just torture me. I have become numb and cumbersome to this world.''
Menacing calls to his home and his mother's nearby prompted him to buy a handgun, which he straps to his ankle whenever he goes out. Always on edge, he drew the gun in February on a salesman who tried to approach his house to offer cleaning goods.
His lawyer, Kenneth J. Mendelsohn of Montgomery, has been both counsel and counselor, taking Mr. Palmer to baseball games and often speaking with him several times a day to keep his spirits from plunging.
Mr. Palmer said his troubles started soon after he filed his first report through an internal whistle-blower channel designated by Jeffrey Friedel, a senior Infosys lawyer. The company had asked Mr. Palmer to write ''welcome letters'' for B-1 visa workers from India. He refused.
''Basically, these letters falsely claim the foreign employee is coming to visit rather than to work,'' Mr. Palmer said. ''Past events started to click in my mind.'' Indian employees he had placed as full-time programmers on projects he managed told him they were struggling to survive in the United States on Indian wages. ''The B-1 workers were fully employed in this country, and Infosys was charging its customers full-time wages,'' he said.
Within days of his report, Mr. Palmer said, it leaked within the company. One manager threatened to fire him, he said, and he received angry calls from co-workers. In November 2010, according to court documents, he found a death threat, neatly printed, on the chair in his office.
At first undaunted, Mr. Palmer sent barrages of e-mails describing apparent visa violations. But in December, he said, he received only about $3,000 of a $45,000 bonus he believed he had earned. Since Infosys has assigned him no work at all since last April, he received no bonus for 2011, losing one-third of his income.
A problem for Mr. Palmer is that the rules governing B-1 visas are so complex that skilled immigration lawyers can disagree on them. Infosys has argued that its practices were legal under a provision that sometimes allows foreign employees to come on B-1 instead of H-1B visas.
Mr. Bockius, the Infosys spokesman, denied any harassment of Mr. Palmer: ''We have not retaliated in any way.''
But the judge in Alabama gave the first round of the whistle-blower lawsuit to Mr. Palmer, denying Infosys's effort to force the matter into binding arbitration.
Mr. Palmer said his friends at Infosys now shun him. ''You start to feel like you are the one who has done everything wrong,'' he said. He continues to receive explicit death threats.
''It is people like you that make us Indians angry,'' said one he received by e-mail. ''Why must you drag us down into poverty. You fat lazy greddy American.''
But Mr. Palmer said: ''My only worry is that Infosys will be slapped on the wrist and will continue to thwart our laws. As much as I need my life back, I will not let this happen.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Infosys offices in Bangalore, India, above, and Plano, Tex., right. Jack B. Palmer, an employee, says he has suffered repercussions since accusing the company of misusing visas for employees from India who work in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAGADEESH NV/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
BRANDON THIBODEAUX FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 CARY NORTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: April 13, 2012


End of Document
DealBook Briefing: Dell Plans to Go Public, Again
The New York Times 
July 2, 2018 Monday 07:25 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1281 words
Highlight: Michael Dell took his company private when he didn’t have enough control to fix it. He won’t make that mistake again.
Body


Good Monday. Want this in your inbox every morning? Sign up here.
Michael Dell plans to take his company public — without repeating mistakes
Dell plans to return to the public markets, five years after its founder and the investment firm Silver Lake took the company private to reshape it for an age of smartphones and cloud computing.
Going private was important, they argued, because public market investors wouldn’t have enough patience for the transformation they had in mind — and would pressure the company to make short-term fixes instead of long-term ones. But the company is prepared to go public again, in part to help finance further investments in its businesses.
Mr. Dell told DealBook’s Michael de la Merced that he had accomplished much of what he had set out to do, but that more work to adapt the company would be required. But this time, he plans to take his company public while keeping a level of control that allows him to continue shaping the company for the future.
How Dell will go public again: Mr. Dell and Silver Lake will offer holders of a Dell tracking stock cash or shares in Dell itself, in a deal valued at $21.7 billion. The deal will be financed through an $11 billion special dividend issued by VMware, a publicly traded Dell subsidiary.
There’s probably more trade war to come
President Trump is said to have ordered up a bill that would have the United States ignore two important World Trade Organization rules. Axios reports that the bill would let Mr. Trump negotiate different tariffs for different countries, and to set them above pre-agreed limits.
Congress would almost certainly stop any such bill. But this news — as well as recent comments promoting auto tariffs as a weapon — shows that Mr. Trump expects more battles. With Europe said to be            preparing its own levies on $300 billion worth of U.S. products as retaliation to the administration’s moves, nobody appears to be backing down.
Meanwhile, concerns are mounting about the fallout from a trade war. G.M. says that auto tariffs could force it to cut jobs at home. Hyundai says that the levies could            harm national security efforts with North Korea. And investors are            increasingly finding ways to hedge in case trade worries hit the markets.
Elsewhere in trade: China is said to bestealing data and staff from high-tech Taiwan companies. How H-1B visas            lost their charm. And how bureaucracy could be            China’s secret trade weapon.
Dan Loeb is turning up the heat on Nestlé
Since the global food giant appointed a new C.E.O. last year, it has embarked on a turnaround plan, putting for-sale signs on underperforming divisions like its U.S. candy business and buying fast-growing brands like Blue Bottle Coffee.
But now the activist investor Mr. Loeb is losing his patience, and pressing the company to take more drastic action — including selling its stake in the cosmetics maker L’Oreal and buying more fast-growing brands to lift its stock from the doldrums.
The big question: If Nestlé doesn’t do what Mr. Loeb wants, will he start a proxy fight at the Swiss company?
In other shareholder activist news: David Einhorn’s Greenlight Capital is down 18 percent so far this year. Nelson Peltz’s Trian is            down almost 2 percent.
Tesla almost met its production goal
Around 5 a.m. Pacific on Sunday, a Tesla Model 3 underwent final quality checks at the company’s Fremont, Calif., factory. The car, Reuters notes, was the 5,000th to be made in just over seven days — meaning the company only just missed its weekly production goal.
Getting to this stage has not been easy, Neal Boudette of the NYT explains. Tesla is building cars on a production line housed in a tent; it has replaced robots that aren’t fast enough with humans; and Elon Musk has been sleeping in the factory, working all hours to streamline production.
In an email to employees, Mr. Musk said that producing 5,000 cars per week meant that Tesla “just became a real car company.” But now comes another challenge: It must reliably maintain production — if not increase it — for years.
More Tesla news: Panasonic says it will consider investing more in Tesla’s Gigafactory.
Facebook admits to special data-sharing arrangements
The tech giant’s first set of written answers to questions from Congress was dull. But its second sheds new light on a series of data-sharing arrangements the company made with other organizations — that went on for longer than previously claimed.
More from Georgia Wells of the WSJ:
The end of an era for Rupert Murdoch
Whether Walt Disney or Comcast emerges as the winner in the fight for most of 21st Century Fox’s businesses, one thing is clear: Mr. Murdoch will bid goodbye to the majority of a media empire that he has assembled over decades.
But he is doing so at a high point: Two media rivals are bidding top dollar for his assets, and he is exiting at a time when tech giants are muscling in on the media business that he made his life’s work. Here’s what a longtime Murdoch associate, Chase Carey, told Sarah Ellison of the WaPo:
In other media news: Mr. Murdoch is keeping Fox News, which is now intimately intertwined with the Trump administration. And the            NYT editorial board asks why Disney’s bid for Fox cleared a government review much more easily than AT&T’s takeover of Time Warner.
Revolving door
Philippe Capron, the C.F.O. of the French waste giant Veolia, has taken himself out of the running to become the next C.E.O. of Air France-KLM. (FT)
Ron Black was fired as the C.E.O. of the semiconductor licensing company Rambus after an incident that the board said fell short of corporate standards. (Bloomberg)
Ken Costa, the veteran investment banker, is joining the investment firm Alvarium Investments as co-chairman. (FT)
The speed read
Deals
 China Merchants Group, a state-owned conglomerate, has teamed up with the London-based merchant bank Centricus to create a $15 billion tech investment fund. (FT)
 ThyssenKrupp and Tata Steel agreed to combine, creating one of Europe’s biggest steel companies. (Bloomberg)
 Alphabet has invested in the scooter-sharing company Lime. (FT)
 Randa Accessories is said to have challenged the founder of Perry Ellis International over control of the men’s wear brand. (WSJ)
Politics and policy
 Andrés Manuel Lopéz Obrador has won Mexico’s presidency, putting an anti-globalization leftist in charge of Latin America’s second-biggest economy. (NYT)
 Three Democratic lawmakers are calling on the Securities and Exchange Commission to investigate whether Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross violated insider-trading laws. (@kylegriffin1)
 The Supreme Court’s decision against public unions threatens to undercut a source of funding for liberal causes. (NYT)
 Technology companies are getting ready to fight California’s new data privacy law. (The Hill)
Tech
 Big tech firms are reportedly annoyed by U.S. intelligence agencies’ lack of help in fighting Russian election influence. (Axios)
 How hard is it to persuade people to use cryptocurrency, rather than treat it as an investment? (NYT)
 Why does Amazon seem to be doing everything? Because its growth forecasts require it to. (WSJ)
 Venture capitalists have a secret Silicon Valley salary database to help them make deals. (Wired)
Best of the rest
 Banks are paying out billions to shareholders. Here’s what those numbers look like in context. (DealBook)
 Poor Americans are being offered loans by wealthy private equity firms. (WaPo)
 The day Toys “R” Us closed for good. Spoiler: It was quiet. (NYT)
 Is New York City in decline because it got too rich? (Harper’s)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Michael Dell (PHOTOGRAPH BY Damon Winter/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: July 3, 2018


End of Document
Music Scholar Barred From U.S., But No One Will Tell Her Why
The New York Times
September 17, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1311 words
Byline: By NINA BERNSTEIN
Body


Nalini Ghuman, an up-and-coming musicologist and expert on the British composer Edward Elgar, was stopped at the San Francisco airport in August last year and, without explanation, told that she was no longer allowed to enter the United States.
  Her case has become a cause celebre among musicologists and the subject of a protest campaign by the American Musicological Society and by academic leaders like Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College at Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., where Ms. Ghuman was to have participated last month in the Bard Music Festival, showcasing Elgar's music.
  But the door has remained closed to Ms. Ghuman, an assistant professor at Mills College in Oakland, Calif., who is British and who had lived, studied and worked in this country for 10 years before her abrupt exclusion. 
  The mystery of her case shows how difficult, if not impossible, it is to defend against such a decision once the secretive government process has been set in motion.
  After a year of letters and inquiries, Ms. Ghuman and her Mills College lawyer have been unable to find out why her residency visa was suddenly revoked, or whether she was on some security watch list. Nor does she know whether her application for a new visa, pending since last October, is being stymied by the shadow of the same unspecified problem or mistake.
  In a tearful telephone interview from her parents' home in western Wales, Ms. Ghuman, 34, an Oxford graduate who earned her Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, said she felt like a character in Kafka.
  ''I don't know why it's happened, what I'm accused of,'' she said. ''There's no opportunity to defend myself. One is just completely powerless.''
  Kelly Klundt, a spokeswoman for Customs and Border Protection in the Department of Homeland Security, said officers at San Francisco International Airport had no choice but to bar Ms. Ghuman because the State Department, at its discretion, had revoked her visa. The State Department would not discuss the case, citing the confidentiality of individual visa records.
  Mr. Botstein, who wrote to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in the hope of having the visa problem resolved before the music festival, said Ms. Ghuman's case is symptomatic. ''This is an example of the xenophobia, incompetence, stupidity and then bureaucratic intransigence that we are up against,'' he said, also citing the case of a teacher of Arabic at Bard who missed the first weeks of the spring semester this year because of visa problems. ''What is at stake is America's pre-eminence as a place of scholarship.''
  Ms. Ghuman is certainly not alone in her frustration. Academic and civil liberties groups point to other foreign scholars who have been denied entry without explanation at an airport, or refused a visa when they applied. A pending lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union contends that the Bush administration is using heightened security measures to keep foreign scholars out on ideological grounds in violation of the First Amendment rights of American scholars to hear them.
  But Ms. Ghuman's case does not seem to fit such a pattern. Few believe that her book in progress, ''India in the English Musical Imagination, 1890-1940,'' or her work on Elgar, best known by Americans for ''Pomp and Circumstance,'' could have raised red flags in Washington. And if it were a question of security profiling, nothing in her background fits. 
  She was born in Wales. Her mother is a British homemaker, and her father, an emeritus professor of educational psychology at the University of Wales, was born in India to a Sikh family and moved to Britain in the 1960s. Last semester, Ms. Ghuman tried to teach her students by video link. This academic year, she is on an unpaid leave of absence.
  ''The arbitrary and inexplicable exclusion of Dr. Ghuman has been a personal tragedy for her and a cause of distress to Mills and to American higher education,'' said Janet L. Holmgren, the president of Mills College, who called her ''one of our most distinguished faculty members.''
  ''She seems to be in this limbo,'' said Ms. Ghuman's fiance, Paul Flight, 47, who has visited her three times in Britain and is considering a move there. Mr. Flight, a countertenor, co-directed Darius Milhaud's opera about Orpheus and Eurydice with Ms. Ghuman at Mills three years ago. 
  Ms. Ghuman's descent into the bureaucratic netherworld began on Aug. 8, 2006, when she and Mr. Flight returned to San Francisco from a research trip to Britain. Armed immigration officers met them at the airplane door and escorted Ms. Ghuman away.
  In a written account of the next eight hours that she prepared for her lawyer, Ms. Ghuman said that officers tore up her H-1B visa, which was valid through May 2008, defaced her British passport, and seemed suspicious of everything from her music cassettes to the fact that she had listed Welsh as a language she speaks. A redacted government report about the episode obtained by her lawyer under the Freedom of Information Act erroneously described her as ''Hispanic.''
  Held incommunicado in a room in the airport, she was groped during a body search, she said, and was warned that if she moved, she would be considered to be attacking her armed female searcher. After questioning her for hours, the officers told her that she had been ruled inadmissible, she said, and threatened to transfer her to a detention center in Santa Clara, Calif., unless she left on a flight to London that night. 
  Outside, Mr. Flight made frantic calls for help. He said the British Consulate tried to get through to the immigration officials in charge, to no avail. And Ms. Ghuman said her demands to speak to the British consul were rebuffed. 
  ''They told me I was nobody, I was nowhere and I had no rights,'' she said. ''For the first time, I understood what the deprivation of liberty means.''
  As Ms. Ghuman tells it, the officers said they did not know why she was being excluded. They suggested that perhaps a jilted lover or envious colleague might have written a poison pen letter about her to immigration authorities, she said, or that Mills College might have terminated her employment without telling her. The notions are unfounded, she said. 
  One officer eventually told her that her exclusion was probably a mistake, and advised her to reapply for a visa in London after a 10-day wait. But it took more than eight weeks for her file to be transferred to the United States Embassy in London, in part because of routine anthrax screening at the State Department.
  As for the possibility that she has been deemed a security threat, Ms. Ghuman said: ''It's not only insulting and heartbreaking, but how? In what way? Musicians, dangerous people? Is it my piano playing?
  ''I have no indication at all,'' she added, ''and it has been 13 1/2 months.''
  Inquiries by Ms. Ghuman's representative in Parliament and several members of Congress, including Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, have been to no avail, said Byron Adams, a professor of music at the University of California, Riverside, who said he had known Ms. Ghuman for years and respected her work.
  ''All of these people have gotten the runaround from the State Department,'' Mr. Adams said. 
  In late spring, when hope faded that Ms. Ghuman's visa nightmare would be resolved quietly, Charles Atkinson, the president of the American Musicological Society, asked its 3,600 members to send letters to the State Department expressing ''our profound consternation and anxiety over the treatment of one of our members.'' 
  The society has invited her to lecture at its conference in November, which, ''in a fortunate circumstance,'' Mr. Atkinson said, is to be held in Quebec. 
  The $500 travel grant they have awarded her will not cover the cost. But at least, he said, she can expect Canada to let her in. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Nalini Ghuman, a professor at Mills College in Oakland, Calif., has been barred from entering the United States since August 2006, when the State Department revoked her residency visa.(pg. B5)                                                              

Load-Date: September 17, 2007


End of Document
A U.S. Hiring Plan Falls Short of Reform
The New York Times
May 6, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; EDITORIAL
Length: 495 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


Infosys, the giant Indian company that supplies American businesses with foreign technology workers, has announced that it will hire 10,000 Americans in the United States in the next two years. This might seem like an early victory in President Trump's ''Hire American'' campaign, but it's less of a cause for celebration than it appears.
Mr. Trump has condemned the loss of Americans' jobs to foreign replacements. And Infosys has been one of the biggest users of H-1B visas -- intended for specially talented foreigners -- to bring in cheaper labor to fill American jobs or replace Americans, often in entry-level positions. 
  But individual corporate measures like Infosys' hiring of Americans, no matter how headline-grabbing, are no substitute for true reform to eliminate systemic abuses. Worse, by creating the appearance of change, they may actually entrench those problems. Rather than say what he wants to see changed about a system he has pilloried, Mr. Trump has simply told executive agencies to recommend reforms in the H-1B program.
  Infosys is, in effect, getting out in front of presidential criticism of outsourcing in a way that makes Mr. Trump's plan appear effective -- even though no real reforms have been broached. The situation is akin to what happened last year at Carrier, when the company blunted criticism from Mr. Trump, then the president-elect, by keeping 800 jobs in the United States rather than offshoring them to Mexico as planned. The workers were happy and Mr. Trump declared victory. But the populist appeal of the deal has far outweighed its practical effect, not just because that deal involved only one plant, but because the Trump administration has shown no interest in or aptitude for addressing the underlying trends in technology, anti-unionism and public policy that undermine blue-collar jobs.
  Similarly, the Infosys pledge to hire 10,000 American workers pales in comparison to roughly 85,000 H-1B visas that are granted each year -- and the hundreds of thousands of jobs that could go to Americans over the years if the H-1B system were reformed. Will Mr. Trump follow through? If recent history is any guide, the answer is no.
  A fair H-1B system would require companies seeking foreign workers to prove that they have actively tried and failed to find American workers with the requisite skills. It would require higher wages for H-1B workers to ensure that they cannot be used as cheaper substitute labor. It would also include an enforcement system of random audits and steep penalties for noncompliance. Most important -- and most unlikely given the demonstrated corporate-friendly bias of the Trump administration -- the rules would apply to American companies like Facebook and Qualcomm that use H-1B visas, as well as to foreign staffing firms.
  The United States needs comprehensive reform of the H-1B system more than it needs Infosys' pledge of 10,000 new jobs. It also needs a president who understands that.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/05/opinion/infosys-hiring-plan-falls-short-of-visa-reform.html

Load-Date: May 6, 2017


End of Document
Bill O’Reilly, Venezuela, Aaron Hernandez: Your Thursday Briefing
The New York Times 
April 20, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 897 words
Byline: CHRIS STANFORD
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
 Lights out for O’Reilly.
Bill O’Reilly, the top-rated host in cable news, will not be returning to Fox News after an investigation of sexual harassment allegations against him, the network announced on Wednesday.
Rupert Murdoch, whose family controls Fox News, had long stood by its star. In signing off on the decision, Mr. Murdoch proved that he is a pragmatist at heart.
Advertisers pulled out and protests flared after a Times investigation revealed payouts of $13 million to resolve claims of inappropriate behavior.
Tucker Carlson will           fill the void left by O’Reilly’s ouster, which will test audience loyalties,            our media columnist writes.
 Trip to Russia caught the F.B.I.’s eye.
Investigators had known since 2013 that a Russian spy was trying to recruit the American businessman Carter Page.
So when Mr. Page became an adviser to the Trump campaign last year and gave a Russia-friendly speech in Moscow, it drew the bureau’s attention.
That trip became the catalyst for the current investigation into connections between Russia and Mr. Trump’s campaign, officials say.
 Big donations to inauguration.
The crowds at President Trump’s swearing-in may have been relatively small, but the checks paying for the festivities were not.
Newly released documents provide a glimpse of the frenzy of influence-seeking and peacemaking at the inauguration,            which raised $107 million, twice as much as any other.
 Chaos in Venezuela.
At least three people were killed in the country amid protests on Wednesday to demand elections and a return to democratic rule.
Times journalists were on the streets of Caracas covering the demonstrations.
 An increasingly expensive habit.
Mayor Bill de Blasio wants to raise the minimum price of a pack of cigarettes to $13, which would make New York City the most expensive place in the nation to buy them.
 “The Daily,” your audio news report.
On today’s show, the reporter who wrote the story that helped lead to the departure of Bill O’Reilly discusses her work.
Listen on a computer, an            iOS device or an            Android device.
Business
 They are app makers or podcasters, and they are H-1B visa holders — possible targets of President Trump’s immigration policies. Meet the tech workers whose lives are in limbo.
 Facebook has been adding features inspired by its rival Snapchat. Our tech columnist explains why the social media giant keeps winning: It’s the network.
 “Unicorn food”: It’s colorful, it’s sparkly, and it’s everywhere.
 U.S. stocks were mixed on Wednesday. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
Smarter Living
 Put the weights down. Here are some brain-fitness exercises, from puzzle games to flying drones.
 This is what 2,000 calories looks like.
 Recipe of the day: A homemade sofrito is central to this Cuban black bean           dish.
Noteworthy
 Brightening the bridge to Staten Island.
In today’s 360 video, visit the new Goethals Bridge, which connects Staten Island to New Jersey and is opening soon.
 Death of a former football star.
Aaron Hernandez, once the youngest player in the N.F.L. and a star for its best team, could never escape his roots. Convicted of murder, he            killed himself in prison.
 More good news for Serena Williams.
The best women’s tennis player of the era confirmed on Wednesday that she is expecting her first child. She was close to two months pregnant when she won the Australian Open in January.
 A day in the lunch box.
Food vendors are a fixture of New York City streets and appetites, yet they struggle daily with weather, logistics and rules. Here’s the story of one.
 A near miss, by cosmic standards.
A large asteroid flew past Earth on Wednesday with only 1.1 million miles to spare, the closest that one has come in years.
 Best of late-night TV.
Everyone was eager to say goodbye to Bill O’Reilly.
Back Story
The most famous photograph of a very camera-shy monster was published in The Daily Mail 83 years ago this week.
The sinuous silhouette of the Loch Ness monster (affectionately known as Nessie) appeared in The Daily Mail, a British newspaper, in April 1934. The picture, apparently taken in the Scottish Highlands by a respected London gynecologist and known as “the surgeon’s photograph,” claimed to show the monster’s long neck and head above water.
The image ignited a media frenzy that year, with The Times itself mentioning the beast no fewer than 55 times.
Though many pictures of Nessie have been taken over the decades (most later found to show wakes from boats, optical illusions, birds or otters), the surgeon’s photograph remains the clearest. But it was proved to be a hoax in 1994, nothing more than a small model on top of a toy submarine.
Despite the hoax (and a number of others like it), many still believe that the monster exists, hidden in dark waters with depths of almost 750 feet.
Last year, Nessie hunters did find something at the bottom of the loch — a 30-foot movie prop version of the monster. For now, it’s the closest thing to finding Nessie itself.
Des Shoe contributed reporting.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
Tech Industry Pushes to Amend Immigration Bill
The New York Times
May 20, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1185 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- The technology industry got much of what it wanted in a bill that overhauls federal immigration law.
But in the give-and-take of political bargaining, the legislation emerged with some provisions the industry considers unappealing. Now its lobbyists are feverishly working to get rid of them.
Whether it gets its way could shape, in part, the fate of the overall package -- and with it, the fate of millions of migrants to this country.
The industry achieved its main goals in the draft Senate bill: an easing of the green card process and an expansion of the number of skilled guest worker visas. That draft, though, includes language that it considers excessive regulatory oversight of when a company can hire a temporary foreign worker and lay off an existing American worker.
Executives from Silicon Valley companies say such language would effectively keep them from using the larger numbers of temporary work permits, known as H-1B visas. They also warn of more jobs being shipped overseas. They are backing proposed amendments that would reverse those provisions.
''The amendments are very important because they allow high-tech companies to use the visas as intended rather than creating regulations that make it so difficult they cannot practically be used,'' the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, which includes I.B.M. and Oracle, said in an e-mailed statement on Friday. It added that most technology companies already hire a preponderance of American workers.
''Companies are willing to show they have tried to hire Americans, but we want to do it in a way that works with their current hiring practices and does not place a heavy administrative burden on them,'' the statement continued. ''The more difficult it is to get H-1B visas, the more likely that jobs will go abroad because there is no American that fits the needed skill set.''
The industry has a powerful ally in Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah. His vote for the bill in the Judiciary Committee is coveted because it is expected to give the legislation crucial conservative support. He has filed several amendments that technology companies favor but that other senators, who insist on additional protections for American workers, have resisted.
Lawmakers were trying to work out compromise language on the bill before Monday, when the committee resumes its deliberations.
Silicon Valley has wasted no time in weighing in. Executives have called senators to press their case, industry lobbyists say. And those lobbyists have themselves been on hand when the committee has taken up their issues, ready to huddle with Senate aides during breaks.
As if to underscore the industry's concern in passing the bill, the secretary of homeland security, Janet Napolitano, traveled to San Francisco on Friday to discuss revamping the immigration law with technology executives.
Critics of Silicon Valley counter that its demands could imperil the overhaul as a whole, including the fate of millions of migrants who stand to gain legal papers.
How can the tech companies threaten to kill comprehensive legislation ''when it contains almost all they have said they wanted?'' said Bruce Morrison, a former chairman of the House immigration committee who now lobbies for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. ''All of America should lose the good the bill does so that they can fire Americans and replace them with H-1Bs? Ridiculous.''
The industry is unlikely to actively sabotage the bill if it does not get its way. It could, though, stop supporting the cause, as it has enthusiastically done this year. A well-financed group led by Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has backed television advertisements for Republicans who support the immigration overhaul. A ''virtual march'' is planned for Wednesday; the event is intended to mobilize tech employees to bombard Congress with automated messages in favor of the bill.
The draft bill makes it easier to sponsor foreign math and science graduates from United States universities for permanent residency. It creates a visa program for entrepreneurs. And it expands, to 110,000, from 65,000, the number of temporary workers allowed into the country every year on H-1B visas, in addition to several thousand more when there is additional demand for workers.
''Over all, tech has gotten, by any metric, the best bill they've ever seen on this issue in terms of H-1Bs,'' said an aide to the Judiciary Committee, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because negotiations were continuing.
To assuage the concerns of American worker groups, like the one Mr. Morrison represents, lawmakers put a provision in the bill that raises minimum wages for guest workers, effectively making it tougher to use the temporary visas to drive down wages in the overall industry. Additionally, the draft makes it all but impossible for outsourcing companies, which are mostly Indian, to bring temporary workers to the United States -- leaving many more for companies based in the United States to recruit.
Technology sector lobbyists are generally pleased with the bill. But they are now objecting to language that requires employers to ensure that an ''equally qualified'' American is not available for a job opening before hiring a foreign temporary worker and allows the Labor Department to regulate. One lobbyist said that could put federal labor officials in the position of ''second-guessing hiring decisions.''
One of Mr. Hatch's amendments would tweak this language so that companies would have to follow only industry standards on hiring, effectively eliminating regulatory oversight.
Tech companies also object to language that would compel companies to show that they have not laid off an American employee 90 days before or after hiring a temporary foreign worker. The companies see this as bureaucratic interference. They support another amendment by Mr. Hatch that would require employers to state on paper that they have not replaced an American employee with a foreign guest worker.
The restrictions on hiring and firing, one industry lobbyist said, would make it difficult for companies to use the additional H-1B visas. ''The numbers mean nothing if you can't use them,'' said the lobbyist, who declined to be named because of the delicate political negotiations. ''The restrictions are so onerous and impose high-cost bureaucratic requirements that they carry too much risk. And if the better option is to hire foreign workers outside the U.S., they'll pursue it.''
Michael Moritz, chairman of the venture capital firm Sequoia Capital, said the industry was lobbying for policies that would buoy the United States economy as a whole. ''The message from Silicon Valley is about the future of America -- it's not about the hiring needs of a few technology companies,'' he said on Friday. ''America's place will be assured if we can continue to be the magnet for the smartest and most energetic young people from all over the world. We need to attract them to the U.S. and keep them here. There's a danger that this sentiment gets lost amidst all the mindless politicking.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/20/technology/tech-industry-pushes-to-amend-immigration-bill.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO:   Scott Corley of Compete America, a coalition of technology companies, wants some language  modified. Whether the industry gets its way could shape, in part, the fate of the overall package. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL ROSENBAUM FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)       

Load-Date: May 20, 2013


End of Document
California Today: Talking to the ‘Water Czar’ About the Drought; California Today
The New York Times 
March 27, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1017 words
Byline: JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
Highlight: Monday: A conversation with the head of the Water Resources Control Board, a potential legal battle with the White House and a grisly anniversary.
Body


 Good morning.
(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
I’m Jonah Engel Bromwich, filling in this week for Mike McPhate, who is on vacation. Today’s introduction comes to us from Adam Nagourney, Los Angeles bureau chief.
LOS ANGELES – By every wet indication, California is about to lift the drought state of emergency order imposed in January 2014. So we thought this would be a good time to talk to Felicia Marcus, the chairwoman of California’s Water Resources Control Board (you can call her the Water Czar.) This interview has been edited and condensed.
Do you think these past three years have produced permanent changes in how Californians use water?
With respect to urban water use, 50 percent of which on average is used on outdoor ornamental landscapes, folks have learned how much they can save outdoors, and how hard it actually can be to kill a lawn. But, we’ve got to value and learn to water our trees separately. With climate change coming, we’ll need more trees and less nonfunctional lawn. We’ve had quite a few conversions to drought-tolerant landscaping.
Just as encouraging are the stepped-up efforts to capture urban storm water. In agriculture, we’ve seen even greater implementation of efficiency in water, pesticide, and fertilizer targeting.
What else have you learned from this drought emergency? We learned even more than we had before about just how precarious the water picture is for small, disadvantaged communities. We learned just how much more we really needed to know to prepare for the next time. There will be a next time, and this time isn’t over yet for a lot of Californians. Certainly isn’t for fish and wildlife.
What did you do right?
We acted early and employed a “rather be safe than sorry” approach rather than just hoping it would rain and snow. The most fortunate and foresighted thing we did was develop a water action plan at the governor’s request to prepare for the nightmare of climate change coming at us.
Are there things you would have done differently?
We cut it too close on saving cold water in northern reservoirs for winter run salmon and lost a painful number of them at their earliest and most vulnerable stages two years in a row. We’re in motion on helping disadvantaged communities on the water supply and water quality side, but we need to find a stable long term funding source to help.
California Online
(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)
 California’s decision to push ahead with stricter auto emissions standards sets up a potential legal battle with the Trump administration. [The New York Times]
 A brawl broke out at a rally for President Trump in Huntington Beach after protesters disrupted the event. Four people were arrested. [The Orange County Register]
 In an interview on “Meet the Press,” Gov. Jerry Brown said that the federal government doesn’t “want to mess with California.” [NBC News]
 Mark Davis, the owner of the Oakland Raiders, wants to move the team to Las Vegas At their annual meeting in Phoenix on Monday, the owners could vote to grant him his wish. [The New York Times]
 Despite his coolness toward California, Mr. Trump has largely sidestepped opportunities for open conflict with the state. [Politico]
 Uber said it would suspend testing on its self-driving vehicles after one of the vehicles was involved in a collision in Tempe, Ariz. [The New York Times]
 City officials in Oakland are looking for a site to use as an officially sanctioned campground for the homeless. [San Francisco Chronicle]
 Kirsten Green, a woman in a male-dominated venture capital field, has parlayed her knowledge of retail into her new endeavors and found success. [The New York Times]
 In the new Zach Braff-directed heist comedy “Going in Style,” out April 7, the performer Ann-Margret, 75, stars as Annie, a supermarket employee. We caught up with the actress near her house in Beverly Hills. [The New York Times]
 The Sea Otters of Morro Bay have made a comeback. [Los Angeles Times]
 Last month, Long Beach cracked a list of the 10 U.S. cities with the steepest rent increases over the past year. Four other California cities were atop the list. [Long Beach Press Telegram]
Coming Up This Week
 On Monday, Representative Darrell Issa, the San Diego Republican, is discussing “Reforming the H-1B Visa System” in Washington.
The Sonoma International Film Festival, featuring dozens of feature films begins Wednesday.
Redwood Coast Jazz Festival starts Thursday, with performances from blues veterans like Duke Robillard, James Harman, Michael Doucet and Kenny Neal.
 The Whiskies of the World Expo, one of the largest whisky tasting events in the country, arrives in San Jose on Thursday and kicks off on in San Francisco on Friday.
And Finally ...
Twenty years ago this week, 39 people were found dead in a suburb north of San Diego.
They were members of the religious group Heaven’s Gate and had committed mass suicide, believing they were destined to go to a better world.
The discovery of their bodies set off a media furor, with cult experts summoned to television studios and reporters racing to learn more about the group’s leader, Marshall Herff Applewhite, who was found among the dead.
Mr. Applewhite had been a music professor in Houston. But in the early 1970s, he began to believe he was a higher being from another dimension. He and the group’s co-founder, a nurse named Bonnie Lu Nettles, started convincing others of their way of thinking.
Though Mr. Applewhite’s views were extreme, his confidence in them may have helped to win him the faith of his followers.
“He said a presence had given him all the knowledge of where the human race had come from and where it was going,” a friend, Hayes Parker, told The Times. “It made you laugh to hear it, but Herff was serious.”
Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.
California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.

Load-Date: March 28, 2017


End of Document
Why Silicon Valley Booed Trump's Immigration Ban
The New York Times
February 9, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1; STATE OF THE ART
Length: 1410 words
Byline: By FARHAD MANJOO
Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- The workers of Silicon Valley make unlikely revolutionaries. As a group, they are relatively wealthy, well educated and well connected.
While most here supported Hillary Clinton, tech workers are not the most obvious targets of President Trump's policy ideas. Many who populate the world's richest tech companies will be just fine if the Affordable Care Act is repealed. Most will not be personally inconvenienced by the proposed Mexican border wall. 
  Under Mr. Trump, tech workers could enjoy a windfall. They may get tax credits for child care costs, their companies may be allowed to repatriate foreign profits, and their coming income tax cuts might fund a luxury vacation or two.
  This is all by way of saying: The protests that swept through Silicon Valley and Seattle in the last two weeks were not motivated by short-term financial gain. If you want to understand why tech employees went to the mat against Mr. Trump's executive order barring immigrants from seven Muslim-majority countries, you need to first understand the crucial role that America's relatively open immigration policies play in the tech business.
  And you need to understand why people in tech see something cataclysmic in Mr. Trump's executive order, and in the other immigration crackdowns waiting in the wings: the end of America's standing as a beacon for the world's best inventors.
  ''Silicon Valley is unlikely, as a phenomenon -- it is not the default state of the world,'' said John Collison, an immigrant from Ireland who is a co-founder of Stripe, a six-year-old payments start-up based in San Francisco.
  One important reason Silicon Valley can exist at all, he said, is that it is welcoming to people from far outside its borders. ''I go all across the world, and every other place is asking, 'How do we replicate Silicon Valley where we are -- in London, in Paris, in Singapore, in Australia?'''
  The reason those places have so far failed to create their own indomitable tech hubs is that everyone there wants to come here.
  ''The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,'' Mr. Collison said. ''Look at all the leading technology companies globally, and look at how overrepresented the United States is. That's not a normal state of affairs. That's because we have managed to create this engine where the best and the brightest from around the world are coming to Silicon Valley.''
  But, Mr. Collison added, ''I think that's kind of fragile.'' Under Mr. Trump, the immigrant-friendly dynamic could change -- and it could bring about the ruin of American tech.
  To outsiders, this may sound alarmist, and perhaps more than a little self-righteous. Silicon Valley gets rightly rapped for talking a big game on its supposed meritocratic openness while failing on basic measures of diversity and inclusion. Women and non-Asian minorities make up a tiny fraction of the industry's employees, and an even smaller portion of its executives and venture capitalists. In short, the tech industry is in thrall to white dudes as much as just about any other business.
  And yet even a casual trip through most histories of the technology industry reveals an outsize role played by immigrants.
  Last year, researchers at the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan think tank, studied the 87 privately held American start-ups that were then valued at $1 billion or more. They discovered something amazing: More than half of them were founded by one or more people from outside the United States. And 71 percent of them employed immigrants in crucial executive roles.
  Collectively, these companies, which include householdish names like Uber, Tesla and Palantir, had created thousands of jobs and added billions of dollars to the American economy. Their founders came from all over the world -- India, Britain, Canada, Israel and China, among lots and lots of other points around the globe.
  In 2011, an immigration reform group, the  Partnership for a New American Economy, found that more than 40 percent of companies in the Fortune 500 were founded by immigrants or the children of immigrants. For the newest members of the Fortune 500, many of them technology companies, the rate of immigrant founders was even higher, the organization said.
  That should come as no surprise if you are familiar with the origins of the most iconic companies of the last few decades. One of Google's founders is an immigrant from Russia, and its current chief executive is an immigrant from India. Microsoft's chief executive is also from India. EBay and Yahoo were started by immigrants. Facebook's largest subsidiaries, Instagram and WhatsApp, were both co-founded by immigrants. Apple was started by a child of immigrants.
  There are many theories for why immigrants find so much success in tech. Many American-born tech workers point out that there is no shortage of American-born employees to fill the roles at many tech companies. Researchers have found that more than enough students graduate from American colleges to fill available tech jobs. Critics of the industry's friendliness toward immigrants say it comes down to money -- that technology companies take advantage of visa programs, like the H-1B system, to get foreign workers at lower prices than they would pay American-born ones.
  But if that criticism rings true in some parts of the tech industry, it misses the picture among Silicon Valley's top companies. One common misperception of Silicon Valley is that it operates like a factory; in that view, tech companies can hire just about anyone from anywhere in the world to fill a particular role.
  But today's most ambitious tech companies are not like factories. They're more like athletic teams. They're looking for the LeBrons and Bradys -- the best people in the world to come up with some brand-new, never-before-seen widget, to completely reimagine what widgets should do in the first place.
  ''It's not about adding tens or hundreds of thousands of people into manufacturing plants,'' said Aaron Levie, the co-founder and chief executive of the cloud-storage company Box. ''It's about the couple ideas that are going to be invented that are going to change everything.''
  Why do tech honchos believe that immigrants are better at coming up with those inventions? It's partly a numbers thing. As the tech venture capitalist Paul Graham has pointed out, the United States has only 5 percent of the world's population; it stands to reason that most of the world's best new ideas will be thought up by people who weren't born here.
  If you look at some of the most consequential ideas in tech, you find an unusual number that were developed by immigrants. For instance, Google's entire advertising business -- that is, the basis for the vast majority of its revenues and profits, the engine that allows it to hire thousands of people in the United States -- was created by three immigrants: Salar Kamangar and Omid Kordestani, who came to the United States from Iran, and Eric Veach, from Canada.
  But it's not just a numbers thing. Another reason immigrants do so well in tech is that people from outside bring new perspectives that lead to new ideas.
  Mike Krieger, an immigrant from Brazil who is a co-founder of Instagram, the photo-based social network app, said one reason it found instant, international success was that he purposely eliminated most text from the app. He knew from growing up in Brazil that English would hinder adoption in most parts of the world.
  ''Every step of the way while we were creating it,'' he said, ''we were thinking, can you create something with international appeal?''
  Mr. Collison, of Stripe, said he could not imagine creating a company without immigrants. ''In the early stages of a start-up you usually have a very specific set of things you need to do, and there's a very short list of people who are able to do them,'' he said.
  In its early years, Stripe needed engineers and executives to build its system for moving money around the world; it needed to create a novel machine-learning system to detect fraud; and it had to convince regulators and other businesses that it was safe and legal to process payments through Stripe. The people it found for all these roles happened to be immigrants.
  ''The fact that we can do that in Silicon Valley -- the fact that the talent is here or that we can bring the talent here, that's what makes the whole thing work,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/technology/personaltech/why-silicon-valley-wouldnt-work-without-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: ''The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,'' said John Collison, an Irish immigrant and co-founder of Stripe. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUKE ATWOOD ABIOL FOR THE NEW YORK) (B6) DRAWING (DRAWING BY DOUG CHAYA)       

Load-Date: February 9, 2017


End of Document
Why Silicon Valley Wouldn’t Work Without Immigrants; State of the Art
The New York Times 
February 8, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1441 words
Byline: FARHAD MANJOO
Highlight: To get the very best people in the world, tech companies must look beyond American shores.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — The workers of Silicon Valley make unlikely revolutionaries. As a group, they are relatively wealthy, well educated and well connected.
While most here supported Hillary Clinton, tech workers are not the most obvious targets of President Trump’s policy ideas. Many who populate the world’s richest tech companies will be just fine if the Affordable Care Act is repealed. Most will not be personally inconvenienced by the proposed Mexican border wall.
Under Mr. Trump, tech workers could enjoy a windfall. They may get tax credits for child care costs, their companies may be allowed to repatriate foreign profits, and their coming income tax cuts might fund a luxury vacation or two.
This is all by way of saying: The protests that swept through Silicon Valley and Seattle in the last two weeks were not motivated by short-term financial gain. If you want to understand why tech employees went to the mat against Mr. Trump’s executive order barring immigrants from seven Muslim-majority countries, you need to first understand the crucial role that America’s relatively open immigration policies play in the tech business.
And you need to understand why people in tech see something cataclysmic in Mr. Trump’s executive order, and in the other immigration crackdowns waiting in the wings: the end of America’s standing as a beacon for the world’s best inventors.
“Silicon Valley is unlikely, as a phenomenon — it is not the default state of the world,” said John Collison, an immigrant from Ireland who is a co-founder of Stripe, a six-year-old payments start-up based in San Francisco.
One important reason Silicon Valley can exist at all, he said, is that it is welcoming to people from far outside its borders. “I go all across the world, and every other place is asking, ‘How do we replicate Silicon Valley where we are — in London, in Paris, in Singapore, in Australia?’”
The reason those places have so far failed to create their own indomitable tech hubs is that everyone there wants to come here.
“The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,” Mr. Collison said. “Look at all the leading technology companies globally, and look at how overrepresented the United States is. That’s not a normal state of affairs. That’s because we have managed to create this engine where the best and the brightest from around the world are coming to Silicon Valley.”
But, Mr. Collison added, “I think that’s kind of fragile.” Under Mr. Trump, the immigrant-friendly dynamic could change — and it could bring about the ruin of American tech.
To outsiders, this may sound alarmist, and perhaps more than a little self-righteous. Silicon Valley gets rightly rapped for talking a big game on its supposed meritocratic openness while failing on basic measures of diversity and inclusion. Women and non-Asian minorities make up a tiny fraction of the industry’s employees, and an even smaller portion of its executives and venture capitalists. In short, the tech industry is in thrall to white dudes as much as just about any other business.
And yet even a casual trip through most histories of the technology industry reveals an outsize role played by immigrants.
Last year, researchers at the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan think tank, studied the 87 privately held American start-ups that were then valued at $1 billion or more. They discovered something amazing: More than half of them were founded by one or more people from outside the United States. And 71 percent of them employed immigrants in crucial executive roles.
Collectively, these companies, which include householdish names like Uber, Tesla and Palantir, had created thousands of jobs and added billions of dollars to the American economy. Their founders came from all over the world — India, Britain, Canada, Israel and China, among lots and lots of other points around the globe.
In 2011, an immigration reform group, the Partnership for a New American Economy, found that more than 40 percent of companies in the Fortune 500 were founded by immigrants or the children of immigrants. For the newest members of the Fortune 500, many of them technology companies, the rate of immigrant founders was even higher, the organization said.
That should come as no surprise if you are familiar with the origins of the most iconic companies of the last few decades. One of Google’s founders is an immigrant from Russia, and its current chief executive is an immigrant from India. Microsoft’s chief executive is also from India. EBay and Yahoo were started by immigrants. Facebook’s largest subsidiaries, Instagram and WhatsApp, were both co-founded by immigrants. Apple was started by a child of immigrants.
There are many theories for why immigrants find so much success in tech. Many American-born tech workers point out that there is no shortage of American-born employees to fill the roles at many tech companies. Researchers have found that more than enough students graduate from American colleges to fill available tech jobs. Critics of the industry’s friendliness toward immigrants say it comes down to money — that technology companies            take advantage of visa programs, like the H-1B system, to get foreign workers at lower prices than they would pay American-born ones.
But if that criticism rings true in some parts of the tech industry, it misses the picture among Silicon Valley’s top companies. One common misperception of Silicon Valley is that it operates like a factory; in that view, tech companies can hire just about anyone from anywhere in the world to fill a particular role.
But today’s most ambitious tech companies are not like factories. They’re more like athletic teams. They’re looking for the LeBrons and Bradys — the best people in the world to come up with some brand-new, never-before-seen widget, to completely reimagine what widgets should do in the first place.
“It’s not about adding tens or hundreds of thousands of people into manufacturing plants,” said Aaron Levie, the co-founder and chief executive of the cloud-storage company Box. “It’s about the couple ideas that are going to be invented that are going to change everything.”
Why do tech honchos believe that immigrants are better at coming up with those inventions? It’s partly a numbers thing. As the tech venture capitalist Paul Graham has pointed out, the United States has only 5 percent of the world’s population; it stands to reason that most of the world’s best new ideas will be thought up by people who weren’t born here.
If you look at some of the most consequential ideas in tech, you find an unusual number that were developed by immigrants. For instance, Google’s entire advertising business — that is, the basis for the vast majority of its revenues and profits, the engine that allows it to hire thousands of people in the United States — was created by three immigrants: Salar Kamangar and Omid Kordestani, who came to the United States from Iran, and Eric Veach, from Canada.
But it’s not just a numbers thing. Another reason immigrants do so well in tech is that people from outside bring new perspectives that lead to new ideas.
Mike Krieger, an immigrant from Brazil who is a co-founder of Instagram, the photo-based social network app, said one reason it found instant, international success was that he purposely eliminated most text from the app. He knew from growing up in Brazil that English would hinder adoption in most parts of the world.
“Every step of the way while we were creating it,” he said, “we were thinking, can you create something with international appeal?”
Mr. Collison, of Stripe, said he could not imagine creating a company without immigrants. “In the early stages of a start-up you usually have a very specific set of things you need to do, and there’s a very short list of people who are able to do them,” he said.
In its early years, Stripe needed engineers and executives to build its system for moving money around the world; it needed to create a novel machine-learning system to detect fraud; and it had to convince regulators and other businesses that it was safe and legal to process payments through Stripe. The people it found for all these roles happened to be immigrants.
“The fact that we can do that in Silicon Valley — the fact that the talent is here or that we can bring the talent here, that’s what makes the whole thing work,” he said.
Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo
PHOTO: “The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,” said John Collison, an Irish immigrant and co-founder of Stripe. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUKE ATWOOD ABIOL FOR THE NEW YORK) (B6)
 DRAWING (DRAWING BY DOUG CHAYA)

Load-Date: February 24, 2017


End of Document
Trump, Theresa May, Georgia: Your Tuesday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 819 words
Byline: KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1.  Call it the saga of the wayward warship.
A week ago, the White House declared that ordering an American aircraft carrier into the Sea of Japan would send a powerful deterrent signal to North Korea.
But the ship was actually sailing in the opposite direction — a fact that came to light only after the photograph above was posted online by the Navy.
White House officials said on Tuesday they were relying on guidance from the Defense Department.
The carrier is now heading to the Sea of Japan. It should arrive sometime next week.
_____
2. It was everyone’s favorite day: Tax Day.
On a more serious note: It looks like President Trump’s efforts to overhaul the U.S. tax code are in serious jeopardy. The Democrats insist they won’t cooperate on it unless Mr. Trump releases his own.
If you’re wondering where your tax money goes, Steve Ballmer, the former chief executive of Microsoft, unveiled a new website to answer that question.
Above, a protest outside an I.R.S. office in Manhattan.
_____
3. “It’s America First, you better believe it.”
As he nears 100 days in office, President Trump spoke at a Wisconsin factory about an executive order authorizing studies and tweaks in government rules that could lead to restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers.
There are signs he’s drifting away from the populist, anti-establishment ideas that guided his campaign.
And here’s a selection of partisan writing you shouldn’t miss.
_____
4. Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain announced that she was reversing course and calling an early election.
She’s making a risky bet that voters will give her a strong mandate as she negotiates the terms of Britain’s exit from the European Union. The vote will be held June 8.
And the first round of voting in France’s presidential election starts Sunday. Critics are worried that Russia may be meddlingin the election to bolster favored candidates.
_____
5. The man suspected of fatally shooting a Cleveland man and then posting video of the killing on Facebook is dead.
Steve Stephens shot himself as he was chased by the police near Erie, Pa., the authorities said.
The pursuit began when a McDonald’s worker stalled him by holding on to his fries — and calling the police.
_____
6. Voters in a wealthy suburban district in Georgia are going to the polls to fill the seat vacated by former Representative Tom Price, who is now the health and human services secretary.
There are 18 candidates to replace him, and the front-runner is a bit of a surprise. Jon Ossoff is a 30           -           year-old Democrat and filmmaker whose slogan is “Make Trump Furious.”
_____
7. In Arkansas, two executions that were set to be carried out yesterday were delayed, one at the 11th hour. They were among eight executions scheduled over 10 days this month.
Others are scheduled for this Thursday and Monday. The legal challenges and protests continue, including over the lethal-injection cocktail the state plans to use.
_____
8. We visited two heavily patrolled borders that have become hot spots in the global refugee crisis — between the U.S. and Mexico, and Hungary and Serbia.
In southern Texas, the Border Patrol agents monitor the banks of the Rio Grande on horseback for drug smugglers and migrants, many of whom are Central Americans seeking asylum.
Hungary, above, which heavily fortified its border over the last two years, is letting in just a handful of asylum seekers these days, and putting them in detention centers while their cases are decided.
_____
9. In Hollywood, TV and movie writers begin voting tomorrow on whether to strike over raises and health benefits.
If no deal is reached between the Writers Guild of America and studios by May 1, they’ll stop work the next day, forcing the late-night comedy shows to immediately start running reruns.
That means we’d be without bits like the one Jimmy Fallon had about the White House Easter Egg Roll: “That bunny took a look at Trump and said, ‘Oh my God, a talking carrot!’”
Above, a scene from the last strike, in 2007-2008, which lasted 100 days.
_____
10. Finally, it’s springtime in Transylvania. Take a peek at this Hungarian village in Romania where they still celebrate a centuries-old seasonal tradition.
On Easter Monday, young men “water” young women like flowers, dousing them with freshly drawn well water and patchouli to bring them health, beauty and love.
Have a great night.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.
Want to look back? Here’s last night’s briefing.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
Related Articles
    • Mike Pence, Turkey, Facebook: Your Monday Evening Briefing

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
At Rally for India’s Modi, Trump Plays Second Fiddle but a Familiar Tune
The New York Times 
September 22, 2019 Sunday 10:05 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1356 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear
Highlight: Mr. Trump treated the giant Houston gathering as his own, seizing on the chance to brag about slashing regulations, lowering unemployment and implementing a tax cut.
Body


HOUSTON — President Trump played second fiddle on Sunday to            Narendra Modi, the prime minister of            India, at a boisterous cultural rally in which the American president was technically just an invited guest.
But never one to let a good crowd go to waste, Mr. Trump treated the giant gathering at NRG Stadium in Houston as his own, declaring that “you have never had a better friend as president than President Donald Trump, that I can tell you.”
Tens of thousands of Indian-Americans gathered to celebrate the recent re-election of India’s fiery populist leader at an event cheekily called “Howdy, Modi!” Big screens throughout the stadium displayed the face of the prime minister, who arrived to thunderous cheers on a red carpet.
There were no Trump signs in the crowd, as there would be at one of his “Make America Great Again” rallies. And the president mostly stuck to his prepared remarks as the crowd of mostly Indian-Americans responded with polite applause.
Mr. Trump praised Mr. Modi, marveling that some 600 million people voted in India’s recent elections. “That’s a lot of people,” the president said, adding that Indian-Americans enrich the culture of the United States and that the two nations are “grounded in our common values.”
But he mostly seized on his own rally themes, bragging about slashing regulations, lowering unemployment, implementing a tax cut and hardening the nation’s borders against “those who would threaten our security.”
“There are those in Washington who would raid your health care to fund free benefits to those who enter our country illegally,” he said, previewing his attacks on Democrats during the presidential campaign. “I will never allow politicians to take away your health care or give it to illegal immigrants.”
The rally brought together two leaders with similar styles. Both rose to power by embracing right-wing populism, portraying themselves as champions of the masses fighting against an entrenched establishment. Both presented voters with a vision to make their respective countries “great again,” and both have fanned tensions along religious, economic and social fault lines.
Mr. Modi, who is in the United States for a week largely to attend the United Nations General Assembly in New York, won a landslide re-election in May. But Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi are also both polarizing figures among the people they lead. While many Indians see Mr. Modi as a strong, decisive leader, a small but vocal minority say he is            becoming an autocrat, rapidly consolidating power, going after political enemies inside his country and sowing division between Hindus and Muslims.
In the United States, Mr. Trump is preparing to run for re-election in a bitterly divided country with polls regularly showing him receiving well short of 50 percent support. His participation in Sunday’s rally with Mr. Modi offered a chance to woo a constituency — the four million American residents of Indian descent — whose support could prove helpful.
Mr. Modi delivered in English an over-the top introduction of Mr. Trump, declaring that the president’s name is “familiar to every person on the planet” and “comes up in almost every conversation in the world on global politics.”
Standing next to Mr. Modi, the president beamed with pleasure as the prime minister delivered a twist on his own election slogan: “Abki baar Trump sarkar” or “This time, a Trump government.”
But earning votes from Indian-Americans will not be easy for Mr. Trump, even with Mr. Modi by his side.
Indian-Americans have supported both Democrats and Republicans in the past, though they have gravitated away from Mr. Trump’s party more recently. Although the president’s tax and economic policies appeal to many Indians, his tough stance on immigration, including legal immigrants from India, has caused great angst, especially in Silicon Valley, which relies heavily on Indian workers who come on H-1B visas.
An overwhelming majority of Indian-American voters are registered as Democrats and voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, according to the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund.
M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a group that tries to organize Indian-Americans, said events like Sunday’s rally help the community become more relevant in the United States. He said Mr. Trump’s appearance here was an opportunity to increase his 14 percent showing among Indian-Americans in 2016.
“He could hope he could change some minds,” Mr. Rangaswami said. “It could happen.”
Mr. Trump crowed last week that his decision to join Mr. Modi at the event on Sunday enlarged the crowd at the stadium, which can hold up to about 70,000 people.
“I have a very good relationship with Prime Minister Modi. By the way, great relationship with Pakistan and with India,” Mr. Trump told reporters on Air Force One several days ahead of the Modi event. “But he’s got a big crowd coming, and I guess the crowd just got a lot bigger because they just announced — he asked would I go, and I will go.”
Mr. Trump’s appearance at the event, which was followed by a stop with the Australian prime minister at an Ohio recycled packaging plant owned by an Australian company, comes as his administration is finalizing plans for a modest trade deal with India. That step that would help resolve earlier tensions between Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi over India’s trade balance with the United States and other trade issues.
The trade agreement, which could be finalized by the two leaders as soon as this week, is expected to help American farmers and manufacturers by eliminating Indian restrictions on electronics, medical devices and a few agricultural goods. In return, Mr. Trump would restore a special trade status for developing countries, something the president stripped from India this year.
Resolving a nettlesome trade dispute with India presents Mr. Trump with an opportunity for a public relations victory amid increasing frustration over his global trade wars with China and other countries.
Mr. Modi, 69, is at his best outside India. He has prioritized, more than any other Indian leader in recent decades, India’s brand around the world and projected an image of a muscular India, an emerging superpower. He travels all across Asia, he was the first Indian prime minister to visit Israel, he has journeyed across Africa and during a visit to New York in 2014 he packed Madison Square Garden with ecstatic crowds cheering: “Modi! Modi! Modi!”
He has come a long way. Years ago, he was banned by American authorities from even entering the United States because of allegations that as chief minister in Gujarat in the early 2000s he was responsible for an explosion of religiously driven violence that claimed more than 1,000 lives, most of them Muslim.
The goal of this trip is to attract investment to India, and there is a little extra urgency: India’s economy is suffering its biggest downturn in years. Mr. Modi is also eager to shore up diplomatic support. But a controversy threatens to cast a shadow over his visit.
Human rights groups and three Nobel Peace Prize winners have criticized the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation for a prestigious award they plan to bestow upon Mr. Modi this week. The peace activists say that under Mr. Modi’s leadership, “India has descended into dangerous and deadly chaos that has consistently undermined human rights.”
A group of protesters gathered in Houston on Sunday to denounce Mr. Modi.
But Mr. Modi has typically drawn strong support from the Indian diaspora, even those who disagree with some of his domestic policies, because he has been so successful at burnishing India’s image on the world stage.
Reporting was contributed by Jeffrey Gettleman from New Delhi, Vindu Goel from Mumbai, India, Alisha Haridasani Gupta from New York and Ana Swanson from Washington. 
PHOTO: Attendees of a ‘Howdy, Modi!’ rally for the prime minister of India in Houston on Sunday. President Trump largely stuck to his script. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As Narendra Modi Heads to U.S., Controversy Follows Him
    • With India, Trump Practices the Art of the Mini-Deal

Load-Date: February 24, 2020


End of Document
Jon Ossoff, Bill O’Reilly, Etan Patz: Your Wednesday Briefing
The New York Times 
April 19, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 996 words
Byline: CHRIS STANFORD
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
 Georgia race heads to a runoff.
In a special congressional election seen as an early referendum on President Trump, a Democrat narrowly missed winning a heavily conservative House district outright.
Jon Ossoff came up short of the 50 percent threshold needed to win the seat, which is in the suburbs of Atlanta, and will face Karen Handel, the top Republican vote-getter, in a June runoff. He might find a head-to-head race tougher than the 18-person field this time around.
Four Times journalists stayed up late to watch the election returns. Here’s how they analyzed it live.
 Former N.F.L. player kills himself.
Aaron Hernandez, a former tight end with the New England Patriots who was convicted of first-degree murder in 2015, hanged himself in prison, the authorities said today.
Mr. Hernandez, 27, was sentenced to prison without the possibility of parole for the murder of Odin Lloyd, who had been dating the sister of Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée.
 Where are those warships?
Just over a week ago, the White House said that moving an aircraft carrier and three other ships to the Sea of Japan would deter North Korean aggression.
“We’re sending an armada,” President Trump said.
The problem? The ships were headed in the opposite direction.
 A globalist in the White House.
Ivanka Trump’s fashion business continues to look for deals abroad, despite possible ethical conflicts with her job advising her father.
C           hina and Japan recently approved trademarks for her brand, and dozens more applications are pending around the world.
 25 years to life for Patz murder.
Pedro Hernandez, who told the police in 2012 that he had killed Etan Patz as the boy headed to school in Manhattan in 1979, was sentenced on Tuesday.
 Hunt for Facebook killer is over.
Two days after a killing was recorded on video and posted online, the gunman was recognized at a fast-food restaurant in Pennsylvania on Tuesday and chased by officers. He committed suicide.
 “The Daily,” your audio news report.
On today’s show, we discuss why so many of President Trump’s advisers are urging him to break a campaign promise on climate change.
Listen on a computer, an            iOS device or an            Android device.
Business
 President Trump has signed an order that he said would favor American companies for federal contracts and lead to changes in visa programs for foreign workers.
One of our reporters explains how the order, which brings no immediate changes, is likely to affect the H-1B program that tech companies depend on.
 A decision on Bill O’Reilly’s future at Fox News could come in the next few days.
The Murdoch family, which controls the company, has stood by Mr. O’Reilly, the top-rated cable news host who faces accusations of harassment.
But their support was showing signs of erosion on Tuesday.
 Big global companies used to be enthusiastic about doing business in China.
But that zeal has cooled, and international brands that once tried not to rock the boat there are becoming more critical of Beijing.
 Our Tech Fix columnist advises against buying the new Samsung Galaxy S8 anytime soon.
 U.S. stocks were down on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
Smarter Living
 Improving your health and fitness doesn’t have to take much time — in fact, four minutes is enough.
 Trouble sleeping? Try replacing negative thoughts with positive ones.
 Recipe of the day: Skip the sad pasta salad and try one that is packed with roasted eggplant, chile and mint.
Noteworthy
 Training Africans to fight terrorism.
In today’s 360 video, American and European special forces train armies from seven African countries in an exercise known as Flintlock.
 Our climate future is now.
How do we live with the fact that the world we knew is going and, in some cases, already gone? This week’s Times Magazine is            devoted to climate change.
 Patrolling the border on four legs.
A horse can often go where vehicles can’t. That’s what one of our reporters and a photographer learned as they traveled along the Rio Grande with agents working to stop illegal immigration.
 Life lessons from a wild and crazy guy.
We sat down with the comedian Steve Martin, who took a rare look back at his stand-up career to reflect on what he’s learned.
 Best of late-night TV.
On “The Tonight Show,” Senator Elizabeth Warren discussed the potential for bipartisan cooperation. Jimmy Fallon had some suggestions.
Back Story
The New England Patriots visit the White House today to celebrate their Super Bowl victory. Several players will be missing, however, including the quarterback Tom Brady, who backed out this morning citing a family commitment.
Brady also skipped his team’s last visit to the White House, when it won the Super Bowl in 2015.
Brady’s current teammate LeGarrette Blount said of his own decision to miss today’s trip, “I don’t feel welcome in that house.”
The players won’t be the first to decline a visit to the White House.
Larry Bird didn’t show when the Boston Celtics visited the Reagan White House in 1984. “           If the president wants to see me, he knows where to find me,” Mr. Bird said.
The tradition of sports teams visiting the White House dates back to at least 1865, when President Andrew Johnson welcomed two amateur baseball teams.
The first championship team believed to have visited didn’t have to travel far: It was the Washington Senators, after winning the 1924 World Series.
Even Canadian teams have visited.
The Toronto Blue Jays received an invitation from President George Bush as the winners of the 1992 World Series.
“America is proud of you,” he told the team’s manager.
Evan Gershkovich contributed reporting.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
Mnuchin Takes on the Dollar at Davos: DealBook Briefing
The New York Times 
January 25, 2018 Thursday 11:33 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 2158 words
Highlight: The Treasury secretary’s advocacy for a weak dollar heightened the sense of conflict between the U.S. and other countries at the World Economic Forum.
Body


Good Thursday. Here’s what we’re watching:
 Steven Mnuchin brought his version of “America First” to Davos with a knock on the value of the dollar.
 G.E.’s string of tough breaks continues.
 Stevie Cohen wants to get closer to the G.O.P.
 Why is SoftBank trying to raise more debt?
Want this in your own email inbox? Here’s the sign-up.
The White House’s curious attack on the dollar at Davos
Davos update of the day: Here at Davos, you can sort of tell the relative power of the individual by how casually they’re dressed. While many attendees wear business suits and snow boots, Jamie Dimon yesterday sported a North Face jacket and dad jeans. (Lloyd Blankfein opted for a more business-casual suit-but-no-tie look.) TPG’s David Bonderman had been known to wear a, shall we say, well-worn fleece.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin yesterday at the World Economic Forum: “Obviously, a weaker dollar is good for us as it relates to trade and opportunities.”
Christine Lagarde’s response: “I really hope that Secretary Mnuchin has a chance to clarify exactly what he said.” (Bob Rubin also            diplomatically rebuked any effort to weaken the dollar to lift trade.)
Today, Mr. Mnuchin said the dollar was “not a concern of mine,” and professed faith in its long-term strength.
The bigger picture, courtesy of Ben White in Politico:
If the U.S. is publicly supporting a weak dollar while also imposing tariffs on foreign imports — as the Trump administration did this week — it could invite retaliation from other countries, potentially sparking both currency and trade wars, economists say.
Said at Davos
Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase told CNBC, “I promise you, we are going to be sitting here in a year and you all will be worrying about inflation and wages going up too high.”
Lloyd Blankfein of Goldman Sachs said of President Trump: “I don’t want to be hypocritical, either. I’ve really liked what he’s done for the economy.”
Sundar Pichai of Google said about taxes: “We are happy to pay a higher amount, whatever the world agrees on as the right framework. It’s not an issue about the amount of tax we pay, as much as how you divide it among various countries.”
Jack Ma of Alibaba said on a panel: “I think globalization cannot be stopped. Nobody can stop globalization. Nobody can stop trade. And I believe, if trade stops, war starts.”
Raymond Nolte of SkyBridge Capital said, “If you take away Trump’s Twitter ridiculousness, it’s actually been a pretty good year for the business community.”
More from the World Economic Forum
 European leaders like Emmanuel Macron (who reportedly persuaded Mr. Trump to come) and Angela Merkel forcefully defended international cooperation and globalization. (NYT)
 Liu He, an influential senior adviser to President Xi Jinping, said China would bring its debt under control within three years. (NYT)
 All of Mr. Trump’s friends and frenemies at Davos. (Bloomberg)
A Davos scheduling bonus
Take a guess: Which former high-powered Wall Street executive who, when bumped into at the bottom of the hill leading up to Mr. Deripaska’s chalet and asked in jest if he was headed to the “oligarch party,” declared that his firm “did not hang out with oligarchs” — and then sauntered up the hill to the party?
CBS and Viacom talked merger.
Shares of Viacom and CBS jumped ahead of the close after Reuters reported that the two companies had held an exploratory discussion about merging, citing sources familiar with the matter.
The boards of both companies are expected to discuss the potential merger at their regularly scheduled meetings in the next couple of weeks, Reuters reports.
The context: Recombining the two companies has been much speculated in recent years as media companies tried to add scale. Shari Redstone, who along with her father, Sumner Redstone, controls the two companies, tried to merge them in 2016. Those efforts faltered over the concerns of CBS’ directors and CBS’s chief executive, Les Moonves. But Walt Disney’s deal for much of 21st Century Fox late last year has sparked much strategic rethinking across the industry.
One celebrity business mogul won’t run for president
It is, of course, Oprah.
Here’s what she told InStyle magazine:
It’s not something that interests me. I don’t have the DNA for it. Gayle—who knows me as well as I know myself practically—has been calling me regularly and texting me things, like a woman in the airport saying, “When’s Oprah going to run?” So Gayle sends me these things, and then she’ll go, “I know, I know, I know! It wouldn’t be good for you—it would be good for everyone else.” I met with someone the other day who said that they would help me with a campaign. That’s not for me.
Completely coincidentally, we’re sure, shares in Weight Watchers International were down 3 percent this morning:
#MeToo meets corporate governance
From a client memo by David Katz and Laura McIntosh of the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz:
A recent study indicates that the topic would be new for most public company boards, notwithstanding the fact that it relates to key elements of board-level governance: company culture, tone-at-the-top, risk management, and crisis management. Sexual misconduct in the workplace can take a devastating human toll. Moreover, the issue implicates gender equality and gender diversity concerns more broadly, and boards that include a meaningful proportion of female directors should be better positioned to address sexual harassment and gender equality issues.
Among the best ways to better address the issue at a company: having more women on corporate boards and in senior management positions.
— Michael J. de la Merced
The race is on to become the first United States company valued at $1 trillion.
Shares of the biggest American technology companies have continued to surge in 2018. The S&P 500 technology sector is up 7.6 percent to start 2018. Amazon.com has risen 17 percent, Alphabet is up 12 percent, and Microsoft has climbed 8.4 percent, writes MoneyBeat’s Ben Eisen. Meanwhile, Apple has lagged a bit in 2018, up just 1.8 percent.
If the rally persists, then the four biggest companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500 index could all soon be flirting with the $1 trillion mark.
Apple: $884 billion.
 Alphabet: $814 billion
Microsoft: $713 billion
Amazon: $656 billion
When will things look up for G.E.?
Bad enough that the embattled industrial giant had to announce that GE Capital would suspend dividends to the group, after a $6.2 billion charge tied to its reinsurance operations.
Now the S.E.C. is taking a look, and questions are being raised about the conglomerate’s            famously opaque accounting. Its shares fell 2.7 percent yesterday.
Critics’ corner
 Spencer Jakab writes, “Sunlight may be the best disinfectant, but General Electric is learning that it can leave some nasty burns — particularly for those who have spent too much time in the shade.” (Heard on the Street)
 Tom Buerkle writes of G.E.’s chief, John Flannery, “Flannery’s time to draw a line under past mistakes is shrinking — and with it the likelihood that he can show that G.E.’s diverse businesses are better together than apart.” (Breakingviews)
Stevie Cohen opens his wallet for the G.O.P.
Point 72 is on the verge of managing outside money and operating as a true hedge fund again. So, it appears, its chief is seeking friends in Washington.
Mr. Cohen donated $2 million to the Senate Leadership Fund and $1 million to the Congressional Leadership Fund, Fox Business reports. That made him the top donor to both Republican super PACs. (He previously gave money to both parties.)
More from Brian Schwartz and Charlie Gasparino:
“Cohen is getting back into the hedge fund business, and he’s making sure he has allies lined up on Capitol Hill given what he went through,” said one financial services lobbyist who spoke on the condition of anonymity. “And it’s not like he’s on a budget.”
The political flyaround
 An immigration bill sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, would permit more H-1B skilled worker visas: 195,000 a year. (Axios)
 Mr. Trump said he was willing to be interviewed under oath for Robert Mueller’s Russia investigation. (NYT)
 Mr. Trump also said he favored offer citizenship to the young immigrants known as Dreamers, days after rejecting a bipartisan bill with that as its centerpiece. (NYT)
 Alex Azar was confirmed yesterday as secretary of health and human services. (NYT)
Is SoftBank looking for even more money?
Its Vision Fund has nearly $100 billion in equity to spend. But here’s how the Japanese conglomerate is reportedly planning to raise yet more capital, according to The Information:
 Borrow as much as $5 billion against its stake in the British chip maker ARM
 Potentially borrow against its new 15 percent stake in Uber
The bigger picture: SoftBank is no stranger to debt, with $103 billion in long-term borrowings on its books as of Sept. 30. But analysts have questioned whether Masa Son’s company is using leverage too aggressively. Some comes due this year — and a huge amount in 2024.
When the Vision Fund’s interest makes life difficult: SoftBank’s deliberations over whether to invest in Wag, a dog-walking app, have elbowed aside other investors, according to The Information — though it isn’t clear whether Mr. Son will follow through.
The deal-making flyaround
 Nearly $30 billion worth of health care deals has been announced this month as drug makers look to acquire new treatments. Some in the industry fear valuations are getting too rich. (FT)
 The hedge funds Corvex Capital Management and 40 North have given up their fight over the chemical maker Clariant, selling their stake to Saudi Arabia’s state-controlled chemical producer. (FT)
 K.K.R. has sold its remaining 12.3 percent of Pets at Home. (FT)
 Sun Basket is raising money despite a bear market for meal-kit companies. It’s promising to limit investors’ risks. (The Information)
 Alibaba and Kroger have had preliminary discussions about a partnership, apparently in a response to Amazon’s grocery moves. (NY Post)
 RPX, a manager of patent-related issues, is considering selling itself and has drawn interest from investment firms, according to unnamed sources. (Reuters)
The downside of the U.S. oil boom
From Javier Blas, in Bloomberg Businessweek’s latest cover story:
It sounds good, but be careful what you wish for. The last three years have been the hottest since record-keeping began in the 19th century, and there’s little room in Trump’s plan for energy sources that treat the planet kindly. Governors of coastal states have already pointed out that an offshore spill could devastate tourism — another trillion-dollar industry — not to mention wreck fragile littoral environments. Florida has already applied for a waiver from such drilling. More supply could lower prices, in turn discouraging investments in renewables such as solar and wind. Those tend to spike when oil prices rise, so enthusiasm for nonpolluting, nonwarming energies of the future could wane.
For now, though, the petroleum train is chugging. And you can thank the resilience of the U.S. shale industry for it.
The misconduct flyaround
 The Presidents Club Charitable Trust has shut down after the FT revealed that participants at its annual men-only dinner groped, harassed and propositioned young women serving them. (FT)
 Hollywood has absorbed the #MeToo critiques — and converted them into digestible branding exercises. (NYT)
 The #MeToo movement is having a harder time in China, including from censors. (NYT)
Revolving door
 Snapchat’s vice president of product, Tom Conrad, is leaving in March. (Evan Spiegel makes the big product decisions.) (Recode)
 Meg Whitman will become the C.E.O. of Jeffrey Katzenberg’s short-form video start-up . (Recode,            The Information)
 Evercore has hired Adam Taetle, most recently the co-head of Barclays’ consumer retail investment banking team, as a senior managing director and head of its retail practice. (Evercore)
The Speed Read
 Marijuana start-ups are largely looking beyond the old-fashioned joint. (NYT)
 Switzerland wants to be a “crypto nation” and its initial coin offering industry is burgeoning. (FT)
 Mr. Trump has offered the coal industry some regulatory relief, but market forces remain against it. (NYT)
 Wall Street isn’t buying Jim Hackett’s plan to reinvigorate Ford Motor. (NYT)
 Last year was the costliest on record for weather disasters. Some struggling insurers are considering selling up. (FT)
 After Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico will not be able to pay down any portion of its more than $70 billion debt over the next five years. (NYT)
 A bank in China found that HNA had put up the same shares as collateral for multiple loans, according to people with knowledge of the matter, and responded by freezing related accounts. (Bloomberg)
 The June mayoral election in San Francisco will be a battle over technology’s influence on the city and its politics. (NYT)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.

Load-Date: January 27, 2018


End of Document
A New Push To Raise Cap On H-1B Visa
The New York Times
November 15, 2006 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 763 words
Byline: By MIGUEL HELFT
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 14 
Body


A coalition of business and education groups is making a renewed push to persuade Congress to raise the number of skilled foreign workers allowed into the United States this year. 
  The coalition, which calls itself Compete America and whose members are drawn heavily from the technology industry, sent a letter to every member of Congress on Monday calling for an increase in both the number of so-called H-1B visas, which are used by skilled immigrants and the number of employment-based green cards given to foreign workers.
''The first part is to ensure that U.S. companies have the ability to hire the best and the brightest,'' said Jack Krumholtz, managing director for federal government affairs at Microsoft. ''The second part is about making sure that we are able to retain them.''
  Microsoft's chairman, Bill Gates, is one of many technology executives who have advocated increased flexibility to hire educated foreign workers like engineers and scientists. He is expected to return to that theme at an industry conference on Wednesday at Stanford University.
  Increasing the number of H-1B visas has long been a top legislative priority of technology companies, which say they cannot find enough skilled workers in the United States. After a temporary increase to 195,000 during the years of the Internet boom, the annual number of visas issued has been capped at 65,000. An additional 20,000 visas have been granted to foreign workers who have an advanced degree from an American university.
  But in recent years, all the visas allotted for a given year were claimed on or before the start of the fiscal year on Oct. 1. 
  ''We can't hire people,'' said Jenifer Verdery, director of work force policy at Intel. 
  The notion of allowing more skilled foreign workers in the United States generally enjoys bipartisan support in Congress. Earlier this year, the Senate passed a bill that would increase the cap on H-1B visas to 115,000 and would automatically raise the cap by a further 20 percent if all visas for a given year were claimed. The bill also would raise the number of employment-based green cards issued to 290,000, from 140,000. 
  But the bill stalled as the House and Senate deadlocked on broader immigration reform legislation. And not everyone agrees that raising the cap on visas is a good idea. 
  ''We think that before raising the H-1B cap there should be reform of the H-1B system,'' said Ronil Hira, vice president for career activities at IEEE-USA, a professional organization representing engineers and computer programmers. 
  The organization, which includes many immigrants among its ranks, is not opposed to legal immigration. But Mr. Hira said that the H-1B visa program, which requires companies to pay foreign workers wages comparable to those they pay American workers, was riddled with loopholes that allow employers to pay subpar wages to immigrants. That, in turn, depresses the wages of American workers, Mr. Hira said.
  Lynn Shotwell, chairwoman of Compete America, said there was virtually no chance that Congress would pass the Senate bill this year. But Ms. Shotwell said the coalition, which includes universities and the Chamber of Commerce, was asking Congress to raise the cap on H-1B visas and green cards for the remainder of the fiscal year.
  Members of the coalition are hopeful that legislation modeled after the Senate bill could be enacted next year, when Democrats will control Congress. House Democrats have promoted what they are calling an innovation agenda that includes wide availability of visas for skilled immigrants.
  The National Venture Capital Association, which is among those advocating an expansion in visas and green cards for skilled workers, is backing that case with a study, to be released Wednesday, that highlights the role of immigrant entrepreneurs in the American economy. 
  The study found that one in four publicly traded American companies that were initially financed by venture capitalists in the last 15 years included at least one immigrant among their founders. During the 1980s, immigrants were involved in founding one in five such companies, and prior to 1980 only 7 percent. 
  ''The notion of being able to come here and shape your own destiny is tremendously appealing and, you have to believe, valuable for the economy, job creation and wealth creation,'' said Axel Bichara, a partner at Atlas Venture in Boston. Mr. Bichara came to the United States from Germany in 1986 to study at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A year later, he became co-founder of a software company. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: November 15, 2006


End of Document
Start-Ups, Not Bailouts
The New York Times
April 4, 2010 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 9; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 849 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Body


Here's my fun fact for the day, provided courtesy of Robert Litan, who directs research at the Kauffman Foundation, which specializes in promoting innovation in America: ''Between 1980 and 2005, virtually all net new jobs created in the U.S. were created by firms that were 5 years old or less,'' said Litan. ''That is about 40 million jobs. That means the established firms created no new net jobs during that period.''
  Message: If we want to bring down unemployment in a sustainable way, neither rescuing General Motors nor funding more road construction will do it. We need to create a big bushel of new companies  --  fast. We've got to get more Americans working again for their own dignity -- and to generate the rising incomes and wealth we need to pay for existing entitlements, as well as all the new investments we'll need to make. It was just reported that Social Security this year will pay out more in benefits than it receives in payroll taxes  --  a red line we were not expected to cross until at least 2016.
  But you cannot say this often enough: Good-paying jobs don't come from bailouts. They come from start-ups. And where do start-ups come from? They come from smart, creative, inspired risk-takers. How do we get more of those? There are only two ways: grow more by improving our schools or import more by recruiting talented immigrants. Surely, we need to do both, and we need to start by breaking the deadlock in Congress over immigration, so we can develop a much more strategic approach to attracting more of the world's creative risk-takers. ''Roughly 25 percent of successful high-tech start-ups over the last decade were founded or co-founded by immigrants,'' said Litan. Think Sergey Brin, the Russian-born co-founder of Google, or Vinod Khosla, the India-born co-founder of Sun Microsystems. 
  That is no surprise. After all, Craig Mundie, the chief research and strategy officer of Microsoft, asks: What made America this incredible engine of prosperity? It was immigration, plus free markets. Because we were so open to immigration  --  and immigrants are by definition high-aspiring risk-takers, ready to leave their native lands in search of greater opportunities -- ''we as a country accumulated a disproportionate share of the world's high-I.Q. risk-takers.''
  In addition, because of our vibrant and meritocratic university system, the best foreign students who wanted the best education also came here, and many of them also stayed. In its heyday, our unique system also attracted a disproportionate share of high-I.Q. risk-takers to high government service. So when you put all this together, with our free markets and democracy, it made it easy here for creative, high-I.Q. risk-takers to raise capital for their ideas and commercialize them. In short, America had a very powerful, self-reinforcing engine for growing innovative new companies.
  ''When you get this happy coincidence of high-I.Q. risk-takers in government and a society that is biased toward high-I.Q. risk-takers, you get these above-average returns as a country,'' argued Mundie. ''What is common to Singapore, Israel and America? They were all built by high-I.Q. risk-takers and all thrived  --  but only in the U.S. did it happen at a large scale and with global diversity, so you had this really rich cross-section.'' 
  What is worrisome about America today is the combination of cutbacks in higher education, restrictions on immigration and a toxic public space that dissuades talented people from going into government. Together, all of these trends are slowly eating away at our differentiated edge in attracting and enabling the world's biggest mass of smart, creative risk-takers.
  It isn't drastic, but it is a decline  --  at a time when technology is allowing other countries to leverage and empower more of their own high-I.Q. risk-takers. If we don't reverse this trend, over time, ''we could lose our most important competitive edge  --  the only edge from which sustainable advantage accrues''  --  having the world's biggest and most diverse pool of high-I.Q. risk-takers, said Mundie. ''If we don't have that competitive edge, our standard of living will eventually revert to the global mean.''
  Right now we have thousands of foreign students in America and one million engineers, scientists and other highly skilled workers here on H-1B temporary visas, which require them to return home when the visas expire. That's nuts. ''We ought to have a 'job-creators visa' for people already here,'' said Litan. ''And once you've hired, say, 5 or 10 American nonfamily members, you should get a green card.''
  We need health care, financial reform and education reform. But we also need to be thinking just as seriously and urgently about what are the ingredients that foster entrepreneurship -- how new businesses are catalyzed, inspired and enabled and how we enlist more people to do that  --  so no one ever says about America what that officer says to Tom Cruise in ''Top Gun'': ''Son, your ego's writing checks your body can't cash.'' 
  Nicholas D. Kristof is off today.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 4, 2010


End of Document
Laid-Off Americans, Required to Zip Lips on Way Out, Are Growing Bolder
The New York Times
June 12, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1435 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


LIBERTYVILLE, Ill. -- American corporations are under new scrutiny from federal lawmakers after well-publicized episodes in which the companies laid off American workers and gave the jobs to foreigners on temporary visas.
But while corporate executives have been outspoken in defending their labor practices before Congress and the public, the American workers who lost jobs to global outsourcing companies have been largely silent. 
  Until recently. Now some of the workers who were displaced are starting to speak out, despite severance agreements prohibiting them from criticizing their former employers.
  Marco Peña was among about 150 technology workers who were laid off in April by Abbott Laboratories, a global health care conglomerate with headquarters here. They handed in their badges and computer passwords, and turned over their work to a company based in India. But Mr. Peña, who had worked at Abbott for 12 years, said he had decided not to sign the agreement that was given to all departing employees, which included a nondisparagement clause.
  Mr. Peña said his choice cost him at least $10,000 in severance pay. But on an April evening after he walked out of Abbott's tree-lined campus here for the last time, he spent a few hours in a local bar at a gathering organized by technology worker advocates, speaking his mind about a job he had loved and lost.
  ''I just didn't feel right about signing,'' Mr. Peña said. ''The clauses were pretty blanket. I felt like they were eroding my rights.''
  Leading members of Congress from both major parties have questioned the nondisparagement agreements, which are commonly used by corporations but can prohibit ousted workers from raising complaints about what they see as a misuse of temporary visas. Lawmakers, including Richard Durbin of Illinois, the second-highest-ranking Senate Democrat, and Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the Republican chairman of the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, have proposed revisions to visa laws to include measures allowing former employees to contest their layoffs.
  ''I have heard from workers who are fearful of retaliation,'' said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. ''They are told they can say whatever they want, except they can't say anything negative about being fired.''
  Lawyers said the paragraph Mr. Peña and other workers object to in their separation agreements is routine in final contracts with employees who are paid severance as they leave, whether they were laid off or resigned voluntarily.
  ''It's a very, very common practice,'' said Sheena R. Hamilton, an employment lawyer at Dowd Bennett in St. Louis who represents companies in workplace cases. ''I've never recommended a settlement that didn't have a clause like that.''
  But former Abbott employees said the provisions had stopped them from speaking openly with elected officials or appearing at congressional hearings.
  ''It is very frustrating that you can't share your story with the public,'' said one former Abbott manager, who had worked for the company for 13 years, rising to an important supervisory position. He had prepared a 90-page manual for his foreign replacements showing how to perform every detail of his work. With a disabled child who requires medical care, he said he had to take his severance and its nondisparagement clause, since it extended his medical benefits. So he asked to remain anonymous.
  ''I've been laid off before, I can understand that,'' he said. ''But these visas were meant to fill in gaps for resources that are hard to find. This time the company actually asked me to transfer my knowledge to somebody else. That changes the equation.''
  According to federal rules, temporary visas known as H-1Bs are for foreigners with ''a body of specialized knowledge'' not readily available in the labor market. The visas should be granted only when they will not undercut the wages or ''adversely affect the working conditions'' of Americans.
  But in the past five years, through loopholes in the rules, tens of thousands of American workers have been replaced by foreigners on H-1B and other temporary visas, according to Prof. Hal Salzman, a labor force expert at Rutgers University.
  In March, two Americans who had been laid off in 2014 by a New England power company, Eversource Energy, spoke at a news conference in Hartford even though they had signed nondisparagement agreements. Craig Diangelo, 63, and Judy Konopka, 56, said most of the 220 people facing dismissal had been required as part of their severance to train Indian immigrants with H-1B and other visas.
  In a protest, departing employees posted American flags outside their cubicles. As they left, they took the flags down. Mr. Diangelo took a photograph of the flags in his final days at the utility. At the time, he and Ms. Konopka spoke with reporters, including from The New York Times, but they did not want to be quoted, even without their names.
  In January, Senator Blumenthal spotted the photograph in an article in Computerworld, a tech industry publication, and was dismayed to learn of the layoffs so long after they happened. In a letter to the company, the senator questioned whether the dismissals were ''accomplished through apparent abuses'' of visas, and he demanded assurances that former employees would not be sued if they spoke with government officials.
  In a forceful reply, the Eversource general counsel, Gregory B. Butler, said the company had not violated any laws, and its nondisparagement provisions were a ''standard form release'' that did not restrict former employees from discussing their layoffs ''with you or anyone else.''
  Mr. Diangelo said he was not so sure the company would refrain from legal action if he spoke to the news media. But, he said, ''I finally got to the point where I am tired of hiding in the shadows.''
  Two years later, his work with a local tech contracting company pays $45,000 a year less than his Eversource salary. Many of his former co-workers are also struggling, Mr. Diangelo said, but stay quiet to avoid provoking the company.
  At Abbott, executives announced in February that technology jobs would be taken over by the Indian company Wipro. Senator Durbin, who is from Illinois, criticized the layoffs and said Abbott's nondisparagement clause was ''overly broad.''
  According to a copy of the agreement, that clause read, in part: ''You agree to make every effort to maintain and protect the reputation of Abbott and its products and agents.''
  A spokesman for Abbott, Scott Stoffel, said the changes were part of its efforts to ''remain globally competitive and a strong U.S. employer.'' He said the company would retain ''the vast majority'' of its tech jobs in the United States. Nondisparagement clauses like Abbott's are ''very common'' in severance agreements, he said.
  Mr. Peña said he could afford to turn down his severance payment because he is single and has no children. ''I was the only one with the ability to put my foot down,'' he said.
  He received consistently positive work reviews, and a merit raise weeks before his layoff, he said. With no indication that poor performance was a factor, he believed it was a measure to cut costs.
  ''Anything that had to deal with technology and resolving problems, that was my satisfaction, my passion,'' Mr. Peña said. ''But these days that has no bearing on the decision making of the executives in the higher positions.''
  Abbott tried to reduce the role of foreigners in the layoffs. Only about 20 percent of the workers brought in by Wipro would be foreigners on H-1B visas, Mr. Stoffel said, while the rest would be American workers.
  Mr. Peña said he had been told at first that he would train his Wipro replacements. But after Senator Durbin's rebuke, Wipro workers were trained only by employees who would be remaining with Abbott, he said.
  He and 13 other former Abbott employees filed federal claims saying they faced discrimination because of their ages and American citizenship, said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing them. Those claims are confidential. Ms. Blackwell organized the tavern meeting where Abbott workers were invited to mourn their jobs. Of the small group that came, only Mr. Peña spoke up.
  On April 20, about two dozen employees of EmblemHealth, a health insurer, protested outside its offices in Manhattan after the company announced that it would transfer about 200 tech jobs to Cognizant, another technology outsourcing company. Even though they were in the street holding signs, the employees declined to have their names used in news reports.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/us/laid-off-americans-required-to-zip-lips-on-way-out-grow-bolder.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Technology workers from Abbott Laboratories and supporters gathered in a North Chicago bar after the company laid off about 150 people in April. (A16)
 Marco Peña, laid off by Abbott, would not sign an agreement with a nondisparagement clause. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSHUA LOTT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)       

Load-Date: June 12, 2016


End of Document
Clinton Asks Congress to Raise the Limit on Visas for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
May 12, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 2; National Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 718 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR 

By ROBERT PEAR 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 11
Body


Racing to keep up with a booming economy, President Clinton today proposed an increase of more than 85 percent in the number of skilled foreign workers who could be admitted to the United States to fill job openings in high-technology industries.
Mr. Clinton asked Congress to provide 200,000 visas for such workers in each of the next three years. The existing law, adopted in 1998, limits the number of such visas to 107,500 in 2001. After that, under existing law, the ceiling will fall back to 65,000 a year, the level in effect before Congressional action in 1998.
In January 1998, the Clinton administration said it did not support an increase in the number of visas. But the president, under pressure from Congress and the computer industry, agreed to support a modest increase six months later. Since then, technology companies say, the demand for computer programmers, engineers and other skilled workers has outstripped the supply and exceeded official expectations.
Many in Congress favor an even bigger increase than the one Mr. Clinton proposed today. Congress therefore appears likely to approve a substantial increase in the number of visas, known as H-1B visas, for high-technology workers.
Robert Cohen, senior vice president of the Information Technology Association of America, an industry group, welcomed the president's proposal.
"It's very encouraging that the White House sees the need to raise the cap," Mr. Cohen said. "The administration understands better now than in 1998 that information technology gives an incredible push to the overall economy. But the number of visas proposed by the administration is probably not adequate. We would be pleased to see the cap eliminated, so the marketplace could decide how many people are needed to get the job done."
Nations in Europe and Asia are competing for the same pool of high-technology workers. And Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan, said some American companies would "move their operations overseas, taking American jobs with them," if they could not get the workers they needed here.
India provides by far the largest number of skilled foreign workers under the H-1B visa program. Its citizens received 47 percent of such visas issued in the last year. The next largest share went to China, with 9 percent.
Gene Sperling, the president's economic policy adviser, set forth Mr. Clinton's proposal in a letter to Congress.
The best way to increase the supply of skilled workers is to improve the education and training of United States citizens and other people already in the country, Mr. Sperling said.
"However," he said, "at times, U.S. businesses need additional access to the international labor market to maintain and enhance our global competitiveness, particularly in high-growth new technology industries and particularly in tight labor markets."
Mr. Sperling said the previous increase in the number of H-1B visas had proved inadequate because "our economy has grown beyond anyone's most optimistic predictions."
Representative Lamar Smith, the Texas Republican who heads the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, was skeptical, saying, "There is still no objective, credible study that documents a shortage of American high-tech workers."
Michael W. Gildea, a policy analyst in the professional employee division of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said: "We would have preferred no increase in the number of visas. We see no credible evidence of widespread shortages of information technology workers."
Mr. Sperling said technology companies appeared to have difficulty finding workers with the necessary skills. But he added, "The lack of clear data suggests that it's best to offer a temporary solution, and to make that solution contingent on an increase in spending for the education and training of American workers."
Mr. Clinton proposed a sharp increase in the fees charged to employers who use the foreign worker program. He said the fee for an H-1B visa, now $500, should be raised to $2,000 for most employers, with a visa fee of $3,000 for companies that depend heavily on skilled foreign workers.
The president said he would use the fees to help pay for the training of American workers, especially those who are underrepresented in the information technology industry, like women, blacks and Hispanics.            

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 12, 2000


End of Document
When Donald Met Melania, Paolo Was There
The New York Times
September 1, 2016 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Column 0; Style Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1736 words
Byline: By JASON HOROWITZ
Body


A couple of weekends ago, Paolo Zampolli received a text message from Melania Trump, the wife of the Republican candidate for president, urging him to give her a call. The next day, Mr. Zampolli, a former modeling agent who had discovered the Slovene 20 years ago in Milan, listened as Ms. Trump expressed anguish over a gossipy report in the British tabloid The Daily Mail accusing her and Mr. Zampolli of operating an escort service in the 1990s.
''This is outrageous,''' Ms. Trump said on the call, according to Mr. Zampolli, explaining that she was considering filing a suit against The Daily Mail for making false and defamatory statements. He said she sounded ''extremely disturbed.'' 
  Mr. Zampolli, 46, sounded less than disturbed as he spoke over a recent lunch of pasta in his Gramercy Park townhouse, which is decorated with works by Canaletto, de Chirico and Picasso. In his monogrammed dress shirt and Italian-accented English, the onetime mainstay of New York gossip pages called the report ''rubbish'' and ''disgusting,'' but also seemed to relish his return to the public eye.
  He spoke emphatically about his central role in an article earlier this month exploring Ms. Trump's visa history (''reprinted in 550 publications around the world.'') and had lined up more interviews about the Daily Mail article later in the day.
  By stepping back into the spotlight, Mr. Zampolli, a tireless self-promoter of mysterious means, brings into the 2016 presidential race an explicit reminder of the company the Trumps and Clintons kept in the behind-the-velvet-rope heyday of fin-de-20th-siècle New York. For two couples often accused of having an exceptionally transactional worldview, Mr. Zampolli is both Zelig and an open-collared emblem of the social waters in which they swam.
  He secured Ms. Trump's visa to the United States and introduced her to her future husband at a 1998 party he hosted at the Kit Kat Club. (Mr. Zampolli's parties have featured an alligator, tiger cubs and models at nightclubs blowing kisses at Fashion Television cameras.)
  He flew with Mr. Trump on his jet to attend the mogul's wedding at Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach, Fla. There, he said, ''I was introduced to Hillary by Huma,'' referring to Huma Abedin, whom he said he knew from events in New York.
  By then, he said, he had already met Mr. Clinton ''many, many, many'' times. He called Mr. Clinton's former adviser Doug Band ''Dougie'' and used to be close to Ronald Burkle, the billionaire investor who was once a close friend, private-jet provider and business partner of Mr. Clinton. (Mr. Clinton ''was not coming to parties with me and the models,'' Mr. Zampolli said.)
  The Clinton campaign, Mr. Trump and Mr. Burkle declined to comment about Mr. Zampolli. But Ms. Trump wrote in a statement last Thursday: ''I have known Paolo Zampolli since 1995 when we first met at a modeling agency in Milan. He loved my portfolio and encouraged me to expand my career to New York City. Paolo was a very professional agent and still remains a friend today. The defamatory statements reported by The Daily Mail are 100% false.''
  These days, Mr. Zampolli has traded in the fashion business for real estate and diplomatic pursuits. In 2013 he became, by appointment, the United Nations ambassador of Dominica, a country of which he is not a citizen. A Brazilian model, Amanda Ungaro, his wife of a decade and the mother of his young son, herself became ambassador of Grenada to the United Nations, also by appointment.
  In his office, along with pictures of him posing with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Trump's jet, there are hundreds of framed photographs of him with dignitaries. His passion now, he says, is sustaining the life aquatic. (''The ocean dies, we die.'')
  He has started an organization, We Are the Oceans, the flags of which fly outside his house and whose scuba-themed pillows are on his oversize bed. In March, Page Six covered a gala of ambassadors and pouting socialites at his home that in part benefited an organization called Save Our Shark Coalition.
  Asked how he broke into the diplomatic corps, Mr. Zampolli shrugged. ''I have been always good to put people together and make things happen,'' he said.
  An only child, Mr. Zampolli was raised in a wealthy Milanese family. He said his grandmother was a distant cousin of Pope Paul VI and that he spent his summers deep-sea diving in the Mediterranean and his winters skiing in St. Moritz, Switzerland. His mother lives on the fifth floor, where she polishes silverware and tells a visitor she ''would like to be proud of my son.''
  He said his father owned Harbert, a toy company best known for introducing to Italy ''Star Wars'' figures and the Easy-Bake Oven (a.k.a. Dolce Forno.) His father died in a skiing accident when Mr. Zampolli was 18.
  Handsome with slicked-back black hair, Mr. Zampolli left college to take over the toy company but considered Milan ''too small.'' He sold the company to a group under the control of Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian billionaire and eventual prime minister.
  Mr. Zampolli had his eye on other amusements. In 1994, he organized the Look of the Year contest in Ibiza, Spain (''Sponsored by Replay Jeans,'' he said, out of habit). He then became friendly with John Casablancas, the founder of Elite Model Management, who suggested he move to New York to work in the modeling business.
  He rented an apartment in Union Square and met Mr. Trump, whose grandiosity he admired and who, like him, was a fixture on the city's nightclub circuit. ''We both have a common interest,'' Mr. Zampolli said. ''We both like beautiful things.''
  Mr. Zampolli drank Diet Cokes with Mr. Trump, a teetotaler, in the exclusive upstairs area of the hot spot Moomba and joined him at other celebrity and model hangouts like Bowery Bar. He also traveled the world scouting talent for his agency and met Ms. Trump at a Milan casting call.
  Mr. Zampolli recalled that he asked her, ''Would you like to come to New York to try the market?'' where, he explained, she could make more money. ''I would be very interested,'' he said she replied.
  ''She was a very beautiful girl with her head on her shoulders,'' Mr. Zampolli said.
  Mr. Zampolli said that he secured an H-1B visa for the eventual Ms. Trump, calling the process ''very very easy to do.'' She moved into the same Union Square apartment building where he had lived and became friends with his girlfriend, a Hungarian model named Edit Molnar.
  Mr. Zampolli said the photographer of a nude photo shoot of Ms. Trump that surfaced last month on the front page of The New York Post had incorrectly dated the pictures 1995, which raised questions about whether she had worked in the United States before possessing a work visa. ''I spoke to the lawyer that did the visa, my understanding is that she came in '96,'' he said, adding ''I had nothing to do with the green card.''
  In a subsequent email, he wrote: ''If u write something about model taking picture w/ nothing on Yes this is part of the business is like An actor in movies that as an intimate scene .... I Am sure POTUS Regan or Governor Svarzeneger [sic] do have intimate scene in their movies.''
  In 1998, Mr. Zampolli introduced the future couple, but it was not his lone stab at matchmaking. In 2006 Mr. Zampolli, then the president of ID Models, arranged a meeting between Mr. Burkle and a reporter from Page Six, the gossip page where Mr. Zampolli boasted that he and his models had appeared ''close to 54 times'' in one year.
  Mr. Zampolli suggested to Mr. Burkle that a better relationship with the newspaper could improve his treatment. Among other items, Page Six infuriated Mr. Burkle by describing him as someone known for flying around on his Boeing 757 with models and considering buying a modeling agency that he would perhaps run with Mr. Clinton.
  Mr. Zampolli organized the meeting. It didn't go well, with Mr. Burkle ultimately alleging to the F.B.I. that the writer had tried to shake him down in return for better coverage.
  Mr. Zampolli tread carefully on the subject of his relationship with Mr. Burkle and Mr. Clinton. Asked whether he had ever hung out with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Burkle at the same time, he initially said, ''Maybe, I don't recall that much,'' before adding he had met Mr. Clinton ''so many times it may be that Burkle was there.''
  Mr. Zampolli was less reluctant to talk about Mr. Trump, whom he suggested he preferred as a presidential candidate. (''I am scared and we need borders in this country,'' he said.)
  In late 2004, Mr. Zampolli's fortunes in the modeling business had faltered and he lost a public auction to buy Elite Model Management. After taking in a Victoria's Secret fashion show, he squeezed into a small banquette at his favorite restaurant, Cipriani Downtown, where he often ate twice a day, with the Trumps and David Copperfield, the illusionist and one-time boyfriend of the supermodel Claudia Schiffer.
  He had lost his top model, and Mr. Trump told him: ''If you lose your supermodel, you go out of business. But if I lose my superintendent, I have a thousand looking for that job the next day.'' He added that Mr. Trump told him: ''Paolo, you are too good for the fashion industry. You should come work with me.''
  He looked at Melania, who smiled.
  Mr. Zampolli entered the real estate business as Mr. Trump's director of international development. (''Ciao, Paolo! Donald's Matchmaker Goes From Pin-Ups to Penthouses'' a New York Observer headline read.)
  He had some success, but he also found Mr. Trump to be a tough boss. And when Mr. Zampolli negotiated a deal to buy his dream home in Trump Park Avenue, Mr. Trump vetoed it, saying, ''I need much more,'' Mr. Zampolli said.
  Mr. Zampolli said he soon left Mr. Trump because the developer stopped developing and ''there wasn't much to do because there was no inventory.'' Instead, he started shuttling around clients in a Rolls-Royce and helicopters as the founder of Paramount Group. The company made headlines for using former models as brokers to sell luxury apartments.
  Back then, Mr. Zampolli explained his thinking to CNBC. ''The gorgeous ladies,'' he said. ''They meet the most rich and powerful people of the world, and some of them, they keep this connection.''
  Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/01/fashion/donald-trump-melania-modeling-agent-paolo-zampolli-daily-mail.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Paolo Zampolli, at home near Gramercy Park, introduced Donald Trump to his future wife, Melania, in 1998. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HILARY SWIFT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: September 1, 2016


End of Document
Destination Flint. But Why?
The New York Times
November 1, 2015 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ED; Column 0; Education Life Supplement; Pg. 16
Length: 3007 words
Byline: By GORDON YOUNG
Gordon Young, a native of Flint, Mich., is author of ''Teardown: Memoir of a Vanishing City'' and is a senior lecturer in communication at Santa Clara University.
Body


A few months after Abhishek Y. Utekar left Mumbai, India, to start an M.B.A. program at the University of Michigan campus in Flint, his landlord gave him a driving tour of his new home. Dennis Brownfield watched out for his tenants, and he wanted Mr. Utekar to understand the dynamics of a city often defined by deindustrialization and decay. His car provided the first lesson. It was a Honda Civic with a license plate that read ''GM LEFT,'' a commentary on the 70,000 automotive jobs that have disappeared over the years in this birthplace of General Motors.
They rolled to a stop in the empty parking lot between the main library and Central High School, an imposing brick building shuttered because of falling enrollment and budget cuts. ''Now make sure you've got your seatbelt on because I'm going to show you an American custom,'' Mr. Brownfield said. He shifted into reverse, cranked the steering wheel hard to the right, gunned the engine and popped the clutch. The result was a dizzying, deftly executed series of backward 360s. For a final flourish, Mr. Brownfield yanked the emergency brake to abruptly change directions. 
  ''That's called a doughnut,'' he said when they had skidded to a stop. ''It's how we have fun in Michigan.''
  Rattled but impressed, Mr. Utekar realized: This was going to be a lot different than India.
  Culture shock is not unusual among international students pursuing degrees in the United States, but some places are more shocking than others. Flint, 60 miles northwest of Detroit, is perennially ranked one of the most dangerous cities in the country. It has lost half its residents since the 1960s, according to the Census Bureau, and the population recently dipped below 100,000 for the first time in nearly a century. Thousands of homes are abandoned -- often stripped bare by thieves in search of scrap metal -- and arson is commonplace, infusing some neighborhoods with an eerie sense of desolation. In October, the county health department declared a public health emergency after elevated lead levels were discovered in the city's water supply.
  It is not, to state the obvious, a fun-loving college town like Ann Arbor. And yet, they come. This year, more than 700 international students, the largest number ever, are studying at U.M.-Flint, a commuter school of some 8,500 undergraduate and graduate students. Nearly 200 more attend Kettering, a smaller, more selective private university with a focus on automotive engineering. The numbers may seem comparatively modest, but this is a place people leave. These students -- from Saudi Arabia, India, China, South Korea, Nigeria and more than 40 other countries -- had hundreds of choices, and they chose Flint.
  The question, of course, is why.
  Some reasons are practical. Both universities offer degrees in fields popular with international students -- engineering, business, computer science and health care. Tuition at U.M.-Flint is inexpensive compared to private universities, and the cost of living is low; a two-bedroom apartment near downtown rents for about $500 a month, utilities included. The universities actively recruit overseas and have forgiving admissions policies for foreign applicants (no SAT or ACT required). With international enrollment climbing nationwide for nearly a decade, to almost 886,000, it is perhaps inevitable that students find their way to cities like Flint.
  Conversations with some three dozen international students at U.M.-Flint and Kettering reveal another explanation. A coveted degree from the United States was their primary goal; where they attained it was far less important. Many found their way to Vehicle City by accident. Some had hopes of immigrating.
  Once here, they grumble about being homesick and about a strange meteorological term called wind chill factor. Joshua O. Anifowoshe, a Nigerian, would sometimes join in dorm-room griping with other international students who were disappointed in U.M.-Flint. Mr. Anifowoshe had wanted a smaller school, but after attending a boisterous football game in Ann Arbor with more than 100,000 fans, he started to waver, and transferred. ''It was kind of lonely and boring in Flint,'' he said. ''I realized I needed a more rigorous academic environment and a more lively campus.''
  But the majority of international students stick it out -- 57 percent earn degrees in four years and 86 percent in five years, according to U.M.-Flint (impressive, considering that only 11 percent and 28 percent of all full-time freshmen there accomplish the same). In the process, the students said, they developed a deeper, more cleareyed understanding of the real America, and experienced an unanticipated sense of community.
  Mr. Utekar's story illustrates the leap of faith many international students take. He was working in sales for a Mumbai pharmaceutical company when he decided to try to immigrate to the United States. His sister had married an American and become a citizen while working for Wells Fargo on an H-1B visa after attending graduate school at Ithaca College. Mr. Utekar began researching M.B.A. programs.
  He considered the University of Michigan's highly ranked Ross School of Business in Ann Arbor but couldn't afford it. Back then, in 2010, Flint would cost him just $10,000 a year -- $40,000 less than Ross. He checked a map and the two campuses were just an hour's drive apart. How different could they be?
  ''I did not look up anything about Flint, which was good because I wasn't judgmental and paranoid when I got here,'' he said. Besides, he had missed the application deadlines for his other choices.
  Residents seemed surprised and grateful when they learned someone had traveled such a great distance to study in Flint, Mr. Utekar said. He rented a room in a group house for $200 from Mr. Brownfield, and stood in line once a week for free groceries at a nearby church. He discovered McDonald's and Wendy's. A friend in India sent him incense sticks and ink drawings of Krishna on dried palm leaves that he sold at art fairs. A music student lent him a pair of Indian tabla drums, and he was soon playing with various bands in the area. He began dating an American woman.
  After completing his M.B.A. in 2013, Mr. Utekar had a job with a local software firm for a year on his F1 student visa. Students and recent graduates can work or intern for 12 to 29 months under the Optional Practical Training program in jobs related to their area of study. Roughly half of U.M.-Flint graduates take advantage of OPT, but how many succeed in permanently immigrating -- there is still a 7 percent cap-per-country on green cards -- is not known.
  Mr. Utekar's visa was still valid when his job ended, so he enrolled in the master's program in computer science, which he expects to complete next fall. Now 33, he does not want to leave the United States. He and his girlfriend recently bought a 1,344-square-foot house for $9,800 and have begun restoring it. ''Maybe I was just lucky, but I've met amazing people in Flint,'' he said. ''I like it here.''
  That's what Flint officials like to hear. In the past decade, they have worked to make the city more appealing to students. A one-mile stretch that connects the University of Michigan campus and Kettering has been landscaped and rechristened University Avenue. The former Hyatt Regency Hotel downtown was converted into student housing. Last year, the popular farmers' market relocated to the edge of the U.M. campus, a fortresslike collection of interconnected brick buildings constructed in the '70s. A newer classroom building occupies the former site of the AutoWorld theme park, a short-lived attempt to lure tourists that was leveled in 1997. Abandoned buildings are still easy to spot. But a handful of new bars and restaurants have given students more to do, and Susan E. Borrego, chancellor of U.M.-Flint, has been talking to local leaders about sponsoring a cricket tournament.
  For merchants, the students provide an economic boost in a city saddled with double-digit unemployment. The international student in Flint spends on average almost $30,000 a year to cover tuition, fees and living expenses, according to the Association of International Educators. And that translates to more than $25 million annually for the local economy.
  So it's no wonder that six U.M.-Flint staff members regularly travel the world to recruit students. Dan Adams, director of its international center, frequently finds himself in Dubai or Singapore fielding questions from a parent or two whose Google search turned up distressing news about Flint. ''I only have about 60 seconds of their attention to try and sell the school,'' he said, ''so I emphasize all the support services we offer, the small class sizes, and point out that downtown Flint is a safe area.''
  Kip Darcy, vice president for marketing, communications and enrollment at Kettering, takes a focused approach to recruiting engineering students. ''We concentrate on India and China because they are a huge market for students hoping to study in the U.S., and they also have nascent automotive industries.''
  Kettering began working last fall in China with an independent broker, who assists students with the application process. U.M.-Flint contracts with approximately 20 brokers in various countries. In addition to collecting fees from students, the agents are paid $1,000 for each student they deliver who enrolls for at least two semesters. It's a practice the National Association for College Admissions Counseling permits in the recruitment of international students. But it does not endorse it, according to Eddie West, director of the association's international initiatives, and member schools cannot pay commissions for placement of domestic students.
  Brokers can have a huge influence, steering students toward specific schools, whether a good fit or not. Neelam Gire, a soft-spoken 24-year-old, desperately needed direction. She had hoped to attend medical school in India but froze when it came time to take the demanding entrance exam, which is given after high school.
  ''I was sitting in the car with my mom watching people go into the building to take the test,'' she remembered. ''I told her I just couldn't do it and we left. It was a big relief to drive away.''
  Her mother encouraged her to study in the United States and, for $500, hired a broker to suggest schools, help her with applications and prep her for her visa interview. U.M.-Flint was the first to accept her. She had never heard of Michigan, let alone Flint, but she thought the other options -- the State University of New York and Fairleigh Dickinson University -- were too close to her former boyfriend, who attended a community college in New Jersey. What if she bumped into him?
  She checked into her dorm on a Sunday. She was struck by the emptiness of the campus, and downtown. ''I was shocked that there were no tall buildings,'' she said. ''It looked like a village. I had a brochure that showed people sitting on the grass and chatting, and I was wondering, 'Where are they?'''
  When a fellow student from India gave Ms. Gire a tour of Flint to help her acclimate, he presented an array of personal safety tips. Don't walk alone after dark. Stay alert so no one can sneak up on you. Never wear high heels because assailants can hear the click of your shoes on the pavement, and it's hard to run away.
  While Ms. Gire dealt with acute anxiety, her mother, a single parent, struggled to pay her college expenses. In tearful Skype conversations, her two younger sisters complained that the family was suffering financially because of her. ''They thought I was in some beautiful place and enjoying life, but it was hard for me to even go outside because I thought it was unsafe,'' she said.
  Ms. Gire reluctantly moved off-campus into a studio apartment to save money, further isolating herself. She spent entire days playing video games and eating. She gained 10 pounds and dropped out for a semester, holed up in her apartment. Returning home would be shameful.
  Slowly, she got used to living away from her family. The university hired Ms. Gire as an ''international ambassador,'' bolstering her confidence and enabling her to make new friends. The eight ambassadors correspond with prospective applicants from other countries, welcome newcomers and plan events.
  Because it's the international students who live on or near campus, they have an outsize impact on life at U.M.-Flint. In fact, the 2014-15 student government president was from Mauritius, an island off the southeast coast of Africa.
  Ms. Gire got involved with the Indian Student Association and helped organize a celebration last fall to mark Diwali, the Hindu festival of lights. At a school where almost half the students are part-time and 50 is considered a big turnout, more than 400, including a group of exchange students from Mexico and dozens of American students, squeezed into four rooms in the student center. There was food, a D.J. and dancing, both traditional and not so traditional. Fines were levied for overcrowding.
  ''No one wanted to leave,'' Ms. Gire said. ''They just wanted to keep dancing.''
  Ms. Gire now lives with her Canadian boyfriend in East Village, a 16-block neighborhood near downtown that is popular with international students. They want to stay in the United States. After graduating in June with a psychology degree, Ms. Gire got a job, under the OPT program, in the university's international admissions office. She intends on enrolling in a master's program in public administration in about a year, with the career goal of working in higher education with international students.
  ''I used to hate it here,'' she said. ''But now it feels like home.''
  A mile south of U.M.-Flint, Kettering is a block from the former site of Chevy in the Hole, the hulking factory complex where the Flint Sit-Down Strike in 1936-37 catapulted the United Auto Workers union into national prominence. Formerly known as General Motors Institute, Kettering continues to have strong ties with the auto industry. Its undergraduates -- nearly 1,800 of them -- participate in a co-op program that alternates academic studies with paid, full-time employment with corporations, frequently one of the Big Three automakers or their suppliers.
  One Friday night last semester, the International Club at Kettering met at Extreme Indoor Kart Racing in a lonely shopping center, where a handful of customers were playing arcade games or racing under fluorescent lights on a quarter-mile track outlined with old tires. There was a good turnout: 40 students representing Pakistan, India, China, Iran and Brazil along with a few Americans.
  Locksly Wallace, an effervescent Jamaican with a quick smile, doled out tickets and a few students put on their crash helmets, prompting a furious round of selfies. About a dozen men in the automotive systems program gathered at a viewing window, eagerly awaiting their turn and critiquing another group navigating the track. An animated discussion on cornering technique ensued.
  ''We are really car freaks,'' one explained.
  The students stayed for three hours and enthusiastically ate pizza in the otherwise empty parking lot before car-pooling back to campus.
  Mr. Wallace reported that the night took $600 from the International Club budget and injected it directly into the local economy. Money well spent, in his opinion.
  Typical of Kettering students, Mr. Wallace took an intentional route to Flint. He had tested into a high school for students with academic potential and was selected to participate in an intensive five-week pre-college program at Kettering aimed at low-income students of color. Once again, he stood out, earning a scholarship to study chemical engineering.
  Mr. Wallace, whose mother worked as a maid and seamstress to support the family, grew up with seven siblings in Central Village, a rough area between Kingston and Spanish Town characterized by poverty and violence. He admitted that his expectations of life in the United States were formed largely by Hollywood, and like many international students he thought that all of America was prosperous. When he arrived, he discovered a city that had similarities with Central Village. ''It turned out that Flint is pretty much what I'm used to, so I can relate to it,'' he said. ''The only shock was realizing that, 'Oh, this happens in America, too.' ''
  Students describe the Kettering campus, comprising just seven buildings near downtown, as an island isolated from the city's more crime-ridden neighborhoods. There's a police substation across the street from the university, and Kettering's website describes a ''state-of-the art security and high definition closed-circuit television surveillance system'' installed in 2013.
  But Mr. Wallace didn't retreat from the rest of the city. He joined a mentoring program that connects Kettering students with academically promising high school students. He met regularly with three boys, prepping them for college, taking them to art museums, and offering them advice on girlfriends and other mysteries of adolescence.
  ''I had friends back home who dropped out of high school and ended up on the corner smoking weed,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''Some of them were dead before they were 18. So I could empathize and offer good solutions for what they were going through.''
  The young men he befriended had a sense of hopelessness. ''The common theme that I heard was: 'I can't wait to get out of here,''' Mr. Wallace said. ''Flint really has nothing to offer kids with potential. They're going to leave.''
  Mr. Wallace earned his master's in engineering management in June and works as a project manager at an automotive supplier. He hopes to land a job in the renewable energy field in California and, eventually, return to Jamaica.
  He is rooting for better times in Flint but he has no intention of staying. ''The engineer in me loves problem solving,'' he said, ''but I've done my time.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/education/edlife/international-students-find-the-american-dream-in-flint.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: SETTLING IN: Abhishek Y. Utekar, from Mumbai, India, is working on a second graduate degree at the University of Michigan in Flint. He's bought a fixer-upper
he plays the tabla drum with local bands. ''I like it here,'' he says. (ED16-ED17)
LEAN STREETS: The distressed city of Flint hosts hundreds of foreign students. Kettering's Great Court flies a flag for each country represented by its student body. (ED18)
 WHEN IN VEHICLE CITY... Locksly Wallace, a Jamaican, above left, center, enjoys a night of go-kart racing with members of the international club at Kettering, above. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FABRIZIO COSTANTINI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ED19) DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANDREA LEVY)       

Load-Date: November 1, 2015


End of Document
A Rush for Work Visas Even as Demand Dips
The New York Times
April 2, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 710 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The yearly scramble by employers for temporary visas for foreign scientists and technology engineers started on Wednesday, with immigration authorities expecting fewer new petitions this year because of the recession and because of new restrictions on financial companies that received emergency federal aid. 
  For five business days beginning Wednesday, Citizenship and Immigration Services will accept petitions for the temporary visas known as H-1B for the 2010 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1. In recent years, visa limits were reached in the first days of the application period. 
  Over the weekend, employers like Microsoft and Cisco Systems rushed to send petitions by express mail and courier services so they would reach the agency when it opened Wednesday. 
  In spite of an expected lull in demand, employers and researchers predicted that the limits would quickly be reached again this year in part because of backlogs from last year. The annual H-1B limit is 65,000 visas, with a few exemptions, including the first 20,000 petitions from immigrants with degrees at the master's level or above from American universities. In 2008, about 163,000 petitions were filed. 
  At many American universities, more than half of graduates with advanced degrees in science and engineering are foreign. ''These visas are really the only practical way for employers to hire them,'' said Stuart Anderson, executive director of the National Foundation for American Policy, who has studied use of the visas. 
  In February, as part of the economic stimulus legislation, Congress added conditions for H-1B visas for banks that received assistance from the Troubled Asset Relief Program, known as TARP. The banks must show that they will not displace an American from a job to be filled by an immigrant for three months before and after the immigrant is hired.
  Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, among others, said that provision led them to rescind small numbers of job offers to graduating foreign students and financial technology engineers.
  In 2008, according to figures from Citizenship and Immigration Services, the top four companies seeking H-1B visas were  from India. By far the most visas -- 4,559 --went to Infosys Technologies, a $4 billion company in Bangalore, which used them to place Indian information technology workers in American companies. Microsoft, the first American company on the list, received 1,037 visas last year. 
  One of the biggest Indian companies using H-1B visas last year was Satyam Computer Services, based in Hyderabad. Its founder and chairman, B. Ramalinga Raju, is facing criminal charges in India, accused of inflating his employee rolls by more than 10,000 workers and falsifying accounts by more than $1 billion. The company is up for auction. 
  Indian companies' heavy use of the visas has drawn accusations of fraud from some lawmakers. Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said they intended to introduce a bill this week that would impose stricter hiring terms for all H-1B visas and increase enforcement. The senators said they would not consider raising the numerical limits on the visas until loopholes they had identified were closed. 
  ''With unemployment at rates higher than we've seen in decades, there is no shortage of people looking for work,'' Mr. Grassley said Wednesday, ''so companies should need less H-1B visas than last year.''
  In January, in a move that unsettled the outsourcing industry, federal prosecutors in Iowa brought criminal charges against the Vision Systems Group, a New Jersey company that provides temporary information technology workers to companies in several states. The company is accused of seeking H-1B visas for workers for an office in Iowa that did not exist, and of paying the workers based on the prevailing wage in Iowa, which is lower than in many states where the immigrants actually worked.
  Lawyers for Vision Systems asked the Iowa court on Wednesday to dismiss the case. ''We don't believe that bringing highly trained and highly productive people to work in the U.S. in an industry that is underserved by our own population is or should be a crime,'' a lawyer for the company, Mark Weinhardt, said. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 2, 2009


End of Document
Engineers See a Path Out of Green Card Limbo
The New York Times
May 23, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1157 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Sanket Sant, a citizen of India, came to the United States at age 21, earning a master's degree in engineering, followed by a doctorate and then landing a well-paying job at a company making semiconductor equipment.
Then, he waited for the American government to decide if he could stay.
''I know this country better than my own country, and I still feel like an outsider,'' said Mr. Sant, 35, who received his Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Dallas in 2006, and has been waiting for federal officials to approve his green card application for six years. ''That's the thing that bothers me.''
That is also the predicament of tens of thousands of workers here in the heart of the tech industry who were born overseas and educated in the United States. Though not living in poverty or in the shadows, as are migrant workers who are here illegally, they are nevertheless in a bureaucratic limbo while they wait in a long line for a green card.
Now, though, Congress is poised to end their uncertainty.
The Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday approved a broad overhaul of the nation's immigration laws on a bipartisan vote, and sent the measure to the full Senate. The bill would make it much easier for science, math and engineering graduates of American universities to become permanent residents.
Crucially, it would also lift the limits on how many immigrants are allowed in from each country, which has meant that citizens of populous countries like India end up waiting far longer than others.
The provisions to ease the green card process enjoy bipartisan support, reflecting a stark reality: Nearly half of all engineering graduate students at American universities are from abroad.
Technology companies, like Facebook and Microsoft, want to hire many more of them, which is why they have lobbied to make it quicker for them to get permanent residency. So has the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, a group that campaigns for American workers.
Still, not everyone is a fan. Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a Washington-based research and advocacy group, who has testified against the legislation, said easy, unlimited access to green cards for math and science graduates could encourage the emergence of ''visa mills,'' or schools established just to sell access to the United States. Also, he said: ''American young people with bachelor's degrees see these occupations distorted by large-scale admissions of foreign workers. That then changes their own decision making about what to do in the future.''
The green card provisions have been obscured by the louder, more polarizing fight between industry and labor over foreign guest worker visas, known as H-1Bs. But they stand to have a far greater impact on the men and women who drive this industry.
Mr. Sant, like many of his friends, was drawn to the United States for higher education. In 2010, the most recent year for which data is available from the National Science Foundation, a government agency, 45 percent of master's and doctoral students in engineering were from abroad, up from 35 percent in 1990 and 24 percent in 1980, according to the agency.
At some universities, the share of foreign students is even higher. At Carnegie Mellon University, which has one of the most prestigious engineering schools in the world, 62 percent of engineering graduate students came from abroad, and at the Rochester Institute of Technology, 56 percent.
This year, at the University of Southern California, the figure is 68 percent, according to university officials.
Among those who come to study in this country, about one in three end up staying on temporary work visas, mainly through the H-1B program. An analysis by the Brookings Institution concluded that in 2010, 30 percent of those who were working on H-1B visas were former students at American universities. Their wait for permanent residency can be frustratingly long, depending on their homeland.
According to data from the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, more than 150,000 of them have filed for green cards since 2010; nearly a third of them are from India, the largest single block.
Kartik Shah, 29, was among them. A native of Mumbai, he went to the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles, for a master's degree in electrical engineering. He graduated in 2007 and swiftly landed a job as a software engineer at Cisco's headquarters in San Jose, just south of here.
The company soon filed a green card application on his behalf, which it says it does for the vast majority of its H-1B workers. The government cleared his application, essentially ruling that his skills were needed. Then, it told him to wait.
So far the wait has been six years, and he has no idea when it will end. He is nervous about exploring other job options, for fear of losing his place in the green card line. (The draft bill would free up workers from their green card sponsors.)
Two evenings a week, he rides the bus an hour each way from his office in San Jose to the University of California, Berkeley, where he is working toward a master's in business administration. Perhaps, by the time he finishes, in the spring of 2014, his green card will be ready and he will be able to put his M.B.A. to use.
Still, he is reluctant to pin his hopes on the bill now on the Senate floor. If the overhaul fails, it would depress him too much.
''It's very frustrating,'' he said. ''Whenever we are hanging out with friends and this topic comes up, it's actually a very depressing topic.''
His onetime roommate, Rushil Kadakia, 32, says he is likewise not losing sleep over what happens in the Senate. He and his wife, an engineer at Oracle, are both in line for a green card. They have a 6-week-old daughter at home, an American citizen by birth.
''I'm taking everything with a grain of salt,'' he said. ''I'm keenly following it, but I'm not optimistic.''
He joked that maybe his daughter could eventually sponsor her parents. ''Twenty-one years down the line,'' he said.
Mr. Sant, a native of Ahmedabad, in western India, came here to earn a master's degree, then a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, specializing in semiconductors. He got a job at a company making semiconductor equipment, published papers in academic journals and earned several patents.
His wife gave up her career as a surgeon back home in India when she came to this country as his bride; under current law, a spouse of a temporary visa holder is barred from working. The draft law would grant them work papers.
Going back home is not an option for Mr. Sant. His specialty is semiconductor equipment research, and not much of it happens in India. And anyway, he says, India has changed so much in the 13 years he has been away, and he has become so much more of, well, an American.
''I went to India last year. The whole culture is different. I don't relate to it any more,'' he said. ''I feel home is here.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/23/technology/long-wait-for-a-green-card-could-be-ending.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Kartik Shah, above, 29, has been waiting six years for a green card. Supporters cheered Tuesday when a Senate committee approved an overhaul of the immigration laws and sent it to the Senate. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 DREW ANGERER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)       

Load-Date: May 24, 2013


End of Document
National Briefing | Washington; Visa Applications Reach Limit for Highly Skilled Workers
The New York Times
April 8, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 148 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal officials announced that the annual limit for applications for visas for highly skilled immigrants, known as H-1B visas, was reached on Thursday, less than a week after the application period opened on April 1. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the federal visa agency, said it received more than enough applications for the annual quotas of 65,000 new H-1B visas and 20,000 visas for students graduating with master's degrees or higher from American universities. It was the fourth year in a row that the yearly quota was reached within one week. The selection will now be made by a computer-run random lottery. Many American employers, especially those in technology, have clamored for Congress to increase the H-1B limits. But American tech workers have protested they were laid off from their jobs and replaced by less skilled H-1B visa holders. JULIA PRESTON 

Load-Date: April 8, 2016


End of Document
Complexities of Visas 
 The New York Times
May 20, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 3; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 170 words
Body


To the Editor:
"Workers, and Bosses, in a Visa Maze" (April 29), spells out clearly the problems plaguing the H-1B visa program that brings skilled foreign workers to the United States for up to six years.
     But the program was conceived and expanded to benefit high-technology companies in this country, which cited a shortage of qualified American workers. 
 It was not devised to benefit foreign workers, many of whom are being harmed by the law's complex provisons.
Most of the program's problems stem from a desire to ensure that no American workers are available for these jobs before allowing foreign workers to be hired.
Foreign workers in the H-1B visa program find that obtaining permanent residency can take some time, especially if they come from countries like India, which generates large numbers of foreign workers and produces a long waiting list.
This wait means the workers can be committed to one company, with restricted opportunities to advance or change jobs.

STEPHEN NORDLINGER
Chevy Chase, Md., April 29

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 20, 2001


End of Document
Visa Program For Skilled Workers Hits Limit Early
The New York Times
April 6, 2013 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11; NATIONAL BRIEFING | WASHINGTON
Length: 79 words
Byline: By REUTERS
Body


A visa program for skilled workers has hit its quota just days into the application period, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said, prompting a lottery and signaling that companies feel confident enough to hire more foreign workers. The H-1B program has not reached its cap of 65,000 so fast since early 2008. A separate H-1B allocation for master's and Ph.D. graduates from universities in the United States has also hit its quota of 20,000, the agency said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/06/us/visa-program-for-skilled-workers-hits-limit-early.html

Load-Date: April 6, 2013


End of Document
LESSONS;
How to Create a Shortage In a Skilled-Labor Market
The New York Times
September 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk; 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page; Column 1; ; Education Page
Length: 828 words
Byline: By Richard Rothstein; 

E-mail: rrothstein@nytimes.com  

By Richard Rothstein;  E-mail: rrothstein@nytimes.com  
Body


TO alleviate apparent shortages of computer programmers, President Clinton and Congress have agreed to raise a quota on H-1B's, the temporary visas for skilled foreigners. The annual limit will go to 200,000 next year, up from 65,000 only three years ago.
The imported workers, most of whom come from India, are said to be needed because American schools do not graduate enough young people with science and math skills. Microsoft's chairman, William H. Gates, and Intel's chairman, Andrew S. Grove, told Congress in June that more visas were only a stopgap until education improved.
But the crisis is a mirage. High-tech companies portray a shortage, yet it is our memories that are short: only yesterday there was a glut of science and math graduates.
The computer industry took advantage of that glut by reducing wages. This discouraged youths from entering the field, creating the temporary shortages of today. Now, taking advantage of a public preconception that school failures have created the problem, industry finds a ready audience for its demands to import workers.
This newspaper covered the earlier surplus extensively. In 1992, it reported that 1 in 5 college graduates had a job not requiring a college degree. A 1995 article headlined "Supply Exceeds Demand for Ph.D.'s in Many Science Fields" cited nationwide unemployment of engineers, mathematicians and scientists. "Overproduction of Ph.D. degrees," it noted, "seems to be highest in computer science."
Michael S. Teitelbaum, a demographer who served as vice chairman of the Commission on Immigration Reform, said in 1996 that there was "an employer's market" for technology workers, partly because of post-cold-war downsizing in aerospace.
In fields with real labor scarcity, wages rise. Yet despite accounts of dot-com entrepreneurs' becoming millionaires, trends in computer technology pay do not confirm a need to import legions of programmers.
Salary offers to new college graduates in computer science averaged $39,000 in 1986 and had declined by 1994 to $33,000 (in constant dollars).  The trend reversed only in the late 1990's.
The West Coast median salary for experienced software engineers was $71,100 in 1999, up only 10 percent (in constant dollars) from 1990. This pay growth of about 1 percent a year suggests no labor shortage.
Norman Matloff, a computer science professor at the University of California, contends that high-tech companies create artificial shortages by refusing to hire experienced programmers. Many with technology degrees no longer work in the field. By age 50, fewer than half are still in the industry. Luring them back requires higher pay.
Industry spokesmen say older programmers with outdated skills would take too long to retrain. But Dr. Matloff counters by saying that when they urge more H-1B visas, lobbyists demonstrate a shortage by pointing to vacancies lasting many months. Companies could train older programmers in less time than it takes to process visas for cheaper foreign workers.
Dr. Matloff says that in addition to the pay issue, the industry rejects older workers because they will not work the long hours typical at Silicon Valley companies with youthful "singles" styles. Imported labor, he argues, is only a way to avoid offering better conditions to experienced programmers. H-1B workers, in contrast, cannot demand higher pay: visas are revoked if workers leave their sponsoring companies.
As for young computer workers, the labor market has recently tightened, with rising wages, because college students saw earlier wage declines and stopped majoring in math and science. In 1996, American colleges awarded 25,000 bachelor's degrees in computer science, down from 42,000 in 1985.
The reason is not that students suddenly lacked preparation. On the contrary, high school course-taking in math and science, including advanced placement, had climbed. Further, math scores have risen; last year 24 percent of seniors who took the SAT scored over 600 in math. But only 6 percent planned to major in computer science, and many of these cannot get into college programs.
The reason: colleges themselves have not yet adjusted to new demand. In some places, computer science courses are so oversubscribed that students must get on waiting lists as high school juniors.
With a time lag between student choice of majors and later job quests, high schools and colleges cannot address short-term supply and demand shifts for particular professions. Such shortages can be erased only by raising wages to attract those with needed skills who are now working in other fields -- or by importing low-paid workers.
For the longer term, rising wages can guide counselors to encourage well-prepared students to major in computer science and engineering, and colleges will adjust to rising demand. But more H-1B immigrants can have a perverse effect, as their lower pay signals young people to avoid this field in the future, keeping the domestic supply artificially low.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (David Suter)

Load-Date: September 6, 2000


End of Document
Intel, in Show of Support for Trump, Announces Factory in Arizona
The New York Times 
June 19, 2020 Friday 15:44 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1138 words
Byline: Vindu Goel
Highlight: The world’s largest chip manufacturer, which opposes President Trump’s immigration order but backs his tax and regulatory plans, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory conceived in 2011.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — Intel, the world’s largest computer chip manufacturer, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory in Arizona, adding 3,000 jobs, the company’s chief executive said on Wednesday after meeting with President Trump at the White House.
The completion of the factory, which will complement two other Intel semiconductor plants in Chandler, Ariz., had been under consideration for several years.
Standing beside Mr. Trump in the Oval Office, Brian Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, said the company had decided to proceed now because of “the tax and regulatory policies we see the administration pushing forward.”
Mr. Trump said: “The people of Arizona will be very happy. It’s a lot of jobs.”
He said Intel called the White House several weeks ago to coordinate the announcement. That outreach illustrates the tightrope that Silicon Valley companies are walking as they deal with a president most of them did not want to see in office.
Intel was one of nearly 130 companies that signed a legal brief challenging Mr. Trump’s Jan. 27 executive order temporarily blocking the entry of all refugees and of immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim nations. Earlier, Mr. Krzanich criticized the order on Twitter, declaring, “As a company co-founded by an immigrant, we support lawful immigration.” (Intel’s third employee and longtime chief executive, Andrew S. Grove, survived the Holocaust and arrived in the United States after fleeing the Soviet invasion of his native Hungary in 1956.)
Yet Intel, like Apple and other large technology companies, also supports the Trump administration’s plans to reduce corporate taxes and regulations. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Krzanich planned and then canceled a fund-raiser for Mr. Trump.
Stacy J. Smith, the executive vice president who oversees manufacturing and sales, said Intel considered itself apolitical. “Intel engages, whatever the administration,” he said in an interview after Wednesday’s announcement. “We focus on the issues that we care about.”
Intel said it agreed with Mr. Trump’s desire to improve the investment climate for American manufacturers. “In places where we believe the policies are in the best interest of the company, we lean in,” Mr. Smith said.
In other areas, such as Mr. Trump’s desire to curb immigration and end free-trade agreements, Intel disagrees, and it is telling the White House so. “We care about hiring the best and brightest people around the world,” Mr. Smith said. “We care about exporting our products all over the world.”
Mr. Krzanich said in a message to employees that he had chosen to announce the expansion at the White House to signal his support for the administration’s efforts to make American manufacturing more competitive.
“When we disagree, we don’t walk away,” he wrote. “We believe that we must be part of the conversation to voice our views on key issues such as immigration, H1B visas and other policies that are essential to innovation.”
Intel’s strategy of engagement mirrors that of Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla Motors and SpaceX, who serves on a presidential advisory council. Other Silicon Valley leaders, such as Travis Kalanick of Uber, have distanced themselves from the administration under pressure from employees and customers.
Intel’s political action committee gave about equally to Democratic and Republican candidates during the last election cycle. Individual employees donated far more to Hillary Clinton’s campaign than to Mr. Trump’s. But over all, the company is not a major political donor.
New chip plants are tremendously expensive, requiring large tracts of land, reliable electricity and water, and a skilled work force that includes people with doctorates in chemistry and technicians who can repair a malfunctioning robot. Sophisticated equipment is necessary to deposit and etch microscopic layers of material on silicon wafers, which are then cut and packaged into the microprocessors that run personal computers, servers, smartphones and, increasingly, other electronic devices.
Countries compete to land such plants, especially modern factories that produce the most valuable chips and bring high-paying research and development jobs. Government subsidies are common, with China vowing to spend tens of billions of dollars to expand its domestic chip industry.
While most technology manufacturing, such as computers and smartphones, has moved overseas, American factories still account for about one-seventh of global chip production and produce many of the most valuable computer chips, including Intel’s flagship processors. Seventy-six chip plants are scattered across the United States, from South Portland, Me., to Newport Beach, Calif., according to the Semiconductor Industry Association.
The industry is seeking corporate tax cuts and incentives for research and development. In addition, chip makers would like to see the United States government relax longstanding national security restrictions on the export of new chip technology. In Intel’s case, the regulations forbid the company from making its high-end processors in China.
Mr. Smith said Mr. Trump had offered Intel no financial incentives to complete the Arizona factory.
The plant was conceived in 2011. President Barack Obama visited the site in 2012, when construction had just begun, and he praised the plant as an example of “an America where we build stuff and make stuff and sell stuff all over the world.”
But it was mothballed in 2014 after sales of personal computers — and the Intel chips that go into them — started to slide. Intel restructured its business and announced last year that it was laying off 12,000 people, including 560 in Chandler. The company now employs about 50,000 people in the United States and 106,000 worldwide.
As Intel looks beyond servers and personal computers to new markets like other Internet-connected devices, cars and tablets, sales are growing again, and it will need the new factory when it is completed in a couple of years. “We’re building it for our own business reasons,” Mr. Smith said.
The plant will build ultradense chips that Intel refers to as seven nanometer, with transistors packed more closely together than in the chips the company now builds. The tighter spacing allows for faster, more energy-efficient chips. “This factory will produce the most powerful computer chips on the planet,” Mr. Krzanich said.
Intel, one of the original chip companies, from which Silicon Valley gets its name, is based in Santa Clara, Calif. But most of its chip production is in Oregon and Arizona. It also has factories in China, Ireland and Israel.
PHOTO: After meeting with President Trump, Brian Krzanich, left, Intel’s chief executive, said the company would invest $7 billion to finish a factory conceived in 2011. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Fact-Checking Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio on Immigration
The New York Times
December 17, 2015 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 
Length: 597 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The two Hispanic senators in the Republican presidential race -- Ted Cruz of Texas and Marco Rubio of Florida -- battled over immigration in the debate on Tuesday, competing to show who is tougher on border security. Mr. Rubio is vulnerable with conservatives on the divisive issue because of a bill he sponsored in 2013 that would have given people in the country illegally a pathway to citizenship.
After Tuesday's debate, readers asked us to look into whether the two candidates had accurately portrayed their own records on immigration: ''Cruz and Rubio exchanged conflicting claims on whether Cruz has or will ever support citizenship/amnesty for immigrants who are currently in the country illegally,'' Laurence Schiffman wrote in. ''Please clarify with a bit of historical perspective.'' 
  Mr. Rubio was trying to dim Mr. Cruz's luster with conservative voters, who have been gravitating toward Mr. Cruz in Iowa, by claiming that Mr. Cruz had also supported legalization for those immigrants. Directly challenged by Mr. Rubio, Mr. Cruz said twice, ''I have never supported legalization.''
  That's not quite right. During the debate in the Senate over the bill in 2013, Mr. Cruz introduced an amendment that would have given legal status, but no possibility of citizenship, to those here illegally. At the time Mr. Cruz said such immigrants would be ''out of the shadows'' and eligible eventually to become permanent residents, although not citizens.
  Recently Mr. Cruz, responding to Mr. Rubio, has said the amendment, which was not approved, was a ''poison pill'' designed to kill the entire bill.
  In the debate Mr. Rubio also said, in accusing tones, that Mr. Cruz had supported a 500 percent increase in H-1B visas, which allow American employers to temporarily hire foreign high-skilled professionals, and a doubling of the number of green cards. True. Mr. Cruz did support both measures in 2013, although recently he has called for a halt to any increases in legal immigration and last week he introduced a bill to tighten restrictions on H-1B visas.
  But Mr. Cruz's charge that Mr. Rubio was trying ''to muddy the waters'' also seems right. Mr. Rubio has also supported big increases in green cards, and in January he sponsored a bill to as much as triple the number of H-1B visas. Mr. Rubio, confusingly, was attacking Mr. Cruz for agreeing with him.
  Meanwhile, Mr. Cruz, as he pledged to ramp up deportations, presented figures on the enforcement records of past presidents that were misleading at best. He said President Obama was ''releasing criminal aliens,'' while President George W. Bush had deported more than 10 million immigrants and President Bill Clinton 12 million.
  Mr. Cruz seems to have lumped together deportations -- about 827,000 under Mr. Clinton and about 2 million under Mr. Bush, compared with at least 2.3 million so far under Mr. Obama -- with a figure for migrants who were returned, mainly to Mexico, without being formally deported. The number of those ''returns'' has plunged under Mr. Obama because, with enhanced border enforcement, illegal immigration from Mexico has dropped to 40-year lows.
  The bottom line: In this rivalry, Mr. Cruz has consistently taken a harder line against what he calls ''amnesty'' for people in the country illegally. Mr. Rubio has evolved. He renounced the 2013 bill, saying he concluded that immigration could not be fixed in one package. On Tuesday he said he still supported a pathway to citizenship, but one that would come after new border security and be at least 10 years long -- and likely much longer.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/17/us/politics/fact-checking-ted-cruz-and-marco-rubio-on-immigration.html

Load-Date: December 17, 2015


End of Document
Luring Foreign High-Tech Workers
The New York Times
February 18, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16; LETTERS
Length: 620 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''America's Genius Glut,'' by Ross Eisenbrey (Op-Ed, Feb. 8):
Finally someone has written accurately about the supposed shortage of scientists, engineers and mathematicians in the United States. Organizations clamoring for more H-1B visas for high-tech workers do not need more access to highly skilled workers. As Mr. Eisenbrey points out, plenty of such workers are already available. What these organizations want is ready access to these workers who will work for lower wages.
Further, these organizations do not truly want scientists. Instead, they want highly skilled technicians who are trained to use the latest technologies in exactly the manner dictated by the organization. Five years later when the technology changes, they will be discarded. They will be replaced by the newest crop of workers, who are trained in the latest technologies and, best of all, will work for lower wages than the previous crop.
STEVEN L. VONDERFECHT Monrovia, Calif., Feb. 8, 2013
To the Editor:
Intellectual protectionism, like all forms of protectionism, helps some people at the expense of the rest of society. According to a paper by the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, half of all Silicon Valley start-ups from 1995 to 2005, and one-quarter of all tech companies, were founded by foreign-born workers. One does not need to be one of the geniuses that Ross Eisenbrey would like to keep out of the United States to see that America will benefit from admitting more scientifically gifted people.
MARK L. GREEN Santa Monica, Calif., Feb. 8, 2013
The writer is a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles.
To the Editor:
I read Ross Eisenbrey's article with great interest, having recently spent four years in New York as a foreign student (from Greece) obtaining my Ph.D. in computer science. One of the pillars of Mr. Eisenbrey's argument is that foreign students who obtain advanced degrees in the United States will usually find a way to stay. But many prefer to leave rather than go through a long and painful immigration process. I know, because I am one of them.
Though I'd rather live in New York, upon graduation I moved to Sweden where, as a European citizen, I didn't have to worry about unreasonable immigration rules. As the economic opportunities in China and India continue to improve, more and more foreign students will make the same choice I did and refuse to jump through the hoops of a dysfunctional immigration system.
In the United States, more than a third of doctoral degrees in the sciences and more than half of those in engineering are awarded each year to foreign students. Congress needs to allow American society to reap the benefits of the American higher education system.
Forget about the H-1B program, whose problems are correctly pointed out in Mr. Eisenbrey's article. Simply let science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or STEM, graduates with advanced degrees stay by giving them green cards.
MICHAEL LAMPIS Stockholm, Feb. 8, 2013
To the Editor:
I was frankly amused by Ross Eisenbrey's baseless hypothesis that we have a glut of genius engineers, and that deep-pocketed tech giants like Microsoft and I.B.M. are importing thousands of foreign professionals on H-1B visas only to use them as bonded labor at below-market rates.
Contrary to his view that H-1B visas somehow ''darken job prospects for America's struggling young scientists and engineers,'' American STEM graduates have far better job prospects than their liberal arts counterparts, thank you very much, and they are hardly struggling even in current dismal economic conditions.
AMIT SARKAR Scarsdale, N.Y., Feb. 8, 2013
The writer is a former Wall Street banker.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/18/opinion/luring-foreign-high-tech-workers.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY VINCENT MAHÉ)       

Load-Date: February 18, 2013


End of Document
Senators Offer A New Blueprint For Immigration
The New York Times
January 28, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1356 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


A bipartisan group of senators has agreed on a set of principles for a sweeping overhaul of the immigration system, including a pathway to American citizenship for 11 million illegal immigrants that would hinge on progress in securing the borders and ensuring that foreigners leave the country when their visas expire.
The senators were able to reach a deal by incorporating the Democrats' insistence on a single comprehensive bill that would not deny eventual citizenship to illegal immigrants, with Republican demands that strong border and interior enforcement had to be clearly in place before Congress could consider legal status for illegal immigrants.
Their blueprint, unveiled on Monday, will allow them to stake out their position one day before President Obama outlines his immigration proposals in a speech on Tuesday in Las Vegas, in the opening moves of what lawmakers expect will be a protracted and contentious debate in Congress this year.
Lawmakers said they were optimistic that the political mood had changed since a similar effort collapsed in acrimony in 2010. Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and one of the negotiators, said he saw ''a new appreciation'' among Republicans of the need for an overhaul.
''Look at the last election,'' Mr. McCain said Sunday morning on ABC's ''This Week With George Stephanopoulos.'' ''We are losing dramatically the Hispanic vote, which we think should be ours.'' The senator also said he had seen ''significant improvements'' in border enforcement, although ''we've still got a ways to go.''
He added, ''We can't go on forever with 11 million people living in this country in the shadows in an illegal status.''
According to a five-page draft of the plan obtained by The New York Times on Sunday, the eight senators -- including Mr. McCain; Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York; and Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina -- have agreed to address the failings of the immigration system in one comprehensive measure, rather than in smaller pieces, and to offer a ''tough, fair and practical road map'' that would eventually lead to a chance at citizenship for nearly all of the immigrants here illegally.
''We on the Democratic side have said that we are flexible and we want to get a bill,'' Mr. Schumer told reporters in New York on Sunday. ''But there's a bottom line, and that's a path to citizenship for the 11 or so million people who qualify. We've made great, great progress with our Republican colleagues.''
Under the senators' plan, most illegal immigrants would be able to apply to become permanent residents -- a crucial first step toward citizenship -- but only after certain border enforcement measures had been accomplished.
Among the plan's new proposals is the creation of a commission of governors, law enforcement officials and community leaders from border states that would assess when border security measures had been completed. A proposal would also require that an exit system be in place for tracking departures of foreigners who entered the country through airports or seaports, before any illegal immigrants could start on a path to citizenship.
The lawmakers intend for their proposals to frame the debate in the Senate, which is expected to take up immigration this spring, ahead of the House of Representatives. Compared with an immigration blueprint from 2011 that White House officials have said is the basis for the president's position, the senators' proposals appear to include tougher enforcement and a less direct path for illegal immigrants than Mr. Obama is considering.
In a parallel effort, a separate group of four senators will introduce a bill this week dealing with another thorny issue that is likely to be addressed in a comprehensive measure: visas for legal immigrants with advanced skills in technology and science. The bill, written primarily by Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, a Republican, and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, a Democrat, would nearly double the number of temporary visas, known as an H-1B, available each year to highly skilled immigrants. It would also free up more permanent resident visas, known as green cards, so those immigrants could eventually settle in the United States and go on to become citizens.
In a sign of the rapidly changing mood in Washington on immigration, the two groups of senators and the White House have been vying in recent days to see who would unveil their proposals first.
Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, a Democrat who was one of those negotiating the comprehensive principles, said the senators finally agreed that any legislation should include a pathway to citizenship.
''First of all, Americans support it, in poll after poll,'' said Mr. Menendez, who was interviewed along with Mr. McCain by Martha Raddatz on Sunday. ''Secondly, Latino voters expect it. Thirdly, Democrats want it. And fourth, Republicans need it.''
Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a Republican, also joined the group of eight senators in recent weeks and endorsed its principles.
Mr. Rubio, a Cuban-American who is a fast-rising figure in his party, had insisted on including the exit tracking system as one of the triggers for opening the path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. Mr. Rubio cited estimates that as many as 40 percent of immigrants in the country illegally had overstayed their visas.
Mr. Rubio also insisted that any immigrants who gained legal status under the legislation would ''be required to go to the back of the line'' behind other immigrants who applied to come through legal channels.
Under the senators' proposal, border security would be immediately strengthened with new technology, including aerial drones, for border patrol agents, while the Department of Homeland Security would work to expand the exit control system. The United States currently has some exit controls to track departures of foreigners at most airports and seaports, but it does not track exits by land.
At the same time, immigrants here illegally would ''simultaneously'' be required ''to register with the government.'' After passing background checks and paying back taxes and fines, those immigrants would receive a ''probationary legal status'' that would allow them to live and work legally in the United States. Immigrants with that status would not be eligible for most federal public benefits.
The senators also called for a mandatory nationwide program to verify the legal status of new hires, although the details of whether that would include some form of identity card remained vague.
The senators would require that ''our proposed enforcement measures be complete before any immigrant on probationary status can earn a green card,'' according to the draft principles. The group also includes Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, both Democrats, and another Republican, Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona.
The proposals would offer major exemptions from the requirements for citizenship to young immigrants here illegally who came to United States as children, giving them a faster path to become Americans.
Immigrant farmworkers would also be given a separate and faster path to citizenship, according to the principles.
Still ahead are difficult negotiations over how long immigrants who gain provisional status would have to wait before they could become citizens. Mr. Rubio's ideas are for a far longer and less direct pathway than Democrats would like. The senators also anticipate a fight over how to bring in low-wage workers in the future. Many labor organizations are skeptical of the temporary guest worker programs that employers favor, and the principles are vague on that point.
Considerable resistance remains among Republicans in the House of Representatives to granting any kind of legal status to illegal immigrants.
Mr. Rubio was also a sponsor of the bill to offer more visas to highly educated technology workers, along with Senator Chris Coons, a Democrat from Delaware. Senator Klobuchar, also a sponsor, said on Sunday that she expected the bill would become part of the comprehensive measure the other senators were preparing.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/28/us/politics/senators-agree-on-blueprint-for-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Senator John McCain, also one of the eight, was optimistic about the plan's prospects. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROSS D. FRANKLIN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Senators Lindsey Graham, left, and Charles E. Schumer, shown in 2011, are two of the eight lawmakers behind the proposal. (PHOTOGRAPH BY J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A10)       

Load-Date: January 29, 2013


End of Document
Senate Rejects Most Efforts to Change Immigration Bill
The New York Times
June 7, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 31
Length: 851 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 6 
Body


The Senate signaled support for major provisions of a comprehensive immigration bill on Wednesday by rejecting many proposed amendments, including one that would have made it much harder for many illegal immigrants to achieve legal status.
  Architects of the legislation said they hoped that by plowing through the amendments, they would gain support for a motion to end debate on the legislation. The motion, scheduled for a vote on Thursday, needs 60 votes to succeed.
The Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, said, ''We have made a lot of progress,'' adding, ''The end really is in sight.''
  Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, who opposes the bill, said, ''The train is moving down the tracks.''
  While senators struggled with the complex legislation, which calls for the biggest changes in immigration policy since 1986, executives from high-tech companies descended on Capitol Hill to express concerns. 
  Steven A. Ballmer, the chief executive of Microsoft, was among the businessmen pleading with Congress to increase the number of H-1B visas and green cards available to skilled foreign professionals. Ginny Terzano, a spokeswoman for Microsoft, said such visas were urgently needed to help meet ''a talent crisis'' in the industry.
  Two amendments intended to reunify families, by providing additional visas for close relatives of United States citizens and lawful permanent residents, failed on procedural votes. The amendments were offered by Senators Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York and Robert Menendez of New Jersey, both Democrats. 
  Republicans raised points of order, saying the proposals violated budget rules because they would increase federal spending with no way to offset the costs.
  The Senate bill, which embodies a fragile bipartisan compromise strongly supported by President Bush, would offer legal status to most of the estimated 12 million illegal immigrants in the United States. Administration officials said they hoped that the Senate would pass the bill with 70 votes, to build momentum in the House, where the legislation faces stiff headwinds.
  By a vote of 51 to 46, the Senate on Wednesday rejected an amendment proposed by Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, that could have made hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants ineligible for legal status.
  Under Mr. Cornyn's proposal, gang members, terrorists and other convicted felons would have been permanently barred from the United States and denied immigration benefits. Most significant, the amendment would have denied legal status to illegal immigrants who had flouted deportation orders or been convicted of identity theft or fraudulent use of identification documents.
  Mr. Cornyn said his purpose was not to cater to ''racists, nativists or know-nothings,'' but to exclude ''felons who have shown contempt for American law.'' But Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, said Mr. Cornyn's amendment would ''gut the bill.'' And Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, the chief Democratic architect of the bill, said: ''Almost every hard-working immigrant in this country has been forced, at one time or another, to use false documents to get a job.''
  Mr. Cornyn said his amendment was a defining issue for presidential candidates. Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, a co-author of the overall bill, voted against Mr. Cornyn's amendment and for a Democratic alternative.
  The four senators seeking the Democratic nomination -- Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, Mrs. Clinton, Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut and Barack Obama of Illinois -- also voted against Mr. Cornyn's proposal.
  Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, voted for it.
  By a vote of 66 to 32, the Senate approved the Democratic alternative, which would increase penalties for illegal immigrants who have been convicted of sex offenses, crimes of domestic violence or the use of firearms in alien-smuggling operations.
  In a surprise, the Senate approved another Cornyn amendment that would give law enforcement and intelligence agencies access to information in applications for legal status that are denied. The vote was 57 to 39.
  Mr. Cornyn said his proposal would give law enforcement ''a critical tool to prevent document fraud and to prosecute those who have broken our immigration laws.''
  But Mr. Kennedy said that without the guarantee of confidentiality, illegal immigrants would be extremely reluctant to come forward and apply for legal status.
  The Senate rejected a proposal to change the structure of the bill's guest worker program. Under the program, foreign workers could get two-year visas, which could be renewed twice, but the guest workers would have to leave the United States for a year in between their stays here.
  Senator Jeff Bingaman, Democrat of New Mexico, said the requirement for workers to leave the country would ''cause enormous instability in the work force.'' Mr. Bingaman proposed an amendment to admit guest workers for a maximum of six consecutive years, but the Senate rejected it, 57 to 41.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 7, 2007


End of Document
Technically Speaking
The New York Times
August 15, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 13; FICTION
Length: 1401 words
Byline: By Lauren Oyler
Body


THE STARTUP WIFE By Tahmima Anam
EDGE CASE By YZ Chin 
  Start-ups: We know they're bad for politics, culture, workers, restaurants, sex, dating, fashion, San Francisco, Seattle, Berlin, local languages other than English, English, and people who enjoyed life more before teenagers could rent electric scooters. Two new novels suggest another downside: They're also bad for marriage.
  Like a C.E.O. trying to disrupt something -- anything! -- Tahmima Anam's ''The Startup Wife'' imagines straying from the path laid by its title. A woman goes into business with her husband, does the grunt work, feels sidelined and is finally vindicated when something goes terribly wrong that her pragmatic advice would have prevented, if only the men had listened to her. ''Sometimes being right is actually worse than being wrong,'' she says. The marriage won't work out, either.
  Asha Ray is a graduate student at M.I.T. who has been developing ''an algorithm designed to unlock the empathetic brain for artificial intelligence.'' The daughter of Bangladeshi immigrants who became entrepreneurs the slow, old-fashioned way (owning a small chain of pharmacies called ''Health Beats'' in Queens), Asha is frustrated by both her fearsome academic adviser and the fact that her dream of building robots to ''just be better versions of us'' is very hard to realize. When she re-encounters her high school crush, Cyrus Jones, at their English teacher's funeral, she is still enthralled, and eager to show him the better version of herself. Since dropping out of school after his mother died, Cyrus has cultivated a reputation for a defiant yet sensitive genius, making a living ''conducting baptisms and cremations and writing little prayers for people to say at the bedside of a sick relative.'' He fancies himself a (devastatingly hot) free spirit, helping people ''find ... meaning without the baggage of religion.'' The pair elope immediately.
  Soon they devise a new social media platform: ''We Are Infinite,'' or WAI, pronounced ''why'' and amenable to puns with ''wise.'' A few years ago I was eavesdropping on a conversation at a now-defunct women's co-working space, and I learned the term for this kind of business arrangement: ''partner partners!'' Imagine it exclaimed with the same doomed excitement as the title of this novel. Asha adjusts her empathy algorithm so that it can customize nonreligious rituals for users, who can then form communities around ''what gives their life meaning, instead of what they like or don't like.'' Their friend Jules provides comic relief and parents who, despite their WASP-y cruelty, pay for everything, until the couple find their funding.
  And find it they do. The trio is accepted into a ''secretive,'' ultraexclusive start-up incubator called Utopia, focusing on projects that will help humanity survive the apocalypse; they've been looking for an app to ''help people frame their existence'' in the ''post-world world.'' Asha drops out of her Ph.D. program and WAI becomes wildly popular, its founders wildly wealthy.
  What's surprising is not the plot itself, but its wholesomeness -- despite all the novel's trappings of tech skepticism, from understated sendups of silly naming conventions, to an office that requires guests to hop across a trampoline to enter, to a moral lesson about the harmful effects of megalomaniacal scale. Except for the venture capitalists (''If you're not an assassin, you can't do your job''), everyone in this novel has good intentions. Asha offers little analysis of the topic about which she is supposedly an underappreciated expert, and as a result the book demonstrates an overall acceptance of the tech industry and its machinations, suggesting its problems can be solved merely by giving women a seat at the table.
  Even as the idealist tenets of WAI's manifesto -- no trying to persuade people to buy things, no spying, the team is paramount -- crumble, the earnestness with which Anam approaches her characters papers over the selfishness, cynicism and myopia that pervade their insular world. And the heavy foreshadowing suggests a much bigger marital breakdown than the Paltrowian conscious uncoupling we get instead. Although Asha is supposed to be the talented foil to a man who thinks he can get by on good will and charisma, she never keeps the novel itself from trying to do just that.
  YZ Chin's debut novel, ''Edge Case,'' takes up many of the same themes -- love, marriage, tech, race, immigration, parents, death -- but instead of user engagement, Chin focuses on engagement with actual problems. The narrator, Edwina, is not a founder, but a lowly ''quality assurance analyst'' at a company called AInstein, tasked with catching bugs in code before customers do. ''The men regularly referred to me in the office as 'the tester,''' she says. ''It always made me think of the sad labeled tubes of lipstick at Sephora, mauve heads battered and ready to transmit oral herpes.''
  Pragmatic and droll (a former English major, naturally), she's under no illusions about the ability of her company to change the world; despite her initial excitement about AInstein's product -- ''A robot that could intelligently tell jokes! A selfless companion that would lift spirits, albeit in the form of a crude metal head attached to a (so far) immobile body'' -- her interest in her job is entirely bureaucratic. She and her husband, Marlin, don't work together, but they, too, are bound by more than just love: Both are immigrants from Malaysia on H-1B visas who have lived and worked at start-ups in the United States for several years, and their relationship is entangled with the forms they are constantly having to send to the imposing immigration office.
  It's distressing enough that the deadline is approaching for them to apply for green cards, if their respective employers agree to sponsor them. But the novel begins with an even bigger problem: Following the death of his father, Marlin has become moody, isolated and obsessed with a practice called dowsing, which he thinks will help him ''contact spirit guides and advisers'' who can shepherd him through life's hard decisions. (As these two novels make clear, the death of a parent is an acceptable reason to become aggressively spiritual.) One day Edwina arrives home to find he has vacated their shared studio apartment and is not responding to her messages.
  The novel follows Edwina's search for Marlin and her accompanying minor breakdown -- a longtime vegetarian, she starts eating all the meat she can find, from Chicken McNuggets to an $18 prime rib sandwich. Interwoven through this story are flashbacks to sweet moments from their relationship and disorienting episodes from Edwina's struggle to adjust to life in America. Chin's specificity and wonderfully drawn minor characters add depth and richness to a story that another writer might have washed out with the glaring light of moral clarity. Edwina's obnoxious co-worker is a believably ridiculous tech bro, flirtatiously accusing her of having crushes on the other men in the office, and demanding she read his novel in progress, ''a combination of all the best-selling genres: sci-fi, fantasy, mystery, romance.'' Her mother, back in Malaysia, appears frequently in a box in the corner of Edwina's laptop, her fuzzy Skype calls a platform for dispensing advice and ''spinning past life stories'' about Edwina, often insulting ones. Her mother provides the kind of structure Edwina doesn't necessarily want, but needs.
  What emerges is not only a subtly provocative depiction of the tech industry, and this country, as tilting ever more off-kilter; but also a realistic portrayal of a woman in crisis. Edwina's problems are of the kind that can't be solved through faulty logic or convenient substitution, but of course we humans, not yet the best versions of ourselves, will try the faulty logic and convenient substitution anyway. If ''The Startup Wife'' takes for granted that 21st-century individuals are desperate for meaning and ritual, ''Edge Case'' shows us why, even as it also shows how our quick fixes, whether they be gimmicky apps or ''riots of New Age stuff hybridized willy-nilly with scientific and engineering terms,'' will inevitably fall short.Lauren Oyler is the author of ''Fake Accounts.''THE STARTUP WIFEBy Tahmima Anam296 pp. Scribner. $26.EDGE CASEBy YZ Chin304 pp. Ecco. $26.99.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/02/books/review/startup-wife-tahmima-anam-edge-case-yz-chin.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Melanie Lambrick FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               

Load-Date: August 15, 2021


End of Document
Papers, Please;
Europe's Love-Hate Affair With Foreigners
The New York Times
December 24, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1783 words
Byline: By ROGER COHEN

By ROGER COHEN
Dateline: BERLIN
Body


SEVERAL European nation-states including Germany, Austria and Italy -- emerged about a century ago from the vast multinational, polyglot empires that dominated 19th-century Europe. Their roots are not deep, their reality one of mingled blood. Yet, as the advance of the European Union encroaches on national sovereignty and the wealth of Europe draws the world's dispossessed migrants, a nationalist reaction has set in, marked by jingoistic hymns to national cultures, anti-immigrant tirades and the scapegoating of foreigners for everything from rising crime to rotten schools. It is no longer Communism that haunts Europe: it is the outsider.
This appears perverse in that, by any estimate, the 15-nation European Union is the continent's most successful postwar project and, by most estimates, an aging Europe needs immigrants. The proportion of the elderly in the union, defined as people aged 65 and over, is expected to rise to 22.4 percent in 2025 from 15.4 percent today. With birth rates low, Europe's already strained state pension system faces collapse unless the working population that supports these people is expanded through immigration. One European Union working paper puts the number needed at 75 million immigrants by 2050.
So, for the first time in decades, Europe is debating whether to abandon an official policy of "zero immigration" (which has meant that increasing numbers of people resort to asylum-seeking or illegal entry) and shift to the selective encouragement of economic migration. "Europe must move to a proactive immigration policy," the European Commission said recently, but warned that this would require strong political leadership to combat "racism and xenophobia."
Such hostile sentiments are widespread. Say immigrant and the word "problem" -- not "potential" -- tends to flash into people's minds. Immigrants cost money as they benefit from generous welfare systems; they build mosques whose minarets are unwelcome beside church spires; they take but do not give. All these accusations are frequently made. But something deeper, it seems, is at work.
The European nation, often forged in repetitive bloodletting, was created against the outsider; it was not forged from the amalgam of diverse outsiders washing up on its shores as in North America. At some level, this history inhabits people's minds, marking one of the fundamental transatlantic cultural divides.
Why has the nation -- in many ways an artificial construct on Europe's mottled soil -- so completely obscured an older reality of mingling? Taher Ben Jelloun, a French author of Moroccan descent, sees one problem in the history of empire and the relationship of colonizer to colonized. "For the French, in North Africa the relationship was always one of domination and exploitation," he said, "and even decades later this troubled memory makes full acceptance of the North African difficult."
Similarly, Europe's long memory of repetitive war against Islam and the Ottoman Turks no doubt plays into wide prejudice against Muslims. Still, even bad imperial history provides the French and British with long experience of cohabitation with foreign cultures, whereas the Germans -- who lack this experience -- often seem less able to imagine an integrative model of society.
"Nationalism is ridiculous in an open world," said Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, a member of a high-level committee reviewing immigration in Germany. "But people still say to me: why don't we just chuck the foreigners out?"
Europe is at a crossroads where it is being asked to define its identity. Over the past year, it has had to confront a series of disasters -- 58 dead Chinese migrants in the back of truck in Dover, 59 immigrants lost in a dinghy off Italy, the corpses of more than 100 Moroccans washed up on the beaches of southern Spain -- that testify to its lure and the desperation of those trying to get in. But, at some fundamental level, the continent is uncertain that it wants, or can accommodate, these foreigners.
"It is very delicate to say that we need immigrants, because perhaps 60 percent of Germans still have a certain resistance to the idea," Otto Schily, Germany's Social Democratic interior minister, said in an interview. The nation was a unifying idea imposed on diffuse history, and the German imagination -- like that of many other European states -- still longs for homogeneity, whatever the abundant evidence to the contrary.
But these attitudes now pose an acute quandary. Europe is full of immigrants and needs more if it is not to become moribund. But governments are also aware of an uncomfortable truth: surrounded by countries like Turkey and Morocco, with high birth rates and huge youth populations, Europe is certain to face immigrant pressure over the coming years that may be uncontrollable. Mobility is greater than ever before; no wall divides the continent any longer. A salary of $100 a month south of the Mediterranean becomes $1,000 on a fruit or vegetable farm on the European side.
EUROPE will also be involved, at the other end of the economic scale, in the global quest for the best and the brightest -- whether Sri Lankan or Nigerian -- that characterizes an information economy. But the readiness to confront, let alone embrace, these realities appears limited. Indeed the politics of xenophobic innuendo are enjoying a revival.
Take Germany, where more than seven million foreigners live, or about 9 percent of the population. This has been the year of renascent German pride, or patriotism, or bigotry -- the distinction is not always clear. The opposition Christian Democrats, for example, speak of Leitkultur, or guiding culture -- a potpourri of Christian and Enlightenment values to which immigrants are being asked to conform. The message is clear enough: a complicit wink to that broad swath of Germans who do not like living with more than two million Islamic Turks, believe such "guest workers" should go home one day and still think the German Volk is defined by blood.
Similar trends are evident elsewhere. Silvio Berlusconi, the leader of Italy's center-right Forza Italia, said that illegal immigrants "all too often swell the ranks of organized crime." In Austria, Jorg Haider's governing Freedom Party has made made much of "Uberfremdung," literally "over-foreignerization," and Britain's conservative leader, William Hague, likes to assail the asylum-seekers living off the country's welfare.
Why this refocusing of fear? In part, center-right parties, facing a left that has occupied the economic center and with no cold war left to fight, have been casting around for a new agenda. They have found it in threatened national identity.
In part, European countries, including Italy and Spain and Greece, are struggling with the profound adjustment to their national psyches involved in viewing themselves as countries of immigration, as they have become, rather than emigration, as they always thought they were.
There are other factors. High birth rates in the developing world combined with the so-called Baby Bust in Europe have fed shadowy concerns about being overwhelmed by foreign hordes. Europeans fret that their generous welfare systems cannot support a tide of newcomers who, unlike those in the United States, qualify for a range of benefits as soon as they arrive. Free housing, free medicine and free education are norms.
"The social standard in major receiving countries is higher than in the United States, and a relatively much larger share of social welfare benefits are spent on immigrants," said Kay Hailbronner, an immigration expert. "This creates resentments."
Such comprehensive welfare lifts wage bills, so unemployment has remained high, even as the European economy has picked up over the past year. About 15 million people, or 9.2 percent of the population, remain out of work. In this context, the foreigner often appears as a threat. Contrast this with an America of full employment where employers clamor for more foreign-born workers. In addition, globalization and the very process of European integration built around the shared euro currency feed fears about loss of national identity.
The fears may prove costly. David Hale, the chief economist at Zurich Financial Services, argues that one reason the United States may continue to outperform Europe lies in "its demographic characteristics and high tolerance for immigration."
"During the next 10 years," he said, "the working age population of Japan will decline by 6 percent, in Europe it will stagnate at best, and in the United States it will expand by at least 10 percent." The potential result: a Europe short of labor and struggling to finance retirement payments.
But a European reaction may be at hand. Europeans often argue that their cohesive social model must be defended against the raw social fragmentation of American multiculturalism; they tend to insist that immigrants adapt to local culture rather than introduce new ones. But they are looking closely at one American idea. Several governments are coming around to the view that a model similar to the American H-1B visa -- allowing skilled foreign workers into the country -- needs to be adopted. In the United States, this program has been expanded to allow in 585,000 workers over the next three years. Germany has now offered 20,000 so-called green cards for qualified foreigners.
This would mark a shift, albeit small, toward controlled immigration and away from the policies that have made family reunion, asylum-seeking and illegality the only roads into Fortress Europe. But the deeper problem appears political and cultural. "Politicians have forced us into parallel societies by denying for so long that we existed and pretending for so long that we would go home," said Safet Cinar, who heads an association of the 130,000 Turks in Berlin.
THE problem of immigration in Europe has existed for a long time. Global culture, economics, demography and reactionary politics have now brought it to a head. The corpses on Europe's borders demonstrate its gravity. In his pioneering 19th-century book on nationalism, "What is a Nation?", Ernest Renan pointed out that the idea of the nation was based on shared habits and language but also on a shared ability to forget past hatreds.
Paraphrasing Renan, it may be asked, at the beginning of the 21st century, how a nascent United States of Europe hopes to further the peace and prosperity that the European Union has brought without overcoming the enduring prejudice that divides Christianity and Islam and without burying, once and for all, the ethnic bigotry that has little basis in a multinational history and has so repeatedly plunged the continent into war.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Seeking to curb illegal immigration, Belgian border guards inspect a car coming from Germany earlier this year. (Associated Press)

Load-Date: December 24, 2000


End of Document
Immigration Bill Wins the Backing Of Senate Panel
The New York Times
May 22, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1115 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER and JULIA PRESTON; Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Michael D. Shear from Washington.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday approved a broad overhaul of the nation's immigration laws on a bipartisan vote, sending the most significant immigration policy changes in decades to the full Senate, where the debate is expected to begin next month.
The 13-to-5 vote came as the committee reached a deal on one of the final snags threatening the legislation -- and agreed to hold off on a particularly politically charged amendment, which would have added protections for same-sex couples.
After intense behind-the-scenes negotiations, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, struck an agreement with the group of eight senators who drafted the original bill to address his concerns about visas for skilled foreign workers who could fill jobs in the high-tech industry.
By late afternoon on Tuesday, Mr. Hatch had said that he would support the bill out of committee, if not necessarily on the Senate floor, after the committee agreed, via a voice vote, to pass his amendment.
''I'm going to vote this bill out of committee because I've committed to do that,'' Mr. Hatch said.
Authors of the legislation hoped for a strong vote out of committee to help the bill as it heads to the Senate floor. Mr. Hatch's support could help persuade other conservative Republicans to back the bill. He was joined in his ''yes'' vote by Senators Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, both Republican members of the bipartisan group.
The most emotional part of the committee process, which stretched over five days and 301 amendments, came late Tuesday, when Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who leads the committee, said that he would not offer an amendment allowing United States citizens to apply for permanent resident status, known as a green card, on behalf of their same-sex partners.
Mr. Leahy, according to immigration and gay rights advocates, was under pressure from the White House not to offer this amendment. Though both President Obama and Democrats in the bipartisan group support protections for same-sex couples in the bill, Republicans in the group have warned that such provisions would lead them to abandon the legislation.
Before Mr. Leahy announced his decision, Democratic senators, all of whom personally supported the provision, engaged in a lengthy and agonizing debate.
Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York and an author of the measure, said that not including the provision amounted to ''rank discrimination.'' But he ultimately concluded, ''As much as it pains me, I cannot support this amendment if it will bring down the bill.''
Similarly, Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, said: ''This is the definition of a Hobson's choice. In my bones, I believe in equality.''
But Mr. Graham reflected the view of his Republican colleagues when he said: ''You've got me on immigration. You don't have me on marriage. If you want to keep me on immigration, let's stay on immigration.''
Ultimately, Mr. Leahy withheld his amendment ''with a heavy heart,'' though he can still bring it up on the Senate floor.
Mr. Hatch's amendment, which reflects the compromise he reached after lengthy negotiations led by Mr. Schumer, raises the minimum number of visas annually for high-skilled foreign workers -- known as H-1B visas -- to 115,000, from 110,000 in the bill, while keeping the maximum at 180,000 a year. More important, aides to Mr. Hatch said, his provision includes a mechanism based on conditions in the labor market, intended to ensure that companies based in the United States can bring in qualified foreign workers when jobs are not filled by Americans, but decreases visas when they are.
His provision would also make it easier for employers to hire foreign workers, because it lightens the burden on them to demonstrate that they first tried to hire a qualified American worker.
Mr. Hatch's amendment clarifies distinctions between companies in which the majority of engineers and computer technicians are Americans, and companies with mostly foreign workers. Under the measure, more stringent restrictions would apply to the companies with a foreign labor force, like many Indian outsourcing companies, raising incentives to hire more Americans.
Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, a Democratic member of the bipartisan group, had been one of the last holdouts against Mr. Hatch's amendment. Along with Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, Mr. Durbin worried that Mr. Hatch's provisions would harm American workers.
But on Tuesday, Mr. Durbin signaled that he would support Mr. Hatch's plan.
''I would like to have seen a different amendment, a different bill -- you would have as well,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''But this is a dramatic improvement.'' (Mr. Grassley, meanwhile, remained unconvinced, arguing, ''Let's see how much this stinks.'')
Mr. Durbin made it clear that he expected Mr. Hatch's support in return for his own vote in favor of the deal, saying: ''A number of us have really leaned a long way in your direction to get your support for immigration reform.''
Mr. Hatch had previously said that he believed his amendment ''makes this bill a much more acceptable bill,'' especially in the Republican-controlled House, where it is likely to face stiff opposition.
The agreement represents a win for the high-tech industry, and comes on the heels of intense lobbying by the industry. The Association for Competitive Technology, a trade group, sent 50 executives and application developers to Washington on Monday and Tuesday to meet with lawmakers, including members of the Judiciary Committee.
Richard L. Trumka, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the nation's largest federation of unions, issued a statement against what he said were Mr. Hatch's ''antiworker amendments.''
After passage, President Obama congratulated the committee and called the legislation ''largely consistent with the principles of common-sense reform I have proposed and meets the challenge of fixing our broken immigration system.'' He urged the Senate to improve it further on the Senate floor.
As the committee was finishing its work, a drumbeat against an immigration overhaul began to pick up. Dozens of high-profile conservative leaders and activists signed an open letter published Tuesday that denounced the bipartisan bill, saying the Senate ''would do better to start over from scratch.''
The conservatives said the bill was ''bloated and unwieldy,'' comparing it to President Obama's health care bill.
Still, when the committee voted to approve the legislation Tuesday evening, a cheer and applause rang out through the room, as immigration advocates leapt to their feet, shouting ''Yes we can!'' and ''Sí, se puede!''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/22/us/politics/leahy-voices-optimism-as-panel-continues-work-on-immigration-bill.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Senator Patrick J. Leahy making his closing statement during the Senate Judiciary Committee process
 at right, Senators Orrin G. Hatch and Charles E. Schumer, who were central to the deal. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DREW ANGERER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A17)       

Load-Date: May 22, 2013


End of Document
Sharpening His Attacks on Rubio, Cruz Urges New Immigration Limits
The New York Times
November 14, 2015 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 855 words
Byline: By MATT FLEGENHEIMER
Body


ORLANDO, Fla. --  Escalating a confrontation with Senator Marco Rubio of Florida over immigration policy, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, one of his rivals for the Republican presidential nomination, introduced proposals on Friday outlining his own approach, calling for a halt to increases in legal immigration ''so long as American unemployment remains unacceptably high.''
Mr. Cruz did not detail any plans to handle the cases of the roughly 11 million people in the country illegally. But he heightened an attack on Mr. Rubio's past efforts to forge a bill in the Senate to overhaul the immigration system, repeatedly assailing those who support ''amnesty'' for undocumented immigrants by suggesting, among other things, that the approach would help Democrats at the ballot box. 
  ''If you're supporting amnesty, you're supporting the Obama-Clinton weakness and appeasement to radical Islamic terrorism,'' Mr. Cruz told an often raucous crowd at a large church rally here. ''If you are supporting amnesty, you're supporting the Ayatollah Khamenei having nuclear weapons in Iran.''
  Mr. Rubio has countered Mr. Cruz's criticisms by arguing that their immigration positions are now essentially the same, noting Mr. Cruz's past support for a large increase in visas issued to bring foreign professionals with college degrees and special skills into the country.
  Mr. Cruz has recently backed off that position, and on Friday, his divorce from it seemed complete. He said the issuance of such visas, known as H-1B visas, should be suspended for 180 days to conduct an audit of allegations of abuse. The program has been criticized for displacing American workers in favor of cheaper foreign labor.
  ''As it was designed, it was a program that I have supported, and if it operated that way, I would continue to support it,'' he said.
  In recent days, Mr. Cruz has reminded voters that Mr. Rubio was one of the ''Gang of Eight'' senators from both parties who supported the immigration overhaul, which included a path to citizenship but was never enacted. He accused the Florida senator of ''trying to jam this amnesty down the American people's throats.''
  When Mr. Cruz began discussing the bill on Friday, condemning the work of Democrats like President Obama and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, members of the crowd started shouting Mr. Rubio's name.
  ''And maybe a Republican or two,'' Mr. Cruz said coyly, ''joined together to try to push through a massive amnesty plan.''
  Mr. Rubio has said that Mr. Cruz was also ''a supporter of legalizing people that are in this country illegally'' by pointing to an amendment Mr. Cruz proposed to the Gang of Eight bill. The amendment would have eliminated a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants while maintaining a provision allowing them to gain legal status to remain in the country. (Some observers believed Mr. Cruz proposed the provision to undermine support for the bill.)
  On Friday, after giving remarks at a Republican summit here attended by several candidates, Mr. Rubio said he was ''puzzled and quite frankly surprised by Ted's attacks.''
  ''He is a supporter of legalizing people that are in this country illegally,'' Mr. Rubio said. ''If he changed that position, then he certainly has a right to change his position on that issue, but he should be clear about it.''
  Speaking to reporters after his speech at the church, Mr. Cruz said he could ''understand why some people might want to blur the history and confuse where people stood.''
  ''I introduced an amendment to eliminate citizenship,'' he said. ''It is an amazing attempt at misdirection to suggest that the person helping lead the fight to defeat the Gang of Eight somehow supported the Gang of Eight.'' 
  The immigration debate, long simmering in the Republican primary, has dominated the campaign in recent days. Beyond the policy implications, the discussion reflects divergent electoral strategies in the party. While some establishment Republicans fret that any caustic language on immigration could lessen a nominee's odds in November, Mr. Cruz has argued that selecting a far-right candidate will inspire more of the party's base to vote.
  The debate also reflects the outsize role that another candidate, Donald J. Trump, has played in driving the issue.
  In his remarks, Mr. Cruz surmised that the national conversation surrounding immigration would be far different if immigrants were competing with bankers and lawyers for jobs.
  ''Then we'd build a wall,'' he said. Mr. Cruz then added a Trumpian adjective at the urging of a shouting audience member. ''And it would be huge.''
  Speaking at the summit, which was hosted by the state's Republican Party, Mr. Trump took full credit for bringing the immigration conversation to the fore.
  ''I watched Ted Cruz and I watched Marco Rubio,'' he said. ''They're fighting over who's tougher. Well, let me tell you something. I was tougher when it wasn't very politically popular to be tough.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/14/us/politics/sharpening-attacks-on-marco-rubio-ted-cruz-urges-new-immigration-limits.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Above, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas at the Sunshine Summit, a Republican gathering in Orlando, Fla., on Friday. Below, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida spoke at the meeting and afterward said he was ''puzzled and quite frankly surprised by Ted's attacks.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: November 14, 2015


End of Document
Money Woes, Long Silences and Islamic Zeal
The New York Times
May 6, 2010 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1778 words
Byline: By JAMES BARRON and SABRINA TAVERNISE
Body


Theirs was an arranged marriage: two well-educated children of prominent Pakistani families set up through a mutual friend. He was the quiet one; she was the one who laughed at parties. 
  At their wedding in Peshawar six years ago, men and women danced separately but also together, ''a rarity at that time,'' recalled one guest. ''It was such a huge gathering that even their family friends from Qatar came.''
  When they returned to the United States, his colleagues at the cosmetics maker Elizabeth Arden celebrated with a small office party. 
  The husband, Faisal Shahzad, put photographs of his wife, Huma Mian, on his desk at the Arden office in Stamford, Conn. They bought a brand-new house for $273,000, 35 miles away on Long Hill Avenue in Shelton. By the time they moved in, she was pregnant, the neighbors recalled.
  As another day passed with Mr. Shahzad talking to investigators about the car bomb he had admitted driving into Times Square on Saturday, details emerged on Wednesday about the couple and their life together, along with speculation about his radicalization. People who knew them, both in Connecticut and in Pakistan, said he had changed in the past year or so, becoming more reserved and more religious as he faced what someone who knows the family well called ''their financial troubles.'' 
  Last year, one Pakistani friend said, he even asked his father, Bahar ul-Haq, a retired high-ranking air force pilot in Pakistan, for permission to fight in Afghanistan.
  Mr. Haq, now in his 70s, adamantly refused, according to a person familiar with the conversation, saying that he disapproved of the mission and reminding his son that Islam does not permit a man to abandon his wife or children. 
  As a newlywed, the wedding guest said of Mr. Shahzad by e-mail from Pakistan, ''there was no sign of him being extremist or, for that matter, he wasn't a bit religious.'' But in the past couple of years, after changing jobs and fathering two children, Mr. Shahzad ''started talking more of Islam.'' The guest spoke on the condition he not be identified because of concerns about his safety in the wake of the attempted car bombing.
  ''The recession had taken a toll on them, I guess,'' he wrote in an e-mail message from Pakistan. He said that their money worries became apparent in 2008 or 2009 and that Mr. Shahzad ''lost his way during the financial problems.''  JPMorgan Chase has since moved to foreclose on the Shelton house, which the couple had abandoned in a hurry, leaving behind clothes and toys.
  In February, Mr. Shahzad leased a two-bedroom apartment in Bridgeport, Conn. His landlord said he never saw Mr. Shahzad's wife. Faiz Ahmad, a friend from the Shahzad family's ancestral village, Mohib Banda, said that when he last saw Mr. Shahzad, at a wedding a year and a half ago, he was sure that something was wrong. Mr. Shahzad seemed changed, he said, sitting by himself and not talking very much. 
  He was ''completely quiet on the sofa, like someone who has some worries, and undergoing some internal change,'' Mr. Ahmad said. ''So he was sitting silent, silent. And silence in itself is a question.'' 
  A Pakistani man said that an acquaintance of his who was a friend of the Shahzad family told him that within the past year, Mr. Shahzad had peered critically at a glass of whiskey the friend was holding, indicating a judgmental stance typical for rigid jihadis. 
  Mr. Shahzad, now 30, appeared to be tracing a familiar arc of frustration, increasing religiosity and, finally, violence. He was born and raised in Pakistan, with a privileged upbringing in a moderate family that lived in at least three places -- Karachi, Rawalpindi and Mohib Banda. Mr. Haq, according to Mr. Ahmad, ''was a man of modern thinking and of the modern age.''
  Family friends interviewed on Wednesday said they believed that Mr. Haq was in hiding in the city of Dera Ghazi Khan in western Pakistan, where the family has wheat fields. Mr. Shahzad's wife was also believed to be in Pakistan, though her whereabouts was unknown. Dawn, a Pakistani daily, reported that her father had been arrested in Karachi, but Pakistani authorities would not confirm that.
  Mr. Shahzad, the youngest of four, was born into a new generation in the years after a military autocrat, Zia ul-Haq, began to inject a rigid version of Islam into Pakistan's education system. At the same time, hard-line mosques were given money and land, elevating a narrow, often sectarian world view that cast a pall over young Pakistanis.
  Ms. Mian, the oldest of four, was born in Colorado, though she spent summer vacations in Pakistan and lived with her family in Qatar for a while as a child, according to the wedding guest. Her father, Mohammad Asif Mian, earned two master's degrees at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden, Colo., in the 1980s, and has written four books.
  In the best-selling ''Project Economics and Decision Analysis,'' published in 2002, Mr. Mian thanked  family members for their patience and support, adding, ''Special thanks to my daughters at the University of Colorado for being on the dean's list; this has contributed a lot to my enthusiasm.''
  Ms. Mian and her sisters, Saba and Hina, all studied at Denver-area colleges and shared a house just off the campus of the University of Colorado in Boulder in 2003 and 2004. 
  Huma Mian married Mr. Shahzad soon after earning an accounting degree in 2004, and moved to Connecticut, where he was pursuing an M.B.A. at the University of Bridgeport and, on an H-1B visa for highly skilled workers, was working as an operation analyst at Elizabeth Arden, managing and analyzing accounts receivable, according to a resume obtained by MSNBC.
  ''I was always surprised, with her having to buy milk for the baby and everything else, how they afforded this on one income,'' recalled Brenda J. Thurman, a neighbor in Shelton. 
  The couple did not socialize much with people on their block. ''It was three years before I knew she spoke English,'' Ms. Thurman said. 
  Ms. Thurman said that Ms. Mian left for a couple of months in late 2008 or early 2009, and that Mr. Shahzad told her she was going to Pakistan to have their second child. Within a few months of her return, they packed up and left again last summer. Mr. Shahzad, who had left Elizabeth Arden in 2006 to become a client reporting analyst at Affinion, a financial marketing services company in Norwalk, Conn., quit his job there. 
  Piles of garbage remained outside the home in Shelton this week, filled with clues about their lives. There were packets of Nair, moisturizer with Arabic writing on the back, a makeup brush, a Japanese cherry blossom scent body spritzer, wrapping paper and gift bags that appeared to be for baby gifts.
  There was an envelope addressed to ''Faisal, Huma and Alishaba,'' which contained a card proclaiming, ''Congratulations on your new little girl!''
  How, why or where Mr. Shahzad became radicalized remains unclear. Dr. Saud Anwar, the founder of a Pakistani-American association in Connecticut, said that as soon as Mr. Shahzad's name surfaced in connection with the car bomb, he canvassed Connecticut Muslim and Pakistani groups and found he was not involved with any of them. 
  But Dr. Anwar said he had been in touch with a university classmate of Mr. Shahzad's, a man of Pakistani descent who told Dr. Anwar he did not want to be interviewed by reporters. The classmate said he had remained friends with the couple and had noticed something different about Mr. Shahzad about a year ago. 
  ''His personality had changed -- he had become more introverted,'' Dr. Anwarsaid the classmate told him. ''He had a stronger religious identity, where he felt more strongly and more opinionated about things.'' Dr. Anwar said he had asked the classmate whether this change had come through association with a group, and the friend said it seemed to be ''on his own that he was learning all these things.'' 
  Mr. Ahmad, the friend from Mohib Banda, speculated that the transformation was rooted in Karachi. An associate of Mr. Shahzad's was arrested in a mosque believed to have ties with a militant group in Karachi early Tuesday, Pakistani intelligence officials said. 
  ''The question is who has put Faisal in this path?'' Mr. Ahmad asked. ''The Faisal with the beard that you see, he was not the old Faisal. He was like you, like me, handsome, liberal and an active person.''
  According to Pakistan's information minister, Mr. Shahzad traveled to Pakistan 13 times in the past seven years. One Pakistani official who knew the family said it was unlikely that Mr. Shahzad would have been radicalized in Pakistan if he was only on short trips, which tend to be dominated by family commitments like weddings; the criminal complaint against him filed on Tuesday says that he returned in February from a five-month stint. It also said Mr. Shahzad had been trained in bomb-making in Waziristan.
  Another family friend in Pakistan, Kifayat Ali, called Mr. Shahzad ''emotional'' and said that he used to carry a dagger around with him as a boy. He speculated that Mr. Shahzad had become enraged by the United States' military actions, fueled by the Pakistani press blaring conspiracy theories and anti-American vitriol.
  ''A person sees the brutality of Afghanistan and Iraq,'' Mr. Ali noted. ''These scenes affect people.''
  The resume posted Wednesday on msnbc.com said Mr. Shahzad held three different positions at Elizabeth Arden over five years starting in mid-2001, and then spent three years at Affinion. At Arden, he said he had ''decreased bad debt write-offs by 47 percent'' and ''recovered over $2.5 mil in 'lost' revenue.'' At Affinion, he said he prepared ''monthly commission forecasting for high-profile Affinion clients such as Citibank, Bank of America, Royal Bank of Scotland, Peoples Bank, US Bank, Wells Fargo and a couple of smaller clients.''
  But James Hart, an Affinion spokesman, said ''there's a lot of resume puffery in there'' and that Mr. Shahzad had been ''one rung up from entry level'' when he left. 
  A former manager at Elizabeth Arden said that he was the only Pakistani working for the company at the time, but never asked for special accommodation for prayer. And she remembered that on Sept. 11, Mr. Shahzad, like everyone else, huddled around the one radio in the office, listening to bulletins about the attacks on the World Trade Center.
  ''I think he was just normal,'' she recalled. ''Isn't it always the case, though? It's always the normal ones that you don't really think they're going to do something like this.''
  James Barron reported from New York and Sabrina Tavernise from Peshawar.  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The couple in this Web photo are identified as Faisal Shahzad and Huma Mian. Ms. Mian is thought to be in Pakistan. (A30)                            

Load-Date: May 6, 2010


End of Document
Immigration Is Litmus Test in G.O.P. Race
The New York Times
November 13, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1330 words
Byline: By MAGGIE HABERMAN and MATT FLEGENHEIMER; Jonathan Martin contributed reporting.
Body


A long-simmering debate over immigration in the Republican presidential contest boiled over on Thursday, as Senator Ted Cruz accused his colleague, Senator Marco Rubio, of ''trying to jam this amnesty down the American people's throats.''
From appearances on conservative talk radio to the campaign trail in South Carolina and New Hampshire, five Republican candidates jumped on the issue as they sought to appeal to grass-roots conservatives alarmed about immigration. And the eruption of open warfare between Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz, two candidates representing different wings of the party, showed the likely contours of the Republican presidential fight as it hurtles toward the Iowa caucuses in less than 90 days. 
  Immigration is a key vulnerability for Mr. Rubio, who was initially part of an effort in 2013 to formulate a bipartisan bill in the Senate to overhaul the immigration system. His subsequent moves to distance himself from his role in fashioning the bill have left some conservatives distrustful of his candidacy.
  Mr. Cruz, in an appearance with the conservative radio host Laura Ingraham, denounced Mr. Rubio without using his name and by using a biblical allusion, saying: ''You know where someone is based on their actions. As the Scripture says, you shall know them based on their fruits.''
  The flare-up came as three other lower-polling candidates -- Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky; Rick Santorum, a former Pennsylvania senator; and Carly Fiorina, a former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard -- joined the fight, piling on Mr. Rubio or Mr. Cruz as insufficiently pure on a key litmus test for segments of the Republican base.
  The long-distance skirmishing illustrated the degree to which several candidates see immigration, which emerged as a key issue in the 2014 midterm elections, as the most potent weapon in their arsenal in a presidential contest that has been characterized by concerns about the direction of the country.
  Yet, because of his work on the 2013 immigration reform effort, Mr. Rubio is more familiar with the nuances of the immigration debate than some of his rivals. When asked about Mr. Cruz's critique while campaigning Thursday in South Carolina, Mr. Rubio sought to turn the tables, highlighting the Texas senator's support of allowing more visas to bring foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills into the country.
  ''He supported a massive expansion of the H-1B program, a 500 percent increase,'' he said. ''So, if you look at it, I don't think our positions are dramatically different. I do believe that we have to deal with immigration reform in a serious way, and it begins by proving to people that illegal immigration is under control.''
  During his campaign, Mr. Rubio has said that immigration reform can be addressed only after the border is first secured. He is not in favor of deporting illegal immigrants en masse, as proposed by Donald J. Trump, who leads most polls for the nomination.
  The topic of immigration, and the candidates' efforts to appeal to conservatives on the issue, are taking on new urgency in a race in which Mr. Trump has used caustic language about immigrants and has also called for a ''beautiful'' border wall to keep Mexican immigrants from illegally entering the country.
  Indeed, the strident language on immigration percolated Thursday to the lower rungs of the Republican field, with Mrs. Fiorina and Mr. Paul echoing Mr. Cruz's comments.
  ''I think Marco Rubio's tax credit plan will extend more tax credits to illegal aliens,'' Mr. Paul said. ''There's no way in the world we should support this.''
  Mrs. Fiorina suggested that Mr. Rubio's recent comments against illegal immigration showed how he was a conventional politician shifting to fit the mood of the party.
  In New Hampshire on Thursday morning, Mr. Cruz denounced what he called ''campaign conservatives'' and insisted he had been consistent on issues.
  And Mr. Cruz on Thursday found himself exposed to criticism on immigration from others beside Mr. Rubio: Mr. Santorum, a staunch conservative who was vocal during the culture wars of the 1990s and who won the Iowa caucuses in 2012, sought to paint the Texas senator as inconsistent.
  ''Cruz tough on immigration? Not so fast!'' read a release from Mr. Santorum's campaign, citing the same issue -- guest-worker visas -- that Mr. Rubio did. In an interview, Mr. Santorum pointed to Mr. Cruz's support in 2013 for an amendment to the immigration bill that Mr. Rubio worked on, which would have eliminated a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, but would have granted them legal status to remain in the country.
  Most Republicans ''would say in either case, it's amnesty,'' Mr. Santorum said.
  And in a signal of how hard he intends to fight back, Mr. Rubio's aides posted on Twitter and emailed supporters about a video clip of Mr. Cruz discussing that amendment. Mr. Cruz has since changed his stand on increasing the number of H-1B visas, saying the program needs to be reformed to guard against abuses.
  Illegal immigration has been an animating issue among a segment of the Republican voters for years. But that has particularly been the case in this year's contest, as the party's base is increasingly dominated by older, whiter, working-class voters who have seen their political clout and numbers dwindle in recent years.
  The immigration issue flared briefly during the Republican debate on Tuesday night in Milwaukee, with Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio saying there was no way to conduct the types of mass deportations that Mr. Trump has called for.
  Just after they addressed the issue, the Fox Business Network moderators turned to Mr. Rubio, but instead of pressing him on the issue, they turned to a new topic, sparing him difficult questions in front of a nationally televised audience. But Mr. Cruz seized on the issue when the questions turned to him that night, criticizing those who support ''amnesty,'' and opening up a new front that was followed by directly targeting Mr. Rubio on Thursday.
  Many establishment Republicans and donors support an immigration overhaul and legislation that allows a pathway to citizenship. They are a group to whom Mr. Rubio has appealed in part by arguing that the party has to change the way it speaks to Hispanic voters. And they have been vocal in their fears that the party will be hindered in the general election among Hispanic voters after a nominating contest in which the word ''amnesty'' is frequently used.
  But Mr. Rubio's own language has at times grown harsher; on Thursday, in an interview with the Fox News Channel, Mr. Rubio sounded a note of law and order.
  ''We are going to have to deport some people; otherwise, if you're not going to enforce the law, what's the point of having those laws?'' Mr. Rubio said. ''Criminals are going to be deported. People who haven't been here very long are going to be deported. People overstaying visas are going to have to be deported. That's how you enforce immigration laws.''
  Javier Palomarez, the president of the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, suggested in an interview that what Mr. Rubio was describing would still involve deporting nearly six million people. ''We have to be careful with our words,'' he said. But he declined to criticize Mr. Rubio, saying he wants the chance to speak with him first.
  But for immigration hard-liners, Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz fall short of their expectations.
  ''They still want to talk about this issue in a way that will get a visceral reaction from primary voters but still won't alienate their fund-raisers,'' said Mark Krikorian, the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies. ''At some point, they're going to have to choose between the voters and the billionaires.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/13/us/politics/immigration-fight-boils-over-as-ted-cruz-and-marco-rubio-battle.html

Load-Date: November 13, 2015


End of Document
Start-Ups Are Not Great for Marriages; Fiction
The New York Times 
August 2, 2021 Monday 01:35 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOKS; review
Length: 1425 words
Byline: Lauren Oyler
Highlight: New novels by Tahmima Anam and Y.Z. Chin feature women facing disadvantages in tech.
Body


THE STARTUP WIFE 
By Tahmima Anam
EDGE CASE 
By YZ Chin
Start-ups: We know they’re bad for politics, culture, workers, restaurants, sex, dating, fashion, San Francisco, Seattle, Berlin, local languages other than English, English, and people who enjoyed life more before teenagers could rent electric scooters. Two new novels suggest another downside: They’re also bad for marriage.
Like a C.E.O. trying to disrupt something — anything! — Tahmima Anam’s “The Startup Wife” imagines straying from the path laid by its title. A woman goes into business with her husband, does the grunt work, feels sidelined and is finally vindicated when something goes terribly wrong that her pragmatic advice would have prevented, if only the men had listened to her. “Sometimes being right is actually worse than being wrong,” she says. The marriage won’t work out, either.
Asha Ray is a graduate student at M.I.T. who has been developing “an algorithm designed to unlock the empathetic brain for artificial intelligence.” The daughter of Bangladeshi immigrants who became entrepreneurs the slow, old-fashioned way (owning a small chain of pharmacies called “Health Beats” in Queens), Asha is frustrated by both her fearsome academic adviser and the fact that her dream of building robots to “just be better versions of us” is very hard to realize. When she re-encounters her high school crush, Cyrus Jones, at their English teacher’s funeral, she is still enthralled, and eager to show him the better version of herself. Since dropping out of school after his mother died, Cyrus has cultivated a reputation for a defiant yet sensitive genius, making a living “conducting baptisms and cremations and writing little prayers for people to say at the bedside of a sick relative.” He fancies himself a (devastatingly hot) free spirit, helping people “find … meaning without the baggage of religion.” The pair elope immediately.
Soon they devise a new social media platform: “We Are Infinite,” or WAI, pronounced “why” and amenable to puns with “wise.” A few years ago I was eavesdropping on a conversation at a now-defunct women’s co-working space, and I learned the term for this kind of business arrangement: “partner partners!” Imagine it exclaimed with the same doomed excitement as the title of this novel. Asha adjusts her empathy algorithm so that it can customize nonreligious rituals for users, who can then form communities around “what gives their life meaning, instead of what they like or don’t like.” Their friend Jules provides comic relief and parents who, despite their WASP-y cruelty, pay for everything, until the couple find their funding.
And find it they do. The trio is accepted into a “secretive,” ultraexclusive start-up incubator called Utopia, focusing on projects that will help humanity survive the apocalypse; they’ve been looking for an app to “help people frame their existence” in the “post-world world.” Asha drops out of her Ph.D. program and WAI becomes wildly popular, its founders wildly wealthy.
What’s surprising is not the plot itself, but its wholesomeness — despite all the novel’s trappings of tech skepticism, from understated sendups of silly naming conventions, to an office that requires guests to hop across a trampoline to enter, to a moral lesson about the harmful effects of megalomaniacal scale. Except for the venture capitalists (“If you’re not an assassin, you can’t do your job”), everyone in this novel has good intentions. Asha offers little analysis of the topic about which she is supposedly an underappreciated expert, and as a result the book demonstrates an overall acceptance of the tech industry and its machinations, suggesting its problems can be solved merely by giving women a seat at the table.
Even as the idealist tenets of WAI’s manifesto — no trying to persuade people to buy things, no spying, the team is paramount — crumble, the earnestness with which Anam approaches her characters papers over the selfishness, cynicism and myopia that pervade their insular world. And the heavy foreshadowing suggests a much bigger marital breakdown than the Paltrowian conscious uncoupling we get instead. Although Asha is supposed to be the talented foil to a man who thinks he can get by on good will and charisma, she never keeps the novel itself from trying to do just that.
YZ Chin’s debut novel, “Edge Case,” takes up many of the same themes — love, marriage, tech, race, immigration, parents, death — but instead of user engagement, Chin focuses on engagement with actual problems. The narrator, Edwina, is not a founder, but a lowly “quality assurance analyst” at a company called AInstein, tasked with catching bugs in code before customers do. “The men regularly referred to me in the office as ‘the tester,’” she says. “It always made me think of the sad labeled tubes of lipstick at Sephora, mauve heads battered and ready to transmit oral herpes.”
Pragmatic and droll (a former English major, naturally), she’s under no illusions about the ability of her company to change the world; despite her initial excitement about AInstein’s product — “A robot that could intelligently tell jokes! A selfless companion that would lift spirits, albeit in the form of a crude metal head attached to a (so far) immobile body” — her interest in her job is entirely bureaucratic. She and her husband, Marlin, don’t work together, but they, too, are bound by more than just love: Both are immigrants from Malaysia on H-1B visas who have lived and worked at start-ups in the United States for several years, and their relationship is entangled with the forms they are constantly having to send to the imposing immigration office.
It’s distressing enough that the deadline is approaching for them to apply for green cards, if their respective employers agree to sponsor them. But the novel begins with an even bigger problem: Following the death of his father, Marlin has become moody, isolated and obsessed with a practice called dowsing, which he thinks will help him “contact spirit guides and advisers” who can shepherd him through life’s hard decisions. (As these two novels make clear, the death of a parent is an acceptable reason to become aggressively spiritual.) One day Edwina arrives home to find he has vacated their shared studio apartment and is not responding to her messages.
The novel follows Edwina’s search for Marlin and her accompanying minor breakdown — a longtime vegetarian, she starts eating all the meat she can find, from Chicken McNuggets to an $18 prime rib sandwich. Interwoven through this story are flashbacks to sweet moments from their relationship and disorienting episodes from Edwina’s struggle to adjust to life in America. Chin’s specificity and wonderfully drawn minor characters add depth and richness to a story that another writer might have washed out with the glaring light of moral clarity. Edwina’s obnoxious co-worker is a believably ridiculous tech bro, flirtatiously accusing her of having crushes on the other men in the office, and demanding she read his novel in progress, “a combination of all the best-selling genres: sci-fi, fantasy, mystery, romance.” Her mother, back in Malaysia, appears frequently in a box in the corner of Edwina’s laptop, her fuzzy Skype calls a platform for dispensing advice and “spinning past life stories” about Edwina, often insulting ones. Her mother provides the kind of structure Edwina doesn’t necessarily want, but needs.
What emerges is not only a subtly provocative depiction of the tech industry, and this country, as tilting ever more off-kilter; but also a realistic portrayal of a woman in crisis. Edwina’s problems are of the kind that can’t be solved through faulty logic or convenient substitution, but of course we humans, not yet the best versions of ourselves, will try the faulty logic and convenient substitution anyway. If “The Startup Wife” takes for granted that 21st-century individuals are desperate for meaning and ritual, “Edge Case” shows us why, even as it also shows how our quick fixes, whether they be gimmicky apps or “riots of New Age stuff hybridized willy-nilly with scientific and engineering terms,” will inevitably fall short.
Lauren Oyler is the author of “Fake Accounts.” THE STARTUP WIFE By Tahmima Anam 296 pp. Scribner. $26.  EDGE CASE By YZ Chin 304 pp. Ecco. $26.99. 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Melanie Lambrick FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • A Debut Novel Skewers Startup Culture, Click by Click
    • Confessions of an Internet Addict
    • These Debuts Arrived at a Tough Time. They Deserve Your Attention.

Load-Date: August 14, 2021


End of Document
Quota Limit For High-Skill Visas Is Reached
The New York Times
April 9, 2008 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19; NATIONAL BRIEFING WASHINGTON
Length: 140 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal immigration officials said they had received enough applications for three-year visas for high-skilled immigrants, known as H-1B, to meet the quota of 65,000 for the year beginning Oct. 1. Officials at Citizenship and Immigration Services said they closed the application period, which started April 1, after the pre-set minimum of five days. The agency also received enough applications to surpass an annual quota of 20,000 work visas for immigrants with a master's degree or higher from an American college or university. The agency has not finished counting the applications, but they are expected to greatly exceed the quotas. In coming days, officials said, the agency will run an electronic lottery to select immigrants who will receive visas, in a process that prompted calls from technology businesses to raise the visa limits.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 9, 2008


End of Document
Disney Has No Comment on the Recent Reversal of Layoffs
The New York Times Blogs 
(Times Insider)
June 23, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 573 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Julia Preston tells of the hearing that got her started on her widely read article about Disney laying off 250 people this year. Days after the article appeared, a more recent round of layoffs scheduled by the company was reversed. 
Body


 I have been covering the immigration beat for The New York Times for nine years, so I sensed that my recent story about layoffs of technology employees at Walt Disney World would draw our readers' interest. The employees had been replaced by temporary immigrants, mainly from India, brought in by an outsourcing company, and the laid-off workers had to train the new ones in order to receive a severance.
      But the raw nerve this article touched surprised me. Millions of people read it, and more than 3,000 commented on the article and a related blog post.
      The story started in March with a Senate hearing on the type of visas - known as H-1B - that were used for some of the foreign workers. Several witnesses mentioned the Disney layoffs, which had not been widely reported. Ronil Hira, a public policy professor at Howard University who has done careful research on temporary visas, provided a factual panorama of their uses and abuses. 
      The story took off after I was able to contact several former Disney employees who had been laid off or "forced into retirement," as one put it. I flew to Orlando, and found it revealing to see Disney's kingdom of fun through the eyes of Americans who had been expelled from it. Most had worked a decade or more with the company. 
Disney had also instructed its many contractors in the area to not hire the workers that had been laid off for one year. There are few tech jobs nearby not connected to Disney.   
      Many of the workers said they felt they had to hide in their own hometown. Those I reached insisted on speaking anonymously and arranged to meet in out-of-the-way places. But they spoke powerfully about the humiliation they said they felt spending three months training replacements. They expressed no hard feelings toward the immigrants; they felt ill-treated by Disney.
       Disney executives pointed to more than 30,000 jobs they said the company had created in the United States in the last decade- far more than the 250 technology layoffs. 
Readers were very interested. According to the comments many middle-class Americans said the story captured an experience they have seen all too often: companies outsourcing their work, saying their employees' skills were not up-to-date even after many years on a job.  Our readers saw it as a story about Disney, an American company, making profits at the expense of Americans. 
        After the article ran, Disney provided another number in an email sent to people who wrote the company in protest. The message said the reorganization that led to the layoffs had produced a net gain of 70 technology jobs nationwide.
        But there was one number Disney did not want to discuss. At Disney/ABC television, about 35 tech employees had been told in late May they would be laid-off and would have to train foreign replacements. Days after my story about the Orlando layoffs was published, the new layoffs were canceled. Again, several employees contacted me, but insisted on speaking anonymously. They were greatly relieved their livelihoods had been saved, at least for the moment. But Disney declined to acknowledge those events and wouldn't return my phone calls or emails.
Going forward, I will be keeping an eye out to see if Disney takes other actions indicating a change of course with its tech workers, while looking deeper at other companies that have used H-1B and other temporary visas to displace Americans.   

Load-Date: June 23, 2015


End of Document
THE BUDGET DEAL: IMMIGRATION;
Agency Gains in Deal; Haitians Do So, Too
The New York Times
October 16, 1998, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 25; Column 2; National Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 712 words
Byline: By MIRTA OJITO 

By MIRTA OJITO 
Body


In a significant shift of United States policy toward immigrants, Congressional Republicans and the White House agreed yesterday on a budget proposal that could benefit thousands of immigrants and the Federal agency that serves them.
The agreement lets about 49,000 Haitian refugees stay in the United States legally, increases the number of specialized foreign workers allowed in the country and earmarks $171 million for the Immigration and Naturalization Service to reduce its backlog of citizenship applications (About 1.9 million people are waiting to become citizens).
The deal, which would have seemed impossible two years ago with Congress's anti-immigrant mood, was the result of new Senate leadership, bipartisan alliances, heavy lobbying from advocacy groups, a coincidence of agendas among the Congressional Black Caucus and Republican senators, as well as White House pressure.
But negotiations that led to the agreement were not smooth. Practically all immigration issues were hotly contested until the end, including the amount of money earmarked for citizenship efforts.
In addition, the House did not accept a measure to grant Haitians the right to apply for residency status until the conference committees met to produce a compromise earlier this month.
And the wrangling over the visas for specialized high-tech workers drew the threat of a veto from a White House concerned that there were not proper protections for American workers.
"It was tough going all the way," said Maria Echaveste, deputy chief of staff to the President and one of the main advisers to White House negotiators on immigration.
Ms. Echaveste said Congress had "overreached" when it voted for measures in 1996 that restricted immigration and affected the lives of legal residents. The current agreement, she said, would impart some balance to those laws.
None of the measures directly reverses any of the immigration laws of 1996, but they represent the first good news that immigrants and their advocates have received in a long time. Some advocates said the agreement is telling because it reflects that both Democrats and Republicans are eager to please immigrants, hoping to earn their trust and, eventually, their votes.
"It's a rare day indeed," said Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum. "It's a new day when immigrants are viewed not as easy targets, but as a powerful new constituency."
Advocates for immigrants are particularly pleased that Haitian refugees who have been in this country since 1995 can stay permanently. They will receive the same benefits that were granted last year to about 150,000 Nicaraguans and about 5,000 Cubans, who, like Haitians, came to the United States to escape political turmoil.
Black Congressional leaders complained that leaving Haitians out of the bill amounted to racial discrimination, and Florida's Senators, Connie Mack, a Republican, and Bob Graham, a Democrat, introduced the Haitian Refugees Immigration Fairness Act. Most Haitians who will benefit from the bill live in South Florida. Neither Senator was available for comment yesterday, but aides called the agreement a victory.
Negotiators from the White House and Congress also agreed to a 30-month delay to implement a law that, as of today, would have forced border patrol officers to track every person entering and leaving the United States from Mexico and Canada.
The measure would have caused border delays of up to 24 hours that would have hurt businesses and cost millions of dollars in delayed or lost trade, critics said.
Several immigration initiatives were dropped from the final bill. As a result, the immigration service will remain one agency and American farmers will not be allowed to bring in tens of thousand of foreigners to work in the fields.
But the deal struck yesterday does allow the immigration agency to nearly double the number of employment visas available for skilled foreign workers, a measure that was sought by high-tech industries and introduced in Congress by Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan.
There are 65,000 of the so-called H1B visas available for skilled foreign workers; the bill increases the number to 115,000 for the next two years and sets the number at 107,500 in the third year.
   MIRTA OJITO
      

Load-Date: October 16, 1998


End of Document
Those H-1B Visas And Americans' Jobs 
 The New York Times
June 30, 2002 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 5; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 142 words
Body


To the Editor:
     "As the Tech Economy Goes, So Go Special Visas" (June 16) described the H-1B visa as intended for "highly skilled foreigners to help fill jobs when no qualified Americans can be found." 
 I am so sick and tired of the high-tech employers' whine that schools in the United States are still not turning out enough graduates in math and science. 
American employers don't use the ones that have graduated!
I have a friend with a master's degree in math; I have a bachelor's degree in math and almost a master's in computer science. Yet we've been out of work for over a year with scant opportunities.
Why should we import more H-1B's? Why should my smart college-age kids be interested in pursuing a "career" like their dad's, being a disposable wage slave facing forced early retirement without pension?

JAMES JORDAN
Colorado Springs, June 21


http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 30, 2002


End of Document
Trump's Immigration Plan Returns to Familiar Strategy
The New York Times
August 18, 2015 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17; FIRST DRAFT
Length: 662 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


With the immigration plan he revealed over the weekend, Donald J. Trump returned once again to the strategy that has worked so well for him in his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination: mixing a little policy with a lot of fiery bombast.
In the blueprint and comments he made on the news programs, Mr. Trump went further than his Republican rivals to compile the ideal roster of measures for those who want a lot fewer immigrants in general. He said all illegal immigrants should be deported, including young people who came to this country as children and have received protections though executive action by President Obama. He implied he would deport American citizens if their parents were here illegally. 
  ''We have to keep the families together, but they have to go,'' Mr. Trump said.
  Some of his proposals are based on assertions that have been broadly debunked. He portrayed undocumented Mexican immigrants as uneducated criminals who have been living off ''hundreds of billions'' of American taxpayer dollars for their health care and education. But scholarly research has shown that undocumented immigrants are much more reluctant to use public health care than Americans. And billions of dollars of Social Security taxes they have paid for benefits they cannot collect have shored up the dwindling funds of that system.
  Mr. Trump accused Mexico of exporting its crime and poverty to the United States. But while a bloody drug war has raged in Mexico in the last five years, notably little violence has spilled over into the United States, with several border cities being among the safest in the nation. Mr. Trump would build a wall across the length of the southwest border, a proposal Border Patrol officials have long rejected as immensely costly and inefficient.
  But Mr. Trump's blueprint is a problem for his Republican rivals who have tried to take fewer hard-line positions on immigration in an effort to attract Latino voters, like former Gov. Jeb Bush and Senator Marco Rubio, both of Florida. The plan crystallizes a hostile approach to Mexico and Mexican immigrants that is likely to stick in the minds of many Latino voters as reflective of the overall Republican view of immigration.
  To force Mexico to pay for the border wall, Mr. Trump says he would ''impound all remittance payments derived from illegal wages.'' A curb on remittances would attack longstanding lifelines between Mexican and other Latino immigrant communities in the United States and families back home -- often older parents or young children -- who rely on regular payments from workers here. Mr. Trump also favors raising fees on visas and border-crossing documents for Mexicans, making it even harder and more expensive for them to come legally.
  About 35 million people in this country were born in Mexico or claim Mexican ancestry, according to census figures, and Mexican-Americans are the fastest-growing group of new voters. About half of Mexican immigrants are undocumented, so their communities follow the immigration debate closely.
  Mr. Trump also called for an end to birthright citizenship, a proposal other Republicans have avoided because it is hard to achieve and risks alienating not only Latinos but also African-Americans. It involves changing the Constitution's 14th Amendment, which allowed freed African slaves to become citizens after the Civil War.
  Yet among Mr. Trump's populist proposals are some that could attract support from Americans in the beleaguered middle class. He went further than his rivals calling for changes to the temporary work visas known as H-1B, to raise the wages paid to immigrants and tighten requirements for employers to search first for Americans to fill jobs.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/08/17/donald-trumps-immigration-plan-would-have-far-ranging-effects/

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mexican-Americans protested a visit by Donald J. Trump in Birch Run, Mich., last Tuesday. He would deport all illegal migrants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REBECCA COOK/REUTERS)       

Load-Date: August 18, 2015


End of Document
Donald Trump's Claims on Immigration: A Reality Check
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
August 17, 2015 Monday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 642 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Donald J. Trump went further than his Republican rivals to offer a hard-line plan to crack down on illegal immigration and to reduce immigration in general. 
Body


With the immigration plan he revealed over the weekend, Donald J. Trump returned once again to the strategy that has worked so well for him in his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination: mixing a little policy with a lot of fiery bombast.
In the blueprint and comments he made on the news shows, Mr. Trump went farther than his Republican rivals to compile the ideal roster of measures for those who want a lot fewer immigrants in general. He said all illegal immigrants should be deported, including young people who came to this country as children and have received protections though executive action by President Obama. He implied he would deport American citizens if their parents were here illegally.
"We have to keep the families together, but they have to go," Mr. Trump said.
Some of his proposals are based on assertions that have been broadly debunked. He portrayed undocumented Mexican immigrants as uneducated criminals who have been living off "hundreds of billions" of American taxpayer dollars for their health care and education. But scholarly research has shown that undocumented immigrants are much more reluctant to use public health care than Americans. And billions of dollars of Social Security taxes they have paid for benefits they cannot collect have shored up the dwindling funds of that system.
Mr. Trump accused Mexico of exporting its crime and poverty to the United States. But while a bloody drug war has raged in Mexico in the last five years, notably little violence has spilled over into the United States, with several border cities being among the safest in the nation. Mr. Trump would build a wall across the length of the southwest border, a proposal Border Patrol officials have long rejected as immensely costly and inefficient.
But Mr. Trump's blueprint is a problem for his Republican rivals who have tried to take less hard line positions on immigration in an effort to attract Latino voters, like former Gov. Jeb Bush and Senator Marco Rubio, both of Florida. The plan crystallizes a hostile approach to Mexico and Mexican immigrants that is likely to stick in the minds of many Latino voters as reflective of the overall Republican view of immigration.
To force Mexico to pay for the border wall, Mr. Trump says he would "impound all remittance payments derived from illegal wages." A curb on remittances would attack longstanding lifelines between Mexican and other Latino immigrant communities in the United States and families back home - often elderly parents or young children - who rely on regular payments from workers here. Mr. Trump also favors raising fees on visas and border-crossing documents for Mexicans, making it even harder and more expensive for them to come legally.
About 35 million people in this country were born in Mexico or claim Mexican ancestry, according to Census figures, and Mexican-Americans are the fastest growing group of new voters. About half of Mexican immigrants are undocumented, so their communities follow the immigration debate closely.
Mr. Trump also called for an end to birthright citizenship, a proposal other Republicans have avoided because it is hard to achieve and risks alienating not only Latinos but also African-Americans. It involves changing the Constitution's 14th amendment, which allowed freed African slaves to become citizens after the Civil War.
Yet among Mr. Trump's populist proposals are some that could attract support from Americans in the beleaguered middle class. He went further than his rivals calling for changes to the temporary work visas known as H-1B, to raise the wages paid to immigrants and tighten requirements for employers to search first for Americans to fill jobs.
 Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via            Facebook,            Twitter and            the First Draft newsletter. 

Load-Date: August 17, 2015


End of Document
The Nation: The Immigration Debate;
Full Employment Opens the Door
The New York Times
June 18, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk 
Section: Section 4; ; Section 4; Page 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 913 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA 

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
Body


JUST a few years ago, lawmakers were in full cry about the supposed dangers of immigration -- from crime to welfare cheats to lost jobs.
Yet now Congress is poised to pass a bill that would grant visas to tens of thousands more temporary high-tech workers from abroad. And an unlikely coalition of business and immigrants rights groups is pushing to fling the door open wider: to unskilled workers who could fill shortages in hotels and on farms, and even to roll back an array of restrictive measures passed with great fanfare in 1996.
Clearly, the national conversation about immigrants and immigration has changed dramatically. Representative Howard L. Berman, a Democrat from California, described the political momentum generated by the temporary workers bill this way: "There's a train going through. Can I get on it?"
Sometime later this summer, Congress is expected to pass H1B, which would nearly double, to 200,000, the number of such visas issued every year for the next three years. The measure has bipartisan support, including the blessings of both presumptive Presidential candidates .
If it passes, H1B will be the largest guest worker measure since the 1942 bracero program, which imported millions of Mexicans farmworkers into virtual servitude, until it was dismantled in 1964.
A broad new service industry coalition, representing everything from hospitals to hotels, is seeking its own temporary workers from abroad. And agribusiness, which has unsuccessfully lobbied for temporary field workers in the past, has renewed its efforts.
Meanwhile, traditional immigrants rights groups are urging lawmakers to lift the 1996 measures that bar immigrants from some government benefits, tighten political asylum rules and require the automatic deportation of non-citizens who had been convicted of certain felony crimes.
A coalition calling itself "Fix 96," is urging lawmakers to repeal the mandatory deportation law and restore social security benefits and food stamps to immigrants who arrived after 1996; benefits to pre-1996 immigrants have already been restored.
Another coalition of business and civil rights groups is calling on Congress to grant legal status to some 300,000 immigrants who fled political violence in El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti and Honduras but were denied refugee status in this country. The same group wants Congress to raise the cap on family reunification visas, while religious leaders and a left-right coalition led by Henry Cisneros and Jack Kemp have called for amnesty for others who have lived here illegally for many years.
In what Rick Swartz, a leading immigration lobbyist, calls the "H1B- plus" strategy, activists are trying to bundle both the family reunification and amnesty proposals with the high-tech worker bill, turning it into a kind of omnibus immigration measure.
"The economy is very strong right now and who knows what it's going to look like a year from now," Mr. Swarz said. "A strong economy enables you to do more. Secondly, an election year in which the politics of immigration may be more positive than negative. Third, you have both major presidential candidates being pro-immigrant at least in their rhetoric."
Of course, good times have usually meant open doors, and these are, economically, the best times ever. Still, none of the other immigration bills enjoy anything like the consensus surrounding H1B. The farm lobby's guest worker bill, which the House immigration subcommittee debated Thursday, is likely to face strong opposition from labor and Latino groups, who don't accept the industry's claims of a labor shortage. They want a provision to legalize the immigration status of farm workers, a majority of whom are undocumented Hispanic immigrants, while the industry bill would allow some farm workers to gain permanent residency.
John Young, executive director of the New England Apple Council who heads the immigration committee of the National Council of Agricultural Employers, remains optimistic. "I think the opportunity is very good for passage, better than it has been in the past few years," he said.
ASERVICE industry umbrella group called the Essential Worker Coalition also cites labor shortages in tourism and other trades, and has just begun what it likes to call an H1B program tailored for groundskeepers, housekeepers and other low-skilled workers, many of them seasonal.
"The high-tech industry has done a very good job in making their case," argued John Gay, a lobbyist for the American Hotel and Motel association and a spokesman for the coalition. "We need to do the same making our case."
Many service industry workers are illegal immigrants from Central America and Haiti, and Mr. Gay's group has thrown its support behind the National Council of La Raza, a leading Latino rights group, which proposes amnesty for undocumented immigrants who have lived and worked here since 1986.
One area in which there has been little movement has been the restoration of government benefits that were cut in 1996. A number of bills have been introduced to repeal the mandatory deportation law, but none have made it out of the immigration subcommittees. Efforts to restore the due process rights of asylum-seekers have had a similar fate.
To Mr. Swartz, the reason is clear. "It's harder to get the business community to support a bill on the legal rights of people getting deported," he pointed out, "than to get a legalization program for Central Americans who are working in their restaurants."

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: June 18, 2000


End of Document
Visas for Foreign Workers
The New York Times
May 1, 2017 Monday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. ; LETTER
Length: 165 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''How 'Hire American' Could Affect a World of Tech Workers'' (news article, April 19): 
  The problem with the H-1B visa program is that it depresses the price of tech jobs, which in turn lowers the desirability for tech jobs and the incentive for American students to seek math and science education.
  This would be true to some extent even if the system weren't abused, but The New York Times and other outlets have shown that employment companies are gaming the lottery system and being used not just to fill a critical opening but also to replace entire departments of citizens who are already working.
  The invisible hand is supposed to respond to a shortage by raising the price. Bringing in substitute labor from foreign countries lowers the price. I don't know what President Trump has in mind, but if companies are allowed to lower the price of tech jobs, the American work force will continue its decline as a leader in math and science.
  JOHN MCGLOIN, STATEN ISLAND

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/01/opinion/visas-for-foreign-workers.html

Load-Date: May 1, 2017


End of Document
Visas for Foreign Workers; Letter
The New York Times 
May 1, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 163 words
Highlight: “If companies are allowed to lower the price of tech jobs, the American work force will continue its decline as a leader in math and science.”
Body


To the Editor:
Re “How ‘Hire American’ Could Affect a World of Tech Workers” (news article, April 19):
The problem with the H-1B visa program is that it depresses the price of tech jobs, which in turn lowers the desirability for tech jobs and the incentive for American students to seek math and science education.
This would be true to some extent even if the system weren’t abused, but The New York Times and other outlets have shown that employment companies are gaming the lottery system and being used not just to fill a critical opening but also to replace entire departments of citizens who are already working.
The invisible hand is supposed to respond to a shortage by raising the price. Bringing in substitute labor from foreign countries lowers the price. I don’t know what President Trump has in mind, but if companies are allowed to lower the price of tech jobs, the American work force will continue its decline as a leader in math and science.
JOHN MCGLOIN, STATEN ISLAND

Load-Date: May 2, 2017


End of Document
The Tone and the Content of the Republican Debate
The New York Times
March 12, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; LETTERS
Length: 293 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Candidates Lower Volume as Five Key Primaries Near'' (front page, March 11): 
  The change of tone was calculated and totally unconvincing. To hear the narcissism (and all other things ugly) coming from the leading candidate, Donald Trump, is thoroughly nauseating, regardless of whether it comes via yelling and name calling or soft-speak. And Marco Rubio seemed no more capable or ready to be president than he did when making crude jokes. I noticed no significant change in tenor in the performances of Ted Cruz and John Kasich.
  GARY WALDMAN
  Delray Beach, Fla.
  To the Editor:
  Marco Rubio stuck his foot in his mouth when he was asked about climate change. He went into a long-winded tirade that climate change is caused by the changing climate and that there is no law that can be passed that will affect it. Then he said that anything we did wouldn't make any difference because of all the pollution caused by China and India. To state that the activities of China and India are affecting climate change is to admit that human activity is causing climate change. This is a complete contradiction to his arguments and the position of many Republicans that human activity is not causing climate change.
  BRUCE ROZENBLIT
  Kansas City, Mo.
  To the Editor:
  Donald Trump's defense of his use of H-1B visas to hire foreigners instead of American workers -- ''I'm a businessman and I have to do what I have to do'' -- is classic business hypocrisy. It's the same defense used for underpaying workers, refusing to clean up the environment and ruthlessly manipulating workers' hours to avoid providing benefits. And the others on stage gave him a pass on that lame explanation.
  And these guys call Hillary Clinton unethical?
  JIM MILLER
  Tucson

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/12/opinion/the-tone-and-the-content-of-the-republican-debate.html

Load-Date: March 12, 2016


End of Document
Veteran Senator Emerges as Player on Immigration Overhaul
The New York Times
May 21, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1225 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER; Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from San Francisco.
Body


WASHINGTON -- As proponents of a new immigration overhaul cast about for a Republican ally to help give their bill an extra boost, they have focused on a 79-year-old lawmaker with new hipster glasses (from Costco), black Nike sneakers (for his bad arches) and, perhaps most important, a deep and complicated relationship with immigration policy: Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah.
Members of the bipartisan group of eight senators who drafted an overhaul of the nation's immigration laws see Mr. Hatch as a potentially influential partner. He was an original co-sponsor of the Dream Act for younger immigrants and has shown a willingness to embrace other immigration legislation as well. Though he ran to the right during a primary challenge in the 2012 election, they believe he might be brought back into the fold now that he is safely ensconced in his seventh Senate term.
''Senator Hatch is somebody who understands these issues well, has a long history, and it would very valuable to have him support our bill, both in committee and on the floor,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York and a member of the bipartisan group, who also sits on the Judiciary Committee with Mr. Hatch.
In an effort to increase Mr. Hatch's investment in the legislation, Mr. Schumer and other members of the bipartisan group on Monday threw their support behind a Hatch initiative to begin collecting biometric information like fingerprints at airports to register immigrants when they leave the country.
With the exception of two Republican members of the bipartisan group who also sit on the Judiciary Committee -- Senators Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina -- Mr. Hatch is considered the other Republican member most likely to support the bill, which would give it some conservative gravitas as it heads to the Senate floor.
The bipartisan group is hoping for a large Senate vote in support of the bill -- some members have suggested as many as 70 votes -- to place pressure on House Republicans to also get behind the legislation. And Mr. Hatch's ''yes'' vote is seen as a driver for what they hope will be a groundswell of support. Mr. Hatch, who hails from a state with a dynamic immigration culture, meanwhile finds himself with a final chance to help pass a broad immigration overhaul, something in which he has both publicly and privately expressed a genuine interest.
But Mr. Hatch's ''yes'' vote in committee comes with a major caveat -- the acceptance of provisions of his that would, among other things, help technology companies by increasing the number of temporary visas available for high-skilled workers (known as H-1B visas) and ease restrictions around the hiring and firing of workers. He also is offering some provisions on the finance side, including one that would require immigrants to show they have paid back taxes and are staying current with them as they proceed toward legal status.
''I personally believe we need immigration reform,'' said Mr. Hatch, adding that his tweaks to the bill are ''amendments that clean it up and make it a better bill, and may even be able to get it more votes.'' The provisions are also, he explained, an all-but-ironclad requirement for earning his vote: ''They know my point is I've got to have those,'' he said, referring to the message he has communicated to the group.
And so last week, as the committee met twice to discuss the bill publicly, the behind-the-scenes negotiating and arm-twisting picked up in earnest, with Mr. Schumer's office taking the lead in trying to work out an agreement with Mr. Hatch.
''He's made it clear that having his support will be dependent on the committee accepting his proposals to improve the bill,'' said Alex Conant, a spokesman for Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, one of the Republican authors. ''We think accepting his improvements and having his support is critical to getting the broad Republican support we want.''
A particular source of tension is Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Senate Democrat and another member of the bipartisan group, who opposes many of Mr. Hatch's amendments because he thinks they would hurt American workers.
''Some of them are absolutely unacceptable,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''What he wants to do is make it easier for firms seeking H-1B visas not to hire Americans.''
Still, Mr. Durbin acknowledged the delicate political realities: ''We want all the support we can get, but if the price of support of any Republican member is for us to turn this carefully crafted, politically balanced deal on its head, it's not worth it.''
If Mr. Hatch succeeds in getting what he wants, it would be a coup both for the senator and the technology industry. Mr. Hatch can fall back on the high-tech community to strengthen his hand, as he did in a committee meeting last week when he warned, ''There's a whole tech world that's getting up in arms if we don't do this right, and they alone can make this bill very difficult to pass.'' And the tech industry will have found a strong advocate in Mr. Hatch to further push their cause in Congress.
By late Monday night, Senate aides said, Mr. Hatch was closing in on a deal with the bipartisan group, and was expected to offer his high-tech amendments on Tuesday.
''Senator Hatch has a long history of leadership on high-tech issues,'' said Dan Turrentine, the vice president of government relations and business development at TechNet, a trade group that advocates for a range of Silicon Valley companies. ''His interest in immigration and efforts to ensure the workability of well-intentioned high-skilled reforms proposed by the Gang of Eight makes him a natural to be at the center of negotiations as he seeks to strengthen the bill and broaden support.''
Utah has been nicknamed the ''Silicon Slopes'' for the more than 5,000 high-tech companies that populate the state, and in some ways, Utah itself is as diverse on the topic of immigration as its two senators. In contrast to Mr. Hatch, Senator Mike Lee, a Republican who also sits on the Judiciary Committee, has advocated breaking up the legislation into smaller pieces and does not necessarily support a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants already in the country.
In 2010, the state's business, political, religious and law-enforcement leaders got behind the Utah Compact, a document intended to offer an open-minded and holistic approach to immigration. The Mormon Church, of which Mr. Hatch is a member, also endorsed the compact and has offered a similarly broad view toward immigration.
In addition to being one of the original co-sponsors of the Dream Act, a bill that surfaced more than a decade ago and would create a formal path to citizenship for young people brought to the United States illegally as children, Mr. Hatch has worked on other components of the immigration debate. He helped draft the agricultural workers program that is part of the Senate bill.
Though he backed away from immigration reform when he faced a tough primary challenge in 2012, many immigration advocates believe he is now ready to come around to their side.
''I think there is the political space now for Senator Hatch to talk about these issues that he has a track record of being supportive of,'' said Ben Johnson, the executive director of the American Immigration Council.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/21/us/politics/senator-hatch-emerges-as-key-player-on-immigration-reform.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah during an interview at the Capitol last week. He added provisions to an immigration bill drafted by a bipartisan group of senators. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER GREGORY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: May 21, 2013


End of Document
ON NYTIMES.COM
The New York Times
April 12, 2009 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 224 words
Dateline: A slide show of work by Martha Cooper 
Body


-- known as Kodakgirl -- whose photographs have chronicled subway graffiti and urban art for decades.
  nytimes.com/thecity
  SLIDESHOW: PENTECOSTAL FIRE
  A visit to the Bronx parish of the Redeemed Christian Church of God, where Pastor Daniel Ajayi-Adeniran, at left, preaches a fiery form of Pentecostalism.
  nytimes.com/magazine
  AUDIO: AT THE AUTO SHOW
  At the 2009 New York International Auto Show, consumers have mixed views about the industry. 
  nytimes.com/autoshow
  Opinion
  100 Days
  How to End a War
  Bringing troops home from Iraq may require President Obama to be like Ike, writes Jean Edward Smith. The blog also features a new interactive timeline, with audio, documents and photos of the notable early moments of five presidencies.
  nytimes.com/100days
  VIDEO: SIGNS OF WEAR 
  In Palm Beach
  Palm Beach, Fla., may have lost more money per square mile than any other town because of the economy and Bernard L. Madoff's Ponzi scheme.
  nytimes.com/business
  AUDIO: IMMIGRANTS' VOICES
  Four skilled immigrants with H-1B visas -- a physicist, a designer, a doctor, and an architect -- share their experience of working in America.
  nytimes.com/immigration
  AUDIO: ART IN THE EVERYDAY
  Jean Shin, an artist who finds art in severed pant legs, castoff pill bottles and other recycled objects, discusses her body of work.
  nytimes.com/design

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARTHA COOPER
 FINLAY MACKAY)                                                          

Load-Date: April 12, 2009


End of Document
The Immigration Debate We Need
The New York Times
February 27, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Length: 1620 words
Byline: By GEORGE BORJAS
George Borjas is a professor of economics and social policy at the Harvard Kennedy School and the author of, most recently, ''We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative.''
Body


The first month of the Trump administration has already changed the direction of the immigration debate, with many more changes coming soon. So far, executive orders and deportations dominate the discussion. But the fight over how many refugees to admit or how best to vet those refugees obscures what the debate is really about.
Changes in social policy do not make everyone better off, and immigration policy is no exception. I am a refugee, having fled Cuba as a child in 1962. Not only do I have great sympathy for the immigrant's desire to build a better life, I am also living proof that immigration policy can benefit some people enormously. 
  But I am also an economist, and am very much aware of the many trade-offs involved. Inevitably, immigration does not improve everyone's well-being. There are winners and losers, and we will need to choose among difficult options. The improved lives of the immigrants come at a price. How much of a price are the American people willing to pay, and exactly who will pay it?
  This tension permeates the debate over immigration's effect on the labor market. Those who want more immigration claim that immigrants do jobs that native-born Americans do not want to do. But we all know that the price of gas goes down when the supply of oil goes up. The laws of supply and demand do not evaporate when we talk about the price of labor rather than the price of gas. By now, the well-documented abuses of the H-1B program, such as the Disney workers who had to train their foreign-born replacements, should have obliterated the notion that immigration does not harm competing native workers.
  Over the past 30 years, a large fraction of immigrants, nearly a third, were high school dropouts, so the incumbent low-skill work force formed the core group of Americans who paid the price for the influx of millions of workers. Their wages fell as much as 6 percent. Those low-skill Americans included many native-born blacks and Hispanics, as well as earlier waves of immigrants.
  But somebody's lower wage is somebody else's higher profit. The increase in the profitability of many employers enlarged the economic pie accruing to the entire native population by about $50 billion. So, as proponents of more immigration point out, immigration can increase the aggregate wealth of Americans. But they don't point out the trade-off involved: Workers in jobs sought by immigrants lose out.
  They also don't point out that low-skill immigration has a side effect that reduces that $50 billion increase in wealth. The National Academy of Sciences recently estimated the impact of immigration on government budgets. On a year-to-year basis, immigrant families, mostly because of their relatively low incomes and higher frequency of participating in government programs like subsidized health care, are a fiscal burden. A comparison of taxes paid and government spending on these families showed that immigrants created an annual fiscal shortfall of $43 billion to $299 billion.
  Even the most conservative estimate of the fiscal shortfall wipes out much of the $50 billion increase in native wealth. Remarkably, the size of the native economic pie did not change much after immigration increased the number of workers by more than 15 percent. But the split of the pie certainly changed, giving far less to workers and much more to employers.
  The immigration debate will also have to address the long-term impact on American society, raising the freighted issue of immigrant assimilation. In recent decades, there has been a noticeable slowdown in the rate at which the economic status of immigrants improves over time. In the 1970s, the typical immigrant could expect a substantial improvement relative to natives over his or her lifetime. Today, the economic progress of the typical immigrant is much more stagnant.
  Part of the slowdown is related to the growth of ethnic enclaves. New immigrants who find few ethnic compatriots get value from acquiring skills that allow more social and economic exchanges, such as becoming proficient in English. But new immigrants who find a large and welcoming community of their countrymen have less need to acquire those skills; they already have a large audience that values whatever they brought with them. Put bluntly, mass migration discourages assimilation.
  The trade-offs become even more difficult when we think about the long-term integration of the children and grandchildren of today's immigrants. Many look back at the melting pot in 20th-century America and assume that history will repeat itself. That's probably wishful thinking. That melting pot operated in a particular economic, social and political context, and it is doubtful that those conditions can be reproduced today.
  Many of the Ellis Island-era immigrants got jobs in manufacturing; Ford's work force was 75 percent foreign-born in 1914. Those manufacturing jobs evolved into well-paid union jobs, creating a private-sector safety net for the immigrants and their descendants. Does anyone seriously believe that the jobs employing low-skill immigrants today will offer the same economic mobility that unionized manufacturing jobs provided?
  Similarly, the ideological climate that encouraged assimilation back then, neatly encapsulated by our motto ''E pluribus unum'' (Out of many, one), is dead and gone. A recent University of California directive shows the radical shift. The university's employees were advised to avoid using phrases that can lead to ''microaggressions'' toward students and one another. One example is the statement ''America is a melting pot,'' which apparently sends a message to the recipient that they have to ''assimilate to the dominant culture.''
  Europe is already confronting the difficulties produced by the presence of unassimilated populations. If nothing else, the European experience shows that there is no universal law that guarantees integration even after a few generations. We, too, will need to confront the trade-off between short-term economic gains and the long-term costs of a large, unassimilated minority.
  Identifying the trade-offs is only a first step toward a more sensible immigration policy. We also need some general principles, combining common sense and compassion.
  First and foremost, we must reduce illegal immigration. It has had a corrosive impact, paralyzing discussion on all aspects of immigration reform. A wall along the Mexican border may signal that we are getting serious, but many undocumented immigrants enter the country legally and then overstay their visas. A national electronic system (such as E-Verify) mandating that employers certify new hires, along with fines and criminal penalties for lawbreaking businesses, might go a long way toward stemming the flow.
  But what about the 11-million-plus undocumented immigrants already here? A vast majority have led peaceful lives and established deep roots in our communities. Their sudden deportation would not represent the compassionate America that many of us envision.
  Perhaps it's time for some benign neglect. Many will eventually qualify for visas because they have married American citizens or have native-born children. Rather than fight over a politically impossible amnesty, we could accelerate the granting of family-preference visas to that population.
  We will also need to decide how many immigrants to admit. Economists seldom confess their ignorance, but we truly have no clue about what that number should be. About one million legal immigrants a year entered the country in the past two decades. The political climate suggests that many Americans view that number as too high. History shows that when voters get fed up with immigration, there is no reluctance to cut off the flow altogether. Back in the 1990s, Barbara Jordan's immigration commission recommended an annual target of about 550,000 immigrants. Such a cut would be significant, but it may be preferable to the alternative, which, in this political climate, could mean shutting off the flow.
  Finally, we need to choose between highly skilled and less-skilled applicants. High-skill immigrants, who pay higher taxes and receive fewer services and can potentially expand the frontier of knowledge, are more profitable for us. But giving an opportunity to the huddled masses is part of what makes our country exceptional.
  Regardless of the allocation, employers should not walk away with all the gains, and workers should not suffer all the losses. We need to ensure a more equitable sharing of the gains and losses among the American people.
  No matter where one stands in the ideological divide, President Trump has already answered the fundamental question guiding the design of a more rational policy. In his speech at the Republican National Convention, he described how he would pick among the available choices: ''We are going to be considerate and compassionate to everyone,'' he said. ''But my greatest compassion will be for our own struggling citizens.''
  He added, ''We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.''
  Many of my colleagues in the academic community -- and many of the elite opinion-makers in the news media -- recoil when they hear that immigration should serve the interests of Americans. Their reaction is to label such thinking as racist and xenophobic, and to marginalize anyone who agrees.
  But those accusations of racism reflect their effort to avoid a serious discussion of the trade-offs. The coming debate would be far more honest and politically transparent if we demanded a simple answer from those who disagree with ''America First'' proposals: Who are you rooting for?

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/27/opinion/the-immigration-debate-we-need.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY LOGAN FITZPATRICK)       

Load-Date: February 27, 2017


End of Document
Donald Trump Jr. Retreats From Foreign Policy on India Trip
The New York Times 
February 23, 2018 Friday 15:17 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1205 words
Byline: Vindu Goel and Maria Abi-Habib
Highlight: A speech in New Delhi was to focus on “Indo-Pacific” ties. After criticism about mixing profit and policy, it became a chat about business and family.
Body


NEW DELHI — After days of controversy over whether he would blur the lines between American foreign policy and his family’s real estate business during a trip to India to sell condos, Donald Trump Jr. on Friday abandoned plans to give a policy speech and instead gave an interview with an Indian journalist, sticking to safe topics.
His remarks in the interview — about his father’s successful 2016 presidential campaign, how little the family sees him now, and India’s great entrepreneurial spirit — were so anodyne that when the Bollywood star Shah Rukh Khan entered the room near the end of the interview, people lifted their phones to take photos of the actor and stopped paying attention to the oldest child of America’s president.
“I’m here as a businessman,” Mr. Trump told a crowd of about 2,000 business and political leaders, who were gathered for the annual business conference hosted by India’s most powerful media company, The Times Group. “I’m not representing anyone.”
But his efforts to distance himself from administration policy were met with some skepticism.
“Though he claims that it’s not an official speech, we take it as an official statement,” said P. V. Sunil, a managing director of a company that builds malls and cinema complexes in India and Singapore. “He speaks to his father more than anyone here.”
Mr. Trump has spent the last week in India promoting new luxury housing projects in the country, the biggest foreign market for Trump real estate interests outside of North America.
He originally intended to give a speech Friday on “Indo-Pacific” cooperation, a policy idea recently championed by President Trump as a counterweight to China’s rising influence. That sparked an uproar, underscoring how the Trump family, with some members working in the White House and others running the family business, has obscured the traditional line between public and private interests.
Ethicists and former government officials with both major political parties have raised concerns that foreign-policy decisions made by the White House could affect the Trump Organization’s business prospects, and in turn, the president’s wealth. Although the president has turned over management of the company to Donald Trump Jr. and another son, Eric Trump, he still holds a huge financial interest in Trump projects around the world.
Two organizers of Friday’s conference said that they had proposed the Indo-Pacific topic to Donald Trump Jr.’s team and that he had agreed to address it. On Thursday, after criticism by ethicists and a Democratic senator, Mr. Trump requested that the topic be changed, they said.
Shortly after Mr. Trump’s interview, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, gave his own keynote speech about India’s economic progress.
Mr. Trump has downplayed ethical concerns during his India visit, saying the company’s promise not to seek new foreign projects during his father’s presidency had hurt its business.
Eric Trump said in an interview on Friday that the criticism of his brother was unfair and unjustified. He said that although he was not involved in the discussions regarding his brother’s speech, there was nothing wrong with the original topic.
“We have been doing business in India for many years,” he said. “I don’t understand the problem with celebrating the camaraderie between two great countries.”
During his onstage interview, Donald Trump Jr. went out of his way to suggest that the Trumps do not mix politics and business, even when they all get together.
“We see him so little that it’s really about being a family,” he said of his father. “We don’t talk politics.”
Donald Trump Jr. was deeply involved in his father’s campaign, meeting with a Russian lawyer who promised political dirt on Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate. That meeting, and how Mr. Trump and the White House responded to public disclosure of it last July, are            now being scrutinized by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating Russian interference in the 2016 election.
In India, officials have struggled to understand what the Trump White House means for Indo-American relations.
“Under Trump, you cannot be sure the policy today will be the policy tomorrow,” said C. Raja Mohan, a foreign-policy analyst and director of Carnegie India. “That is a huge problem.”
India views some of the president’s evolving positions as favorable and others as less so.
His recent criticism of Pakistan as a haven for terrorists has been music to the ears of leaders in New Delhi, some of whom view that neighboring country in much the same way. The president has also signaled that he sees a more important role for India, along with other traditional American allies like Japan and Australia, in an Indo-Pacific grouping that would curb Beijing’s influence.
The Trump administration has strengthened military ties with New Delhi and discussed a flurry of defense agreements, including one that may see the F-16 fighter jet move its production line from Texas to India.
At the same time, there are significant tensions between the Modi government and the Trump administration on several critical issues, including immigration and trade policy.
In an effort to boost Indian manufacturing, the Modi government has raised tariffs on imported products like electronics and beauty products. India has also tangled with American drug companies over patent protections for their products. In 2017, the United States had a $23 billion trade deficit with India.
Indian immigrants are also a large segment of the work force of American technology companies. President Trump campaigned on curbing such immigration and has gradually tightened the rules governing the H-1B and other visas used by tech workers.
On Thursday, the administration announced rules that would make it harder for Indian outsourcers that have many corporate customers to bring workers to the United States and move them from site to site. Friday’s conference was in full swing as news spread of the administration’s latest move to restrict H-1B visas.
With the younger Mr. Trump, who has voiced strong support for his father’s tough stance on immigration, sitting in the audience, Uber’s chief executive officer, Dara Khosrowshahi, took a dig at the president.
“The American dream is the single most incredible brand in the world,” said Mr. Khosrowshahi, whose family immigrated from Iran. “I’m worried that the attitude this American administration has on immigration will ruin that brand.”
The journalist who interviewed Mr. Trump, Supriya Shrinate, pressed him on immigration, asking whether he thought it was fair that he could travel the world and invest in places like India, while the United States tightened immigration rules.
Mr. Trump dodged the question, before Ms. Shrinate finally asked: “Is the American dream still alive? A lot of people in this audience beg to differ.”
“I think 100 percent it is,” Mr. Trump said.
Eric Lipton contributed reporting from Washington. 
PHOTO: A newspaper bearing an image of Donald Trump Jr. in New Delhi. (PHOTOGRAPH BY The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As Donald Trump Jr. Drums Up Business in India, Some Ask What’s Being Sold
    • President or Luxury Towers: Either Way, Trump Is the Rage in India

Load-Date: October 9, 2018


End of Document
On Trip to India, Trump's Son Retreats From Foreign Policy
The New York Times
February 24, 2018 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL and MARIA ABI-HABIB; Eric Lipton contributed reporting from Washington.
Body


NEW DELHI -- After days of controversy over whether he would blur the lines between American foreign policy and his family's real estate business during a trip to India to sell condos, Donald Trump Jr. on Friday abandoned plans to give a policy speech and instead gave an interview with an Indian journalist, sticking to safe topics.
His remarks in the interview -- about his father's successful 2016 presidential campaign, how little the family sees him now, and India's great entrepreneurial spirit -- were so anodyne that when the Bollywood star Shah Rukh Khan entered the room near the end of the interview, people lifted their phones to take photos of the actor and stopped paying attention to the oldest child of America's president. 
  ''I'm here as a businessman,'' Mr. Trump told a crowd of about 2,000 business and political leaders, who were gathered for the annual business conference hosted by India's most powerful media company, The Times Group. ''I'm not representing anyone.''
  But his efforts to distance himself from administration policy were met with some skepticism.
  ''Though he claims that it's not an official speech, we take it as an official statement,'' said P. V. Sunil, a managing director of a company that builds malls and cinema complexes in India and Singapore. ''He speaks to his father more than anyone here.''
  Mr. Trump has spent the last week in India promoting new luxury housing projects in the country, the biggest foreign market for Trump real estate interests outside of North America.
  He originally intended to give a speech Friday on ''Indo-Pacific'' cooperation, a policy idea recently championed by President Trump as a counterweight to China's rising influence. That sparked an uproar, underscoring how the Trump family, with some members working in the White House and others running the family business, has obscured the traditional line between public and private interests.
  Ethicists and former government officials with both major political parties have raised concerns that foreign-policy decisions made by the White House could affect the Trump Organization's business prospects, and in turn, the president's wealth. Although the president has turned over management of the company to Donald Trump Jr. and another son, Eric Trump, he still holds a huge financial interest in Trump projects around the world.
  Two organizers of Friday's conference said that they had proposed the Indo-Pacific topic to Donald Trump Jr.'s team and that he had agreed to address it. On Thursday, after criticism by ethicists and a Democratic senator, Mr. Trump requested that the topic be changed, they said.
  Shortly after Mr. Trump's interview, India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, gave his own keynote speech about India's economic progress.
  Mr. Trump has downplayed ethical concerns during his India visit, saying the company's promise not to seek new foreign projects during his father's presidency had hurt its business.
  Eric Trump said in an interview on Friday that the criticism of his brother was unfair and unjustified. He said that although he was not involved in the discussions regarding his brother's speech, there was nothing wrong with the original topic.
  ''We have been doing business in India for many years,'' he said. ''I don't understand the problem with celebrating the camaraderie between two great countries.''
  During his onstage interview, Donald Trump Jr. went out of his way to suggest that the Trumps do not mix politics and business, even when they all get together.
  ''We see him so little that it's really about being a family,'' he said of his father. ''We don't talk politics.''
  Donald Trump Jr. was deeply involved in his father's campaign, meeting with a Russian lawyer who promised political dirt on Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate. That meeting, and how Mr. Trump and the White House responded to public disclosure of it last July, are now being scrutinized by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating Russian interference in the 2016 election.
  In India, officials have struggled to understand what the Trump White House means for Indo-American relations.
  ''Under Trump, you cannot be sure the policy today will be the policy tomorrow,'' said C. Raja Mohan, a foreign-policy analyst and director of Carnegie India. ''That is a huge problem.''
  India views some of the president's evolving positions as favorable and others as less so.
  His recent criticism of Pakistan as a haven for terrorists has been music to the ears of leaders in New Delhi, some of whom view that neighboring country in much the same way. The president has also signaled that he sees a more important role for India, along with other traditional American allies like Japan and Australia, in an Indo-Pacific grouping that would curb Beijing's influence.
  The Trump administration has strengthened military ties with New Delhi and discussed a flurry of defense agreements, including one that may see the F-16 fighter jet move its production line from Texas to India.
  At the same time, there are significant tensions between the Modi government and the Trump administration on several critical issues, including immigration and trade policy.
  In an effort to boost Indian manufacturing, the Modi government has raised tariffs on imported products like electronics and beauty products. India has also tangled with American drug companies over patent protections for their products. In 2017, the United States had a $23 billion trade deficit with India.
  Indian immigrants are also a large segment of the work force of American technology companies. President Trump campaigned on curbing such immigration and has gradually tightened the rules governing the H-1B and other visas used by tech workers.
  On Thursday, the administration announced rules that would make it harder for Indian outsourcers that have many corporate customers to bring workers to the United States and move them from site to site. Friday's conference was in full swing as news spread of the administration's latest move to restrict H-1B visas.
  With the younger Mr. Trump, who has voiced strong support for his father's tough stance on immigration, sitting in the audience, Uber's chief executive officer, Dara Khosrowshahi, took a dig at the president.
  ''The American dream is the single most incredible brand in the world,'' said Mr. Khosrowshahi, whose family immigrated from Iran. ''I'm worried that the attitude this American administration has on immigration will ruin that brand.''
  The journalist who interviewed Mr. Trump, Supriya Shrinate, pressed him on immigration, asking whether he thought it was fair that he could travel the world and invest in places like India, while the United States tightened immigration rules.
  Mr. Trump dodged the question, before Ms. Shrinate finally asked: ''Is the American dream still alive? A lot of people in this audience beg to differ.''
  ''I think 100 percent it is,'' Mr. Trump said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/23/world/asia/donald-trump-jr-india-modi.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Donald Trump Jr. at a conference Friday in New Delhi. ''I'm here as a businessman,'' he told attendees. Above, newspapers bearing ads for a proposed Trump Towers development in Gurgaon, India. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MANISH SWARUP/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 REBECCA CONWAY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: February 24, 2018


End of Document
The Immigration Debate We Need; Op-Ed Contributor
The New York Times 
February 27, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1645 words
Byline: GEORGE BORJAS
Highlight: How much of a price are the American people willing to pay, and who will pay it?
Body


The first month of the Trump administration has already changed the direction of the immigration debate, with many more changes coming soon. So far, executive orders and deportations dominate the discussion. But the fight over how many refugees to admit or how best to vet those refugees obscures what the debate is really about.
Changes in social policy do not make everyone better off, and immigration policy is no exception. I am a refugee, having fled Cuba as a child in 1962. Not only do I have great sympathy for the immigrant’s desire to build a better life, I am also living proof that immigration policy can benefit some people enormously.
But I am also an economist, and am very much aware of the many trade-offs involved. Inevitably, immigration does not improve everyone’s well-being. There are winners and losers, and we will need to choose among difficult options. The improved lives of the immigrants come at a price. How much of a price are the American people willing to pay, and exactly who will pay it?
This tension permeates the debate over immigration’s effect on the labor market. Those who want more immigration claim that immigrants do jobs that native-born Americans do not want to do. But we all know that the price of gas goes down when the supply of oil goes up. The laws of supply and demand do not evaporate when we talk about the price of labor rather than the price of gas. By now, the well-documented abuses of the H-1B program, such as the Disney workers who had to train their foreign-born replacements, should have obliterated the notion that immigration does not harm competing native workers.
Over the past 30 years, a large fraction of immigrants, nearly a third, were high school dropouts, so the incumbent low-skill work force formed the core group of Americans who paid the price for the influx of millions of workers. Their wages fell as much as 6 percent. Those low-skill Americans included many native-born blacks and Hispanics, as well as earlier waves of immigrants.
But somebody’s lower wage is somebody else’s higher profit. The increase in the profitability of many employers enlarged the economic pie accruing to the entire native population by about $50 billion. So, as proponents of more immigration point out, immigration can increase the aggregate wealth of Americans. But they don’t point out the trade-off involved: Workers in jobs sought by immigrants lose out.
They also don’t point out that low-skill immigration has a side effect that reduces that $50 billion increase in wealth. The National Academy of Sciences recently estimated the impact of immigration on government budgets. On a year-to-year basis, immigrant families, mostly because of their relatively low incomes and higher frequency of participating in government programs like subsidized health care, are a fiscal burden. A comparison of taxes paid and government spending on these families showed that immigrants created an annual fiscal shortfall of $43 billion to $299 billion.
Even the most conservative estimate of the fiscal shortfall wipes out much of the $50 billion increase in native wealth. Remarkably, the size of the native economic pie did not change much after immigration increased the number of workers by more than 15 percent. But the split of the pie certainly changed, giving far less to workers and much more to employers.
The immigration debate will also have to address the long-term impact on American society, raising the freighted issue of immigrant assimilation. In recent decades, there has been a noticeable slowdown in the rate at which the economic status of immigrants improves over time. In the 1970s, the typical immigrant could expect a substantial improvement relative to natives over his or her lifetime. Today, the economic progress of the typical immigrant is much more stagnant.
Part of the slowdown is related to the growth of ethnic enclaves. New immigrants who find few ethnic compatriots get value from acquiring skills that allow more social and economic exchanges, such as becoming proficient in English. But new immigrants who find a large and welcoming community of their countrymen have less need to acquire those skills; they already have a large audience that values whatever they brought with them. Put bluntly, mass migration discourages assimilation.
The trade-offs become even more difficult when we think about the long-term integration of the children and grandchildren of today’s immigrants. Many look back at the melting pot in 20th-century America and assume that history will repeat itself. That’s probably wishful thinking. That melting pot operated in a particular economic, social and political context, and it is doubtful that those conditions can be reproduced today.
Many of the Ellis Island-era immigrants got jobs in manufacturing; Ford’s work force was 75 percent foreign-born in 1914. Those manufacturing jobs evolved into well-paid union jobs, creating a private-sector safety net for the immigrants and their descendants. Does anyone seriously believe that the jobs employing low-skill immigrants today will offer the same economic mobility that unionized manufacturing jobs provided?
Similarly, the ideological climate that encouraged assimilation back then, neatly encapsulated by our motto “E pluribus unum” (Out of many, one), is dead and gone. A recent University of California directive shows the radical shift. The university’s employees were advised to avoid using phrases that can lead to “microaggressions” toward students and one another. One example is the statement “America is a melting pot,” which apparently sends a message to the recipient that they have to “assimilate to the dominant culture.”
Europe is already confronting the difficulties produced by the presence of unassimilated populations. If nothing else, the European experience shows that there is no universal law that guarantees integration even after a few generations. We, too, will need to confront the trade-off between short-term economic gains and the long-term costs of a large, unassimilated minority.
Identifying the trade-offs is only a first step toward a more sensible immigration policy. We also need some general principles, combining common sense and compassion.
First and foremost, we must reduce illegal immigration. It has had a corrosive impact, paralyzing discussion on all aspects of immigration reform. A wall along the Mexican border may signal that we are getting serious, but many undocumented immigrants enter the country legally and then overstay their visas. A national electronic system (such as E-Verify) mandating that employers certify new hires, along with fines and criminal penalties for lawbreaking businesses, might go a long way toward stemming the flow.
But what about the 11-million-plus undocumented immigrants already here? A vast majority have led peaceful lives and established deep roots in our communities. Their sudden deportation would not represent the compassionate America that many of us envision.
Perhaps it’s time for some benign neglect. Many will eventually qualify for visas because they have married American citizens or have native-born children. Rather than fight over a politically impossible amnesty, we could accelerate the granting of family-preference visas to that population.
We will also need to decide how many immigrants to admit. Economists seldom confess their ignorance, but we truly have no clue about what that number should be. About one million legal immigrants a year entered the country in the past two decades. The political climate suggests that many Americans view that number as too high. History shows that when voters get fed up with immigration, there is no reluctance to cut off the flow altogether. Back in the 1990s, Barbara Jordan’s immigration commission recommended an annual target of about 550,000 immigrants. Such a cut would be significant, but it may be preferable to the alternative, which, in this political climate, could mean shutting off the flow.
Finally, we need to choose between highly skilled and less-skilled applicants. High-skill immigrants, who pay higher taxes and receive fewer services and can potentially expand the frontier of knowledge, are more profitable for us. But giving an opportunity to the huddled masses is part of what makes our country exceptional.
Regardless of the allocation, employers should not walk away with all the gains, and workers should not suffer all the losses. We need to ensure a more equitable sharing of the gains and losses among the American people.
No matter where one stands in the ideological divide, President Trump has already answered the fundamental question guiding the design of a more rational policy. In his speech at the Republican National Convention, he described how he would pick among the available choices: “We are going to be considerate and compassionate to everyone,” he said. “But my greatest compassion will be for our own struggling citizens.”
He added, “We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.”
Many of my colleagues in the academic community — and many of the elite opinion-makers in the news media — recoil when they hear that immigration should serve the interests of Americans. Their reaction is to label such thinking as racist and xenophobic, and to marginalize anyone who agrees.
But those accusations of racism reflect their effort to avoid a serious discussion of the trade-offs. The coming debate would be far more honest and politically transparent if we demanded a simple answer from those who disagree with “America First” proposals: Who are you rooting for?
George Borjas is a professor of economics and social policy at the Harvard Kennedy School and the author of, most recently, “We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative.”
DRAWING (DRAWING BY LOGAN FITZPATRICK)

Load-Date: February 28, 2017


End of Document
He Became a Hate Crime Victim. She Became a Widow.
The New York Times 
July 8, 2017 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 3465 words
Byline: AUDRA D.S. BURCH
Highlight: Srinivas Kuchibhotla’s death in an anti-immigrant attack at a Kansas bar made headlines the world over. Now his wife, Sunayana Dumala, tells her story.
Body


OLATHE, Kan. — Sunayana Dumala tried once again to enter the worship room she and her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, had created in their home for daily prayers. Mr. Kuchibhotla had built an intricate wooden shrine by hand two years ago, a small sacred edifice where they would kneel each morning. Months after his death, it became a place where she would honor him.
On a Wednesday night in February, a man with a semiautomatic pistol and a distorted notion of American pride turned ordinary people into shooting victims and survivors — and he turned Ms. Dumala into a widow.
Mr. Kuchibhotla, an Indian-born engineer, was confronted about his immigration status at a bar, then fatally shot. By the time the police arrived, Mr. Kuchibhotla was dying, and his close friend Alok Madasani was wounded. Another patron who tried to stop the attack was also struck by gunfire.
Three months to the day after her husband’s murder, Ms. Dumala stood at the entrance of the prayer room alone, looking toward a window that framed storm clouds. She turned away.
“Everything about this room, everything about this house,” she said later, “reminds me of my Srinu,” the nickname she gave him during their courtship.
It was in the quiet of the next morning that Ms. Dumala, 32, decided that would be the day she would step inside the worship room. What had been unbearable just the previous day seemed surmountable, if only because it was the next painful step.
So she willed herself up the stairs, inching past the framed collage of wedding photos, and into the room. She cleaned each of the deity figurines with warm water. Then she prayed for peace in a whisper just above the sound of children’s play at the elementary school next door.
‘Do We Belong Here?’
In some ways, what one man shouted in anger and one woman uttered in grief capture one of America’s most troubling intersections.
“Get out of my country!” the gunman would yell, before opening fire on the two Indian men he later said he believed were from Iran.
“Do we belong here?” the widow would ask in a Facebook post six days after the shooting.
The episode happened at dinnertime in a neighborhood bar, part of a spasm of hatred that seems to be uncoiling in small towns and big cities across the nation — and in rising numbers.
A month before the shooting, the Victoria Islamic Center in Texas was torched, destroying the mosque. A month after the shooting, a            white supremacist traveled from Baltimore to New York City on a mission to randomly kill a black man. He did just that. The reason: a deep hatred of black men, according to the New York Police Department.
“We’ve read many times in newspapers of some kind of shooting happening,” Ms. Dumala said at a news conference in February at the headquarters of Garmin, where Mr. Kuchibhotla worked as a senior aviation systems engineer.
“And we always wondered, how safe?”
Ms. Dumala had wondered how the couple fit into this new narrative, if they should move to a different country, and once even asked her husband, “Are we doing the right thing of staying in the United States of America?”
Ms. Dumala shared what is now the most dreadful chapter of her life seated at the foot of the king-size bed where they once slept. Much of their story was typical, abundant with promise: They were Indian immigrants who moved to the United States from Hyderabad for postgraduate degrees and jobs, a young couple in love, planning a family, making Kansas home.
Her night stand, closest to the window, offered unintended markers on that life: a 2007 college graduation photo of Mr. Kuchibhotla taken not long after they met, and a small box of Russell Stover assorted chocolates he gave her for Valentine’s Day, eight days before he was shot.
The realization that her husband was killed because of intolerance, because he was not born in America, is what forced her to emerge from this personal, private hell. She thought that if people were to know the aftermath of a hate crime, the crater-sized void and endless questions left behind, if the victims were rendered as three-dimensional, maybe there would be less fear, less hate.
“My story needs to be spread,” she said plainly. “Srinu’s story needs to be known. We have to do something to reduce the hate crimes. Even if we can save one other person, I think that would give peace to Srinu and give me the satisfaction that his sacrifice did not go in vain.”
A Prescient Dread
On the morning of his death, Mr. Kuchibhotla left for work before his wife. “Bye,” he said, hurrying past her, a casual farewell that would come to haunt Ms. Dumala for its brevity and finality.
Just before 6 p.m., Ms. Dumala texted and called Mr. Kuchibhotla to plan for the evening. His cellphone was off, which was not unusual, because of his habit of watching videos, draining the battery.
She had hoped they could spend time that evening in their backyard, sipping tea and watching the sun lower into the horizon. The view, a wide-open stretch with houses dotted in the distance, was one of the charms of their deep blue two-story house in Olathe, an orderly Kansas City suburb in Johnson County, Kan.
Ms. Dumala picked at her roti in between calls to their friends looking for her husband. Maybe he had gone to have drinks at Austins Bar & Grill, his favorite after-work spot, with Mr. Madasani, one of his best friends from work. But Mr. Madasani’s phone was off, too.
She began to scroll through Facebook. A news story popped into her feed: three people shot at Austins.
“I was getting scared, some kind of feeling was going through me. I was all alone,” she said, pausing to catch her breath, her face dampened by tears. “This is not my usual Srinu, I am saying to myself. He would have reached out to me somehow to let me know he is safe.”
Ms. Dumala’s instincts were right. The best friends, more like brothers, were at Austins. Typically the two went with another close friend from the office, Manju Nag, but he had been out of town on business. That night, it was just Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani at their regular table on the patio, the one closest to the door, discussing Bollywood movies and drinking a pair of Miller Lites.
The assailant approached the friends. Witnesses recall him wearing a white T-shirt with military-style pins, his head wrapped in a white scarf. He was intent on finding out one thing: Did the men at the table belong in the country?
Adam W. Purinton, a white Navy veteran, turned to the two brown-complexioned men, both living in the United States for years, and demanded to know their immigration status.
“Out of the blue comes this weird-looking gentleman, I say weird-looking because he had anger on his face,” said Mr. Madasani, 32, an aviation systems engineer at Garmin. “I did not hear what he was saying instantly, but I saw the look on Srinivas’s face change drastically. I looked at Adam and he walked towards me, he came to me and said, ‘Are you here legally?’”
Peppered with more questions and ethnic slurs, Mr. Madasani did not respond. Instead, he went inside to get the manager. Ian Grillot, 24, and another patron asked Mr. Purinton to leave and escorted him from the patio. As Mr. Madasani returned to the patio area, he said he heard more of the rant. “Oh, here comes the Arab,” Mr. Purinton said.
But he didn’t go far, pacing outside in the parking lot. Mr. Madasani said he and Mr. Kuchibhotla had decided to leave, but were stopped as other patrons apologized and assured them they were welcome. One guy paid their tab; the bar manager gave them another round of beer and fried pickles, a favorite of Mr. Kuchibhotla. “Everybody kept coming up to us saying this is not what we represent, you guys belong here,” he said.
Not long after, according to the authorities, Mr. Purinton returned to the bar with a handgun. He stood in the patio door, pointed his gun toward the two men, and fired.
Proposing to Him, Online
They had met online in 2006 after a mutual friend gave her a list of names of Indian students attending the University of Texas at El Paso. She was considering a master’s program there and wanted to get a feel for what to expect as an immigrant student. She sent a note to the first name on the list: Mr. Kuchibhotla.
They were both from Hyderabad, the riverside capital of Telangana State in southern India. He grew up the middle of three sons and loved cricket as a boy, playing on the rooftop of his family home. His father was a quality assurance officer for a pharmaceutical company and his mother was a teacher.
“He was the tallest of all of us brothers and cousins,” said Sai Kota, a cousin who grew up with Mr. Kuchibhotla and now lives in Edison, N.J. “We used to volunteer him to get the ball when it would go onto another rooftop. He could jump to the other rooftop. He was a brother and mentor to me.”
Ms. Dumala was immediately drawn to Mr. Kuchibhotla’s sharp focus, sense of humor and patience — she still likes to tell the story of the many weekends he took her to empty parking lots to teach her to drive. He liked the sound of her voice, melodic and sweet, and her caring nature — almost every day, she checked to make sure he had eaten breakfast.
Their casual phone conversations blossomed into the beginnings of a six-year courtship. After three months, Ms. Dumala proposed to him one night. No matter that she had never seen him in person.
They finally met months later at a temple when he went home to Hyderabad. “I did not know that he was going to be 6’2”, with me being 5 feet,” she said, chuckling.
She ended up attending St. Cloud State University in Minnesota, where she studied engineering management and graduated in 2010. After Mr. Kuchibhotla’s graduation in 2007, he accepted a job at Rockwell Collins, an avionics and information technology company in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, where he worked as a systems engineer in the flight control department. He loved everything about aviation, particularly the very idea that something so heavy could fly.
At Rockwell, he met Mr. Madasani, who would become one of his best friends and a roommate. Mr. Madasani moved to Kansas in 2014, joining his friend Mr. Kuchibhotla at Garmin.
Mr. Kuchibhotla persuaded his parents and his wife’s to bless their marriage, built upon love, rather than arranged. The couple married in 2012, in a ceremony in Hyderabad attended by more than 1,000 people.
In 2014, they moved to the Kansas City area, mostly to find opportunities for Ms. Dumala. She had stayed home much of their time in Iowa, unable to work with an H-4, for spouses of specialty workers who hold H-1B visas.
They found a home in Olathe, population 135,000, a city 20 minutes outside Kansas City and one of the fastest-growing in the nation.
Mr. Kuchibhotla continued his work as an engineer at Garmin. He helped companies that build airplanes and helicopters integrate Garmin technology and software into their aircraft. He was so well regarded that his boss routinely asked if the human resources division could “find more Srinivases.”
“This is not hyperbolic when I tell you he was almost the perfect employee,” said Dave Wysong, his supervisor. “He was a great engineer. Technically, very, very good. He was quiet and very, very friendly.”
Ms. Dumala started work as a database developer at a pharmaceutical marketing agency in May 2016. The couple became part of a circle of Indian friends who spent most every weekend together at dinner parties. The men played on a cricket team, where Mr. Kuchibhotla was the bowler, the pitcher’s position. Two years ago, they moved into a subdivision near Garmin. And last year, they began planning a family.
The End of the Day
It was 7:15 p.m. The work day had ended, and most people were home, headed there or winding down.
On this particular Wednesday, the winter sun had already set, but it was unseasonably warm, in the high 70s. It was just after halftime of the University of Kansas basketball game against Texas Christian University. Kansas was up a point and a win meant the team would clinch the Big 12 conference title for the 13th year in a row, which also meant Austins was packed with Jayhawks fans besides its usual cast of regulars, among them Mr. Kuchibhotla, Mr. Madasani and Mr. Grillot.
Ms. Dumala was at her Olathe home, three miles away, eating dinner and scrolling through Facebook.
Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani were back at their table talking. The crowd on the patio had thinned out during the halftime break, but the televisions were still blaring.
Suddenly, the sound of gunfire. “Pop, pause, then pop, pop, pop,” said Tim Hibbard, the owner of a software company who was sitting at the bar sipping a Blue Moon beer. “It wasn’t like the movies where the gunfire is large and demanding of attention. The sound was subdued, almost underwhelming. Low fidelity is how I would describe it.”
Mr. Kuchibhotla was hit first. Mr. Madasani, who had been sitting on the other side of the table, hit the ground, forced by a bullet, instinct or both. He crawled on his belly toward the opposite door. He thought the bullets were close by because the floor shook with each gunshot. “All I was thinking about at the time was about my baby, all I was thinking of was my wife’s belly,” said Mr. Madasani, whose wife was pregnant with their first child, a boy due in July. “In flashes, I was thinking, ‘I have to live.’”
Once outside, he realized he was shot in the left leg. “I saw Srivinas on the floor, not moving. I kept on yelling to everyone, ‘Leave me, go and attend to him.’”
Mr. Grillot, the bar patron who had intervened earlier, chased Mr. Purinton into the parking lot. Mr. Purinton turned and shot him in the chest and hand.
As people scattered, Vincent Baird, who was headed to the gas station across the street, ran toward the chaos to help. With four years of experience as an Army medic, he went straight to Mr. Kuchibhotla, whose breathing was shallow and labored.
Once on his knees, Mr. Baird could see a gunshot wound in his chest. With the help of two others, Mr. Baird said, he cut a four-inch square from an unused garbage bag and taped it over the wound. He then checked for other wounds and, seeing none, he turned him on his side.
Mr. Kuchibhotla stopped breathing at a couple of points, Mr. Baird said. Each time, he performed chest compressions until Mr. Kuchibhotla started breathing again and an ambulance arrived. He was pronounced dead at the University of Kansas Hospital.
Mr. Purinton had fled amid the chaos. He ended up 80 miles away at a bar in Clinton, Mo., where he told a bartender that he had shot “two Iranians.”
The Officers at the Door
Hours after the shooting, Ms. Dumala was an emotional wreck. Finally, she found the courage to search for more details on the shooting at Austins. The reports had not identified the victims, but included the name of the hospital in downtown Kansas City where they had been taken. What she didn’t know was that her husband of four years was already dead.
A car pulled into the driveway.
It was one of their friends, Shashi Bolaram. Ms. Dumala opened the door. Voice quivering, she asked him, “He was there, wasn’t he?”
Mr. Bolaram nodded.
Before Ms. Dumala could fully process what that might mean, there was a second knock at the door. She sat on the second stair as two Olathe police officers confirmed Mr. Kuchibhotla’s death.
On the half-hour ride to the hospital, Ms. Dumala sat in the back seat of a friend’s car, her mind cluttered and spinning. It came to rest on this incomprehensible notion of sudden loss: Her beloved Srinu was dead. She remembers hearing her own hollowed voice pose an endless loop of questions to herself, each more desperate than the last: “What should I do? What is this life? Is it true that I cannot see Srinu? Is it true that I can’t hear his voice? Is it true I lost the person who loves me the most?”
The next day, Ms. Dumala learned the horrific details of her husband’s murder. An Olathe police officer and an agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation told her who had killed him and why.
The police officer — who was stopped by Ms. Dumala from uttering Mr. Purinton’s name — also said that it appeared the shooting was premeditated.
“Hold on,” she said, stunned. “What do you mean?”
“Something planned,” he said.
“When? At that moment? In that night?” she pressed, the questions crashing into one another.
The reality of what had happened to her husband began to wash over her.
“At least until then, I was of the opinion that this was some random guy who came in and just shot three people, and my husband was unfortunate to be there,” she said. “That was a lot harder for me to hear.”
Mr. Purinton, 52, was formally charged with premeditated first-degree murder and two counts of premeditated attempted murder. Last month, he was also indicted on federal hate-crime charges.
The term “hate crime” was being used over and over and by the police, journalists and politicians to describe the death of her husband. All of a sudden, Mr. Kuchibhotla was a hate crime statistic, an example to bolster anti-hate legislation and now linked, fairly or not, to President Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric. Days after Mr. Kuchibhotla’s death, the president issued a statement condemning the shooting.
Ms. Dumala was aghast, baffled by the man who took her husband from her. “That guy, I think he was hurt, I don’t know what hurt him,” she said. “What is he doing by taking away this life? Did he serve his purpose? Did he lessen his anger? Even I have anger now, but that does not give me the right to go and take away his life.”
The funeral home made arrangements for Mr. Kuchibhotla to spend a final night in his Olathe home — a first for the company. His body was transported to the house in a discreet white van.
“We did everything to accommodate their requests. We also wanted to be culturally sensitive and show the family that our community was behind them,” said Christopher Holland, the funeral director. “We wanted them to heal from this tragedy.”
Mr. Kuchibhotla was in repose on a cot in an empty dining room that he had painted an elegant burgundy where family and friends paid their final respects. He remained with Ms. Dumala and her family until early that Saturday, when he was returned to the funeral home to be prepared for the trip to his homeland.
On a Tuesday afternoon in Hyderabad, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla was placed on a pyre of           logs. His funeral was held nine days before what would have been his 33rd birthday.
 Return to an Empty Home
Ms. Dumala returned to Kansas with her parents in April, staying with a friend until she could summon the strength to return to her home without Srinu. She spent her first few weeks back in Kansas trying to figure out the next chapter, difficult to define because her visa status is now in limbo. She is also looking for the best way to help reduce hate crimes.
Before her husband’s death, Ms. Dumala shopped at KC India Mart in Overland Park, where she could find foods imported from home. Over the years, she and her husband had become friendly with the owners, and when Mr. Kuchibhotla died, the store’s employees brought meals every day to friends and family gathered at the house.
One May evening, Ms. Dumala and her parents went to the grocery store to pick up ingredients for a traditional chickpea dish. Ms. Dumala pushed an empty cart down the first aisle toward the produce, unprepared for what would happen next. She stopped, almost involuntarily, in front of a crate of miniature eggplants. The sigh was audible, the sadness palpable.
“This was his favorite food,” she said out loud. “It didn’t matter how you cooked them, he loved any recipe made with eggplant.”
Ms. Dumala lingered, lost in the memory of the simple act of baking her late husband’s favorite dish.
John Eligon contributed reporting.Follow Audra Burch on Twitter @abscribe.
PHOTOS: Sunayana Dumala with her parents in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, below, was killed in a shooting. (A1); Some of Mr. Kuchibhotla’s personal effects in the couple’s bathroom, left, and a collage of wedding photos in the home. “Everything about this house reminds me of my Srinu,” Ms. Dumala said, using her nickname for him.; Ms. Dumala with her parents in her home in Olathe. It took her time to be able to face entering her own home again. (A12); Sunayana Dumala, left, at home in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, was killed in February in Austins Bar & Grill, above, by a gunman who targeted immigrants. She now works to reduce hate crimes. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12-A13)
Related Articles
    • An Eerie Similarity in 2 Kansas Hate Crimes, 3 Years Apart
    • Kansas Man Indicted on Hate Crime Charges in Shooting of Indian Immigrants
    • Indian-Americans Reward Man Who Intervened in Kansas Shooting
    • Spread of Hate Crimes Has Lawmakers Seeking Harsher Penalties

Load-Date: July 14, 2017


End of Document
What You Missed in the Debate
The New York Times
March 11, 2016 Friday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 
Length: 1035 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER
Body


Here's how we analyzed the Republican debate.
_______ 
  MIAMI -- The four candidates still battling for the Republican nomination for president gathered at the University of Miami for the party's 12th debate, hosted by CNN. Donald J. Trump leads in both delegates and states won, with Gov. John Kasich's home state, Ohio, and Senator Marco Rubio's home state, Florida, both heading to the polls on Tuesday.
   In a surprise twist, the first question, on jobs and the economy, goes to Mr. Kasich. Asked by Jake Tapper, the debate moderator, if his advocacy for trade deals had come at the ''expense of the middle class,'' Mr. Kasich cited his blue-collar background -- his father was a mailman and his family worked in the steel industry -- and said he believes in ''free trade, but fair trade.''
   Mr. Rubio -- who supports increasing the number of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers -- was asked about the case of Disney, which used a loophole in the program to lay off American workers and replace them with foreign workers. Companies like Disney that abuse the program, he said, ''should be barred from using it in the future.''
   On the question of visas for high-skilled workers, Mr. Trump seemed to try to have it both ways. As a businessman, he said, he uses the program and ''I do what I have to do.'' But, he added, it's ''unfair'' for workers -- ''And we should end it.''
   Senator Ted Cruz of Texas used the H-1B question to switch to the issue of illegal immigration, a hot topic for the Republican base. He said he would cut federal funds to ''sanctuary cities'' that don't follow the nation's immigration laws. And, he added, Democrats don't have the political will to fix the nation's broken immigration system, because they ''view those illegal immigrants as potential voters.''
   And the mystery of just why Mr. Trump is holding a news conference at Mar-a-Lago, his private club, on Friday morning became clear midway through the first hour, when Mr. Trump declared that Ben Carson, the retired pediatric neurosurgeon, would be endorsing him. He will make sure Mr. Carson will be very involved in his education policies, he added.
   ''First of all, Ted was in favor of amnesty,'' Mr. Trump said. ''There's no question about that.'' In any other debate, those would have been fighting words. But none of the candidates have really had a highly heated exchange yet. As Mr. Trump himself said, just moments later, ''I cannot believe how civil it's been up here.''
   Mr. Cruz and Mr. Trump did get into a brief back-and-forth over Mr. Trump's threat to impose a 45 percent tariff on foreign goods. Mr. Trump called it a ''threat'' that would become a tax only if foreign countries, like China, ''don't behave.'' Mr. Cruz countered that ''it's not China who pays the tax,'' but the ''working men and women'' here in the United States.
  Not so, Mr. Trump argued, explaining that he would ''start building those factories and those plants here instead of China,'' thus creating more jobs. And then it was time for a commercial break.
   Asked about his recent comments that ''Islam hates us,'' and if he really meant all Muslims, Mr. Trump doubled down: '' I mean a lot of them, I mean a lot of them,'' he said. ''There's tremendous hatred, and I will stick with exactly what I said.'' He is not willing to be politically correct, he said.
  ''I'm not interested in being politically correct -- I'm interested in being correct,'' Mr. Rubio retorted, saying the nation would need to work with Muslim countries to help defeat radical extremism. Mr. Kasich, similarly, said that the United States would need Muslim and Arab countries to fight the Islamic State.
   On an issue that has dogged Mr. Trump in recent weeks -- his calls for violating international law and targeting the families of suspected terrorists -- the New York billionaire called on existing laws to be expanded in order to fight terrorists on ''equal footing.'' Both Mr. Cruz and Mr. Rubio, meanwhile, quickly and firmly said they would not target the families of terrorists.
   Mr. Trump said that he would be a strong supporter of Israel, citing a somewhat unlikely list of credentials: his Jewish son-in-law, his daughter Ivanka who converted to Judaism, and his Jewish grandchildren. He also mentioned that he had served as the grand marshal of the Israeli Day Parade down Fifth Avenue.
  He also added that a peace deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians would be a tough negotiation. But, he said, ''I'd like to give it a shot.''
   Asked about his comments seeming to praise authoritarian governments -- calling both President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and China's government during the Tiananmen Square massacre ''strong'' -- Mr. Trump said that ''strong doesn't mean good,'' adding that he was not endorsing the massacre.
  ''Putin is a strong leader, absolutely,'' he said. ''I don't say that in a good way or a bad way. I say that as a fact.'' Mr. Kasich, asked a follow-up question, was swift in his rebuke: ''I think the Chinese government butchered those kids,'' he said.
   Does Mr. Trump share some culpability for encouraging the hostile tone at his rallies, which in recent weeks have turned increasing violent, Mr. Tapper asked.
  ''I hope not, I truly hope not,'' Mr. Trump said. But, he said, when his supporters see protesters, when ''they see what's going on in this country, they have anger that's unbelievable.'' And, he added, ''We have some protesters who are bad dudes'' and are ''really dangerous.''
   ''There are only two of us who have a path to winning the nomination -- Donald and myself,'' Mr. Cruz said, responding to a question about the possibility of a brokered convention, and noting that he has finished ahead of Mr. Trump in eight states. He then appealed to voters, saying that if Mr. Trump is the nominee, Hillary Clinton will win in November and urging, ''Come and join us.''
  But Mr. Trump also returned to the numbers. What Mr. Cruz doesn't mention, he said, is that he has actually beaten Mr. Cruz far more frequently -- in 13 states.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/us/politics/what-you-have-missed.html

Load-Date: March 11, 2016


End of Document
Facing a Void Left by Hate
The New York Times
July 9, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3336 words
Byline: By AUDRA D.S. BURCH; John Eligon contributed reporting.
Body


OLATHE, Kan. -- Sunayana Dumala tried once again to enter the worship room she and her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, had created in their home for daily prayers. Mr. Kuchibhotla had built an intricate wooden shrine by hand two years ago, a small sacred edifice where they would kneel each morning. Months after his death, it became a place where she would honor him.
On a Wednesday night in February, a man with a semiautomatic pistol and a distorted notion of American pride turned ordinary people into shooting victims and survivors -- and he turned Ms. Dumala into a widow. 
  Mr. Kuchibhotla, an Indian-born engineer, was confronted about his immigration status at a bar, then fatally shot. By the time the police arrived, Mr. Kuchibhotla was dying, and his close friend Alok Madasani was wounded. Another patron who tried to stop the attack was also struck by gunfire.
  Three months to the day after her husband's murder, Ms. Dumala stood at the entrance of the prayer room alone, looking toward a window that framed storm clouds. She turned away.
  ''Everything about this room, everything about this house,'' she said later, ''reminds me of my Srinu,'' the nickname she gave him during their courtship.
  It was in the quiet of the next morning that Ms. Dumala, 32, decided that would be the day she would step inside the worship room. What had been unbearable just the previous day seemed surmountable, if only because it was the next painful step.
  So she willed herself up the stairs, inching past the framed collage of wedding photos, and into the room. She cleaned each of the deity figurines with warm water. Then she prayed for peace in a whisper just above the sound of children's play at the elementary school next door.
  'Do We Belong Here?'
  In some ways, what one man shouted in anger and one woman uttered in grief capture one of America's most troubling intersections.
  ''Get out of my country!'' the gunman would yell, before opening fire on the two Indian men he later said he believed were from Iran.
  ''Do we belong here?'' the widow would ask in a Facebook post six days after the shooting.
  The episode happened at dinnertime in a neighborhood bar, part of a spasm of hatred that seems to be uncoiling in small towns and big cities across the nation -- and in rising numbers.
  A month before the shooting, the Victoria Islamic Center in Texas was torched, destroying the mosque. A month after the shooting, a white supremacist traveled from Baltimore to New York City on a mission to randomly kill a black man. He did just that. The reason: a deep hatred of black men, according to the New York Police Department.
  ''We've read many times in newspapers of some kind of shooting happening,'' Ms. Dumala said at a news conference in February at the headquarters of Garmin, where Mr. Kuchibhotla worked as a senior aviation systems engineer.
  ''And we always wondered, how safe?''
  Ms. Dumala had wondered how the couple fit into this new narrative, if they should move to a different country, and once even asked her husband, ''Are we doing the right thing of staying in the United States of America?''
  Ms. Dumala shared what is now the most dreadful chapter of her life seated at the foot of the king-size bed where they once slept. Much of their story was typical, abundant with promise: They were Indian immigrants who moved to the United States from Hyderabad for postgraduate degrees and jobs, a young couple in love, planning a family, making Kansas home.
  Her night stand, closest to the window, offered unintended markers on that life: a 2007 college graduation photo of Mr. Kuchibhotla taken not long after they met, and a small box of Russell Stover assorted chocolates he gave her for Valentine's Day, eight days before he was shot.
  The realization that her husband was killed because of intolerance, because he was not born in America, is what forced her to emerge from this personal, private hell. She thought that if people were to know the aftermath of a hate crime, the crater-sized void and endless questions left behind, if the victims were rendered as three-dimensional, maybe there would be less fear, less hate.
  ''My story needs to be spread,'' she said plainly. ''Srinu's story needs to be known. We have to do something to reduce the hate crimes. Even if we can save one other person, I think that would give peace to Srinu and give me the satisfaction that his sacrifice did not go in vain.''
  A Prescient Dread
  On the morning of his death, Mr. Kuchibhotla left for work before his wife. ''Bye,'' he said, hurrying past her, a casual farewell that would come to haunt Ms. Dumala for its brevity and finality.
  Just before 6 p.m., Ms. Dumala texted and called Mr. Kuchibhotla to plan for the evening. His cellphone was off, which was not unusual, because of his habit of watching videos, draining the battery.
  She had hoped they could spend time that evening in their backyard, sipping tea and watching the sun lower into the horizon. The view, a wide-open stretch with houses dotted in the distance, was one of the charms of their deep blue two-story house in Olathe, an orderly Kansas City suburb in Johnson County, Kan.
  Ms. Dumala picked at her roti in between calls to their friends looking for her husband. Maybe he had gone to have drinks at Austins Bar & Grill, his favorite after-work spot, with Mr. Madasani, one of his best friends from work. But Mr. Madasani's phone was off, too.
  She began to scroll through Facebook. A news story popped into her feed: three people shot at Austins.
  ''I was getting scared, some kind of feeling was going through me. I was all alone,'' she said, pausing to catch her breath, her face dampened by tears. ''This is not my usual Srinu, I am saying to myself. He would have reached out to me somehow to let me know he is safe.''
  Ms. Dumala's instincts were right. The best friends, more like brothers, were at Austins. Typically the two went with another close friend from the office, Manju Nag, but he had been out of town on business. That night, it was just Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani at their regular table on the patio, the one closest to the door, discussing Bollywood movies and drinking a pair of Miller Lites.
  The assailant approached the friends. Witnesses recall him wearing a white T-shirt with military-style pins, his head wrapped in a white scarf. He was intent on finding out one thing: Did the men at the table belong in the country?
  Adam W. Purinton, a white Navy veteran, turned to the two brown-complexioned men, both living in the United States for years, and demanded to know their immigration status.
  ''Out of the blue comes this weird-looking gentleman, I say weird-looking because he had anger on his face,'' said Mr. Madasani, 32, an aviation systems engineer at Garmin. ''I did not hear what he was saying instantly, but I saw the look on Srinivas's face change drastically. I looked at Adam and he walked towards me, he came to me and said, 'Are you here legally?'''
  Peppered with more questions and ethnic slurs, Mr. Madasani did not respond. Instead, he went inside to get the manager. Ian Grillot, 24, and another patron asked Mr. Purinton to leave and escorted him from the patio. As Mr. Madasani returned to the patio area, he said he heard more of the rant. ''Oh, here comes the Arab,'' Mr. Purinton said.
  But he didn't go far, pacing outside in the parking lot. Mr. Madasani said he and Mr. Kuchibhotla had decided to leave, but were stopped as other patrons apologized and assured them they were welcome. One guy paid their tab; the bar manager gave them another round of beer and fried pickles, a favorite of Mr. Kuchibhotla. ''Everybody kept coming up to us saying this is not what we represent, you guys belong here,'' he said.
  Not long after, according to the authorities, Mr. Purinton returned to the bar with a handgun. He stood in the patio door, pointed his gun toward the two men, and fired.
  Proposing to Him, Online
  They had met online in 2006 after a mutual friend gave her a list of names of Indian students attending the University of Texas at El Paso. She was considering a master's program there and wanted to get a feel for what to expect as an immigrant student. She sent a note to the first name on the list: Mr. Kuchibhotla.
  They were both from Hyderabad, the riverside capital of Telangana State in southern India. He grew up the middle of three sons and loved cricket as a boy, playing on the rooftop of his family home. His father was a quality assurance officer for a pharmaceutical company and his mother was a teacher.
  ''He was the tallest of all of us brothers and cousins,'' said Sai Kota, a cousin who grew up with Mr. Kuchibhotla and now lives in Edison, N.J. ''We used to volunteer him to get the ball when it would go onto another rooftop. He could jump to the other rooftop. He was a brother and mentor to me.''
  Ms. Dumala was immediately drawn to Mr. Kuchibhotla's sharp focus, sense of humor and patience -- she still likes to tell the story of the many weekends he took her to empty parking lots to teach her to drive. He liked the sound of her voice, melodic and sweet, and her caring nature -- almost every day, she checked to make sure he had eaten breakfast.
  Their casual phone conversations blossomed into the beginnings of a six-year courtship. After three months, Ms. Dumala proposed to him one night. No matter that she had never seen him in person.
  They finally met months later at a temple when he went home to Hyderabad. ''I did not know that he was going to be 6'2'', with me being 5 feet,'' she said, chuckling.
  She ended up attending St. Cloud State University in Minnesota, where she studied engineering management and graduated in 2010. After Mr. Kuchibhotla's graduation in 2007, he accepted a job at Rockwell Collins, an avionics and information technology company in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, where he worked as a systems engineer in the flight control department. He loved everything about aviation, particularly the very idea that something so heavy could fly.
  At Rockwell, he met Mr. Madasani, who would become one of his best friends and a roommate. Mr. Madasani moved to Kansas in 2014, joining his friend Mr. Kuchibhotla at Garmin.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla persuaded his parents and his wife's to bless their marriage, built upon love, rather than arranged. The couple married in 2012, in a ceremony in Hyderabad attended by more than 1,000 people.
  In 2014, they moved to the Kansas City area, mostly to find opportunities for Ms. Dumala. She had stayed home much of their time in Iowa, unable to work with an H-4, for spouses of specialty workers who hold H-1B visas.
  They found a home in Olathe, population 135,000, a city 20 minutes outside Kansas City and one of the fastest-growing in the nation.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla continued his work as an engineer at Garmin. He helped companies that build airplanes and helicopters integrate Garmin technology and software into their aircraft. He was so well regarded that his boss routinely asked if the human resources division could ''find more Srinivases.''
  ''This is not hyperbolic when I tell you he was almost the perfect employee,'' said Dave Wysong, his supervisor. ''He was a great engineer. Technically, very, very good. He was quiet and very, very friendly.''
  Ms. Dumala started work as a database developer at a pharmaceutical marketing agency in May 2016. The couple became part of a circle of Indian friends who spent most every weekend together at dinner parties. The men played on a cricket team, where Mr. Kuchibhotla was the bowler, the pitcher's position. Two years ago, they moved into a subdivision near Garmin. And last year, they began planning a family.
  The End of the Day
  It was 7:15 p.m. The work day had ended, and most people were home, headed there or winding down.
  On this particular Wednesday, the winter sun had already set, but it was unseasonably warm, in the high 70s. It was just after halftime of the University of Kansas basketball game against Texas Christian University. Kansas was up a point and a win meant the team would clinch the Big 12 conference title for the 13th year in a row, which also meant Austins was packed with Jayhawks fans besides its usual cast of regulars, among them Mr. Kuchibhotla, Mr. Madasani and Mr. Grillot.
  Ms. Dumala was at her Olathe home, three miles away, eating dinner and scrolling through Facebook.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani were back at their table talking. The crowd on the patio had thinned out during the halftime break, but the televisions were still blaring.
  Suddenly, the sound of gunfire. ''Pop, pause, then pop, pop, pop,'' said Tim Hibbard, the owner of a software company who was sitting at the bar sipping a Blue Moon beer. ''It wasn't like the movies where the gunfire is large and demanding of attention. The sound was subdued, almost underwhelming. Low fidelity is how I would describe it.''
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was hit first. Mr. Madasani, who had been sitting on the other side of the table, hit the ground, forced by a bullet, instinct or both. He crawled on his belly toward the opposite door. He thought the bullets were close by because the floor shook with each gunshot. ''All I was thinking about at the time was about my baby, all I was thinking of was my wife's belly,'' said Mr. Madasani, whose wife was pregnant with their first child, a boy due in July. ''In flashes, I was thinking, 'I have to live.'''
  Once outside, he realized he was shot in the left leg. ''I saw Srivinas on the floor, not moving. I kept on yelling to everyone, 'Leave me, go and attend to him.'''
  Mr. Grillot, the bar patron who had intervened earlier, chased Mr. Purinton into the parking lot. Mr. Purinton turned and shot him in the chest and hand.
  As people scattered, Vincent Baird, who was headed to the gas station across the street, ran toward the chaos to help. With four years of experience as an Army medic, he went straight to Mr. Kuchibhotla, whose breathing was shallow and labored.
  Once on his knees, Mr. Baird could see a gunshot wound in his chest. With the help of two others, Mr. Baird said, he cut a four-inch square from an unused garbage bag and taped it over the wound. He then checked for other wounds and, seeing none, he turned him on his side.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla stopped breathing at a couple of points, Mr. Baird said. Each time, he performed chest compressions until Mr. Kuchibhotla started breathing again and an ambulance arrived. He was pronounced dead at the University of Kansas Hospital.
  Mr. Purinton had fled amid the chaos. He ended up 80 miles away at a bar in Clinton, Mo., where he told a bartender that he had shot ''two Iranians.''
  The Officers at the Door
  Hours after the shooting, Ms. Dumala was an emotional wreck. Finally, she found the courage to search for more details on the shooting at Austins. The reports had not identified the victims, but included the name of the hospital in downtown Kansas City where they had been taken. What she didn't know was that her husband of four years was already dead.
  A car pulled into the driveway.
  It was one of their friends, Shashi Bolaram. Ms. Dumala opened the door. Voice quivering, she asked him, ''He was there, wasn't he?''
  Mr. Bolaram nodded.
  Before Ms. Dumala could fully process what that might mean, there was a second knock at the door. She sat on the second stair as two Olathe police officers confirmed Mr. Kuchibhotla's death.
  On the half-hour ride to the hospital, Ms. Dumala sat in the back seat of a friend's car, her mind cluttered and spinning. It came to rest on this incomprehensible notion of sudden loss: Her beloved Srinu was dead. She remembers hearing her own hollowed voice pose an endless loop of questions to herself, each more desperate than the last: ''What should I do? What is this life? Is it true that I cannot see Srinu? Is it true that I can't hear his voice? Is it true I lost the person who loves me the most?''
  The next day, Ms. Dumala learned the horrific details of her husband's murder. An Olathe police officer and an agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation told her who had killed him and why.
  The police officer -- who was stopped by Ms. Dumala from uttering Mr. Purinton's name -- also said that it appeared the shooting was premeditated.
  ''Hold on,'' she said, stunned. ''What do you mean?''
  ''Something planned,'' he said.
  ''When? At that moment? In that night?'' she pressed, the questions crashing into one another.
  The reality of what had happened to her husband began to wash over her.
  ''At least until then, I was of the opinion that this was some random guy who came in and just shot three people, and my husband was unfortunate to be there,'' she said. ''That was a lot harder for me to hear.''
  Mr. Purinton, 52, was formally charged with premeditated first-degree murder and two counts of premeditated attempted murder. Last month, he was also indicted on federal hate-crime charges.
  The term ''hate crime'' was being used over and over and by the police, journalists and politicians to describe the death of her husband. All of a sudden, Mr. Kuchibhotla was a hate crime statistic, an example to bolster anti-hate legislation and now linked, fairly or not, to President Trump's anti-immigrant rhetoric. Days after Mr. Kuchibhotla's death, the president issued a statement condemning the shooting.
  Ms. Dumala was aghast, baffled by the man who took her husband from her. ''That guy, I think he was hurt, I don't know what hurt him,'' she said. ''What is he doing by taking away this life? Did he serve his purpose? Did he lessen his anger? Even I have anger now, but that does not give me the right to go and take away his life.''
  The funeral home made arrangements for Mr. Kuchibhotla to spend a final night in his Olathe home -- a first for the company. His body was transported to the house in a discreet white van.
  ''We did everything to accommodate their requests. We also wanted to be culturally sensitive and show the family that our community was behind them,'' said Christopher Holland, the funeral director. ''We wanted them to heal from this tragedy.''
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was in repose on a cot in an empty dining room that he had painted an elegant burgundy where family and friends paid their final respects. He remained with Ms. Dumala and her family until early that Saturday, when he was returned to the funeral home to be prepared for the trip to his homeland.
  On a Tuesday afternoon in Hyderabad, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla was placed on a pyre of logs. His funeral was held nine days before what would have been his 33rd birthday.
   Return to an Empty Home
  Ms. Dumala returned to Kansas with her parents in April, staying with a friend until she could summon the strength to return to her home without Srinu. She spent her first few weeks back in Kansas trying to figure out the next chapter, difficult to define because her visa status is now in limbo. She is also looking for the best way to help reduce hate crimes.
  Before her husband's death, Ms. Dumala shopped at KC India Mart in Overland Park, where she could find foods imported from home. Over the years, she and her husband had become friendly with the owners, and when Mr. Kuchibhotla died, the store's employees brought meals every day to friends and family gathered at the house.
  One May evening, Ms. Dumala and her parents went to the grocery store to pick up ingredients for a traditional chickpea dish. Ms. Dumala pushed an empty cart down the first aisle toward the produce, unprepared for what would happen next. She stopped, almost involuntarily, in front of a crate of miniature eggplants. The sigh was audible, the sadness palpable.
  ''This was his favorite food,'' she said out loud. ''It didn't matter how you cooked them, he loved any recipe made with eggplant.''
  Ms. Dumala lingered, lost in the memory of the simple act of baking her late husband's favorite dish.
  Follow Audra Burch on Twitter @abscribe.        

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/08/us/he-became-a-hate-crime-victim-she-became-a-widow.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Sunayana Dumala with her parents in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, below, was killed in a shooting. (A1)
Some of Mr. Kuchibhotla's personal effects in the couple's bathroom, left, and a collage of wedding photos in the home. ''Everything about this house reminds me of my Srinu,'' Ms. Dumala said, using her nickname for him.
Ms. Dumala with her parents in her home in Olathe. It took her time to be able to face entering her own home again. (A12)
 Sunayana Dumala, left, at home in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, was killed in February in Austins Bar & Grill, above, by a gunman who targeted immigrants. She now works to reduce hate crimes. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12-A13)       

Load-Date: July 9, 2017


End of Document
Trump's Goals Are Their Goals, And the Tweets Are Irrelevant
The New York Times
August 26, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2270 words
Byline: By Trip Gabriel
Body


Many supporters of President Trump said in interviews that he had succeeded on issues that matter to them. And they dismissed as unimportant the behavior that critics say makes him unfit for office.
DiAnna Schenkel is a law school graduate who once ran on the Democratic ticket for her city council. She voted twice for Barack Obama. A 59-year-old suburbanite in North Carolina, she worries about her Black son-in-law being racially profiled by the police, pulled over and beaten or worse. 
  The portrait of a Biden voter?
  No, Ms. Schenkel, who is white, is a confirmed supporter of Donald J. Trump. She voted for him enthusiastically four years ago after becoming disillusioned with the Obama presidency, and plans to vote for his re-election. At the same time, she is wary of expressing her politics openly because she believes that stereotypes of what she calls ''Trumpers'' like herself, as portrayed on social media and in conversations, are smug and spiteful.
  ''There's so many people throwing down really inflammatory words: Racist. Xenophobic,'' she said of the way people regard Trump supporters. ''And these inflammatory words carry emotions. It just pivots people to where they're not going to even tolerate someone for supporting that person. You're automatically put on trial and you have to testify why you believe what you believe.''
  As Mr. Trump takes center stage at the Republican National Convention this week, he maintains a core of rock-solid supporters like Ms. Schenkel who believe he is fighting in America's best interests and has achieved many of his goals -- which are their goals too. He has aggressively cultivated these voters over the last few months with scathing criticism of vandalism that has occasionally arisen from mostly peaceful protests calling for racial justice, and by boasting that, pre-coronavirus, he had built an economy second to none.
  For Democrats and many independents, Mr. Trump has shattered the norms of presidential behavior with racist tweets and divisive policies; his use of federal agencies to advance his personal interests; and, perhaps most important, his detachment from managing the pandemic, which has killed more than 175,000 Americans.
  The revulsion toward the president that his opponents feel has colored how many regard Mr. Trump's supporters. Portrayals of his base, these supporters say, are often distilled into a caricature: that they are all white bigots, in thrall to an authoritarian leader and lost in a fog of fact-denial.
  While polling and interviews turn up ample evidence of these traits, tens of millions of Americans will vote for Mr. Trump, and there are plenty of supporters who transcend the stereotypes, whose personal experiences or policy interests make him the right fit for them.
  In lengthy interviews over the last several weeks, a cross-section of Trump voters said they believed he had succeeded on issues like hardening the Southern border, appointing conservative judges, taking on China and putting ''America first.'' Many said the president's grievances were their grievances, too. They believed kneeling during the national anthem was un-American, and they were appalled at what they viewed as liberals' minimizing of violence that at times grew out of the protests over the killing of George Floyd.
  At the same time, Trump voters dismissed as irrelevant aspects of the president's behavior that critics say make him historically unfit for office. All politicians lie, many said; as for the president's suggestion that he might not accept the election results, supporters said voters should judge his actions, not his loose talk or tweets.
  ''I didn't vote for Trump because I wanted him to be my best friend,'' Ms. Schenkel said. ''I wanted to make a change and a difference.''
  ''If he thinks it's the right thing, he doesn't care who's going to get mad at him,'' she added. ''I think he's very misunderstood.''
  Asked about her two votes for Mr. Obama, Ms. Schenkel faulted him for doing little, in her view, to heal racial divisions or lift the Black community. She cited a ''blood bath'' of crime in Chicago whose victims are mainly young Black men, and a high abortion rate for African-American women. ''I feel he made race relations the worst I've seen in my 50 years,'' she said.
  A longtime resident of Minnesota, Ms. Schenkel moved with her husband last year to North Carolina to be closer to their grandchildren. She found work using her law degree in a bank loan department, while her husband babysits.
  She grades the president highly on having met his promises, including slowing the flow of undocumented immigrants and building a strong economy before the virus struck.
  Other Trump supporters outlined myriad reasons for wanting to re-elect him, ranging from the pragmatic, like a new job made possible by the administration's policies, to a gut-level attraction to his hard-nosed personality. His supporters related ''aha'' moments in their upbringing when they realized they were conservatives, which they spoke of as nonnegotiable beliefs woven into their identity, like opposition to abortion. 
  Joseph Karlovich of Jacksonville, Fla. is also a former Obama voter who abandoned the Democrats for Mr. Trump. Mr. Karlovich, 33, an engineer, explained that he was working for a government contractor on a Navy missile system in 2015 when the news cycle became consumed with Hillary Clinton's private email server, which had held some classified information.
  ''That's like a huge no-no, what she did,'' he said, noting that he believes he would have been fired for a similar offense. Offended by what he said were Mrs. Clinton's attempts to minimize the issue, he voted for Mr. Trump.
  Mr. Karlovich is from a family of five adult siblings with diverse political leanings. A sister who is a nurse is a Republican. A brother who leans Democratic works for the National Rifle Association.
  Mr. Karlovich said he had personally benefited from the president's America First policies. After the Trump administration restricted H-1B visas for immigrants with high-tech skills, Mr. Karlovich landed a better-paying job just this month in his field, robotics. ''I don't think I would have gotten offered the position'' without the restrictions on foreign workers, he said. ''There was less competition out there for me applying for that position.''
  He takes the president's bullying outbursts and lying with a grain of salt. ''He's selling a pitch, for the most part,'' he said. ''My dad's a salesman. For me, it's the same with all politicians. They're trying to get you to buy in, and you have to do your own research.''
  When Shelley Taylor was 17 in rural Ohio, she crossed a teachers' picket line at her high school and told the school board the teachers were selfishly depriving seniors of credits they needed to graduate. Supporters of the teachers boycotted her parents' hardware store, she recalled. The episode shaped her political identity as a conservative.
  Now a resident of Deltona, Fla., Ms. Taylor, 59, still considers herself outspoken, and she was drawn in four years ago by that same quality in Mr. Trump. ''I liked how he was very straight up,'' she said. ''I laughed at his demeanor. I thought, all right, we got a guy here who's going to whoop some butt on these politicians.''
  Ms. Taylor believes the president's enemies, including Democrats who she says behave like ''spoiled little kids,'' have tried to undermine him from Day 1. Among the developments she said were being manipulated to damage the president are the coronavirus outbreak and the protests after the death of Mr. Floyd, a Black man killed in the custody of white police officers in Minneapolis.
  ''We've had more cops gun down white people than Black people,'' she said. ''Do we throw a fit if a white guy gets killed by the cops? No.''
  ''I'm not racist,'' she said. ''I'm not. I have all kinds of friends. There's good cops and there's bad cops, I see that. We just need to weed them out. I think this George Floyd incident got escalated to be ridiculous.''
  ''He was doing such a great job,'' Ms. Taylor said of the president. ''They couldn't impeach him. Everything was going good and wham, all of a sudden, we got a freaking virus.''
  Ms. Taylor and others blamed the news media's coverage of the virus, complaining that the media is being hypocritical when it condemns unmasked crowds in bars but not unmasked protesters in Portland and Seattle. They echoed a Gallup poll from March that showed Republicans' trust in the media's response to the pandemic was lower than for any institution.
  Mr. Trump has called journalists ''the enemy of the people'' and has worked to undercut confidence in other institutions, including science, the electoral process and government.
  Ludwig Pikulski, 57, of Pennsylvania, said he had stopped watching all TV news a couple of months ago. ''There's no real news sources anymore,'' he said. ''I don't trust anything.'' He even tried watching a French channel in English.
  Kathleen O'Boyle, who sells real estate in the Pittsburgh suburbs, said she didn't believe Mr. Trump had soft-pedaled the virus at all.
  On the contrary, the coronavirus turned out to be ''a lot less severe'' than initially feared, with fatalities concentrated among older people but barely touching young ones, said Ms. O'Boyle, a law school graduate and former litigator.
  Mr. Trump, she said, had ''overreacted based on the information he had available.'' She added, ''I would have been opposed to an economic shutdown.''
  Ms. O'Boyle, 60, who called herself a constitutional conservative, said those who fixate on the president's behavior didn't understand what supporters like her admire in him: He has accomplished what she would want from any Republican president.
  ''It seems there's an argument that anybody who's a Trump supporter is not rational, is a racist, just likes him for his personality,'' she said. ''None of that is true with me. I actually don't particularly like his personality.''
  ''For some reason, people who are not Trump supporters can't understand that Trump supporters are pleased because he's done what they elected him for,'' she added.
  She ticked off a list: putting conservatives on the Supreme Court, withdrawing from the Paris climate accord, renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement and presiding over the lowest unemployment in 50 years before the pandemic. Moreover, she said, he did so amid a special counsel investigation and an impeachment.
  ''It's a very chaotic atmosphere to accomplish those things, so I give him credit for that,'' she said.
  Robin Sinsabaugh, who lives outside Charlotte, N.C., supervises seven McDonald's franchises. Many of her employees are African-Americans, and initially she was sympathetic to the outrage over Mr. Floyd's killing.
  ''Obviously Black men, especially younger men, are targeted,'' she said. ''I say that because I'm able to talk to a lot of my employees. I talked to a young man who said, 'I've been pulled over a dozen times when I've done nothing wrong.'''
  But she believes that grievances that were peacefully expressed at first got out of hand in early June, when the police in Charlotte said that protesters had aimed rocks and fireworks at officers, and the authorities responded with pepper spray and tear gas.
  ''I'm not going to remember them for anything they said,'' Ms. Sinsabaugh said of the marchers. ''I'm going to remember them for what they did to their own city.''
  Ms. Sinsabaugh, 47, is married to a retired police officer.
  She said the nationwide fracture between the president's support of aggressive policing and the protesters' fury at law enforcement had split her own household. Her 17-year-old son, who will vote for the first time in November, is vehemently anti-Trump. When he watched the video of Mr. Floyd's killing, he erupted, saying ''all cops should be shot.''
  Ms. Sinsabaugh hit the roof. She took her son aside, she recalled, and said: ''From now on, I don't want to hear you say one more word. We don't talk about cops in this house. Your father being a cop for 26 years is why we have what we have. That level of respect needs to change.''
  Polls show that Mr. Trump's most unwavering supporters are white evangelical Christians. Despite the moral lapses in his life -- his infidelity, his bankruptcies or questionable enterprises like his now-defunct charity -- they have continued to stick with him.
  When Sarah Danes was an adolescent, her parents were Christian missionaries on the Navajo Reservation. Today she, her husband and their five children, 8 to 17, live in rural Western Michigan. He works at a food processing plant and she is a homemaker. They both strongly oppose abortion, and believe Mr. Trump will further that cause.
  They don't spend much time on the internet. ''I get a little news through a pro-life TV network,'' said Ms. Danes, 39. ''They said Trump was the first-ever president to speak at the March for Life,'' she added, referring to the annual anti-abortion rally on the National Mall. ''I'm like, wow, that's awesome. When I hear him talk about life, it's not just a social issue, it's a God-says-it's-wrong issue.''
  She feels a long way from Washington and what elected officials there seem to understand about the lives of people like her.
  ''We're in a lot better place financially than we used to be, but we've lived in a lot of trailers,'' she said of her family. ''I've had crazy neighbors dropping f-bombs at their children. I don't think people up in Washington have much of any clue about what my life looks like.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/25/us/politics/trump-reelection-supporters.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: SHELLEY TAYLOR, 59, of Deltona, Fla., who says bad police officers just need to be weeded out (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLOTTE KESL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
ROBIN SINSABAUGH, 47, who lives near Charlotte, N.C., about violence at protests (PHOTOGRAPH BY TRAVIS DOVE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 SARAH DANES, 39, who lives in rural western Michigan and strongly opposes abortion (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRITTANY GREESON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)               

Load-Date: August 26, 2020


End of Document
Trump’s Fights Are Their Fights. They Have His Back Unapologetically.
The New York Times 
August 25, 2020 Tuesday 08:33 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 2310 words
Byline: Trip Gabriel
Highlight: Many supporters of President Trump said in interviews that he had succeeded on issues that matter to them. And they dismissed as unimportant the behavior that critics say makes him unfit for office.
Body


Many supporters of President Trump said in interviews that he had succeeded on issues that matter to them. And they dismissed as unimportant the behavior that critics say makes him unfit for office.
DiAnna Schenkel is a law school graduate who once ran on the Democratic ticket for her city council. She voted twice for Barack Obama. A 59-year-old suburbanite in North Carolina, she worries about her Black son-in-law being racially profiled by the police, pulled over and beaten or worse.
The portrait of a Biden voter?
No, Ms. Schenkel, who is white, is a confirmed supporter of Donald J. Trump. She voted for him enthusiastically four years ago after becoming disillusioned with the Obama presidency, and plans to vote for his re-election. At the same time, she is wary of expressing her politics openly because she believes that stereotypes of what she calls “Trumpers” like herself, as portrayed on social media and in conversations, are smug and spiteful.
“There’s so many people throwing down really inflammatory words: Racist. Xenophobic,” she said of the way people regard Trump supporters. “And these inflammatory words carry emotions. It just pivots people to where they’re not going to even tolerate someone for supporting that person. You’re automatically put on trial and you have to testify why you believe what you believe.”
As Mr. Trump takes center stage at the Republican National Convention this week, he maintains a core of rock-solid supporters like Ms. Schenkel who believe he is fighting in America’s best interests and has achieved many of his goals — which are their goals too. He has aggressively cultivated these voters over the last few months with scathing criticism of vandalism that has occasionally arisen from mostly peaceful protests calling for racial justice, and by boasting that, pre-coronavirus, he had built an economy second to none.
For Democrats and many independents, Mr. Trump has shattered the norms of presidential behavior with racist tweets and divisive policies; his use of federal agencies to advance his personal interests; and, perhaps most important, his detachment from managing the pandemic, which has killed more than 175,000 Americans.
The revulsion toward the president that his opponents feel has colored how many regard Mr. Trump’s supporters. Portrayals of his base, these supporters say, are often distilled into a caricature: that they are all white bigots, in thrall to an authoritarian leader and lost in a fog of fact-denial.
While polling and interviews turn up ample evidence of these traits, tens of millions of Americans will vote for Mr. Trump, and there are plenty of supporters who transcend the stereotypes, whose personal experiences or policy interests make him the right fit for them.
In lengthy interviews over the last several weeks, a cross-section of Trump voters said they believed he had succeeded on issues like hardening the Southern border, appointing conservative judges, taking on China and putting “America first.” Many said the president’s grievances were their grievances, too. They believed kneeling during the national anthem was un-American, and they were appalled at what they viewed as liberals’ minimizing of violence that at times grew out of the protests over the killing of George Floyd.
At the same time, Trump voters dismissed as irrelevant aspects of the president’s behavior that critics say make him historically unfit for office. All politicians lie, many said; as for the president’s suggestion that he might not accept the election results, supporters said voters should judge his actions, not his loose talk or tweets.
“I didn’t vote for Trump because I wanted him to be my best friend,” Ms. Schenkel said. “I wanted to make a change and a difference.”
“If he thinks it’s the right thing, he doesn’t care who’s going to get mad at him,” she added. “I think he’s very misunderstood.”
Asked about her two votes for Mr. Obama, Ms. Schenkel faulted him for doing little, in her view, to heal racial divisions or lift the Black community. She cited a “blood bath” of crime in Chicago whose victims are mainly young Black men, and a high abortion rate for African-American women. “I feel he made race relations the worst I’ve seen in my 50 years,” she said.
A longtime resident of Minnesota, Ms. Schenkel moved with her husband last year to North Carolina to be closer to their grandchildren. She found work using her law degree in a bank loan department, while her husband babysits.
She grades the president highly on having met his promises, including slowing the flow of undocumented immigrants and building a strong economy before the virus struck.
Other Trump supporters outlined myriad reasons for wanting to re-elect him, ranging from the pragmatic, like a new job made possible by the administration’s policies, to a gut-level attraction to his hard-nosed personality. His supporters related “aha” moments in their upbringing when they realized they were conservatives, which they spoke of as nonnegotiable beliefs woven into their identity, like opposition to abortion. 
Joseph Karlovich of Jacksonville, Fla. is also a former Obama voter who abandoned the Democrats for Mr. Trump. Mr. Karlovich, 33, an engineer, explained that he was working for a government contractor on a Navy missile system in 2015 when the news cycle became consumed with Hillary Clinton’s private email server, which had held some classified information.
“That’s like a huge no-no, what she did,” he said, noting that he believes he would have been fired for a similar offense. Offended by what he said were Mrs. Clinton’s attempts to minimize the issue, he voted for Mr. Trump.
Mr. Karlovich is from a family of five adult siblings with diverse political leanings. A sister who is a nurse is a Republican. A brother who leans Democratic works for the National Rifle Association.
Mr. Karlovich said he had personally benefited from the president’s America First policies. After the Trump administration restricted H-1B visas for immigrants with high-tech skills, Mr. Karlovich landed a better-paying job just this month in his field, robotics. “I don’t think I would have gotten offered the position” without the restrictions on foreign workers, he said. “There was less competition out there for me applying for that position.”
He takes the president’s bullying outbursts and lying with a grain of salt. “He’s selling a pitch, for the most part,” he said. “My dad’s a salesman. For me, it’s the same with all politicians. They’re trying to get you to buy in, and you have to do your own research.”
When Shelley Taylor was 17 in rural Ohio, she crossed a teachers’ picket line at her high school and told the school board the teachers were selfishly depriving seniors of credits they needed to graduate. Supporters of the teachers boycotted her parents’ hardware store, she recalled. The episode shaped her political identity as a conservative.
Now a resident of Deltona, Fla., Ms. Taylor, 59, still considers herself outspoken, and she was drawn in four years ago by that same quality in Mr. Trump. “I liked how he was very straight up,” she said. “I laughed at his demeanor. I thought, all right, we got a guy here who’s going to whoop some butt on these politicians.”
Ms. Taylor believes the president’s enemies, including Democrats who she says behave like “spoiled little kids,” have tried to undermine him from Day 1. Among the developments she said were being manipulated to damage the president are the coronavirus outbreak and the protests after the death of Mr. Floyd, a Black man killed in the custody of white police officers in Minneapolis.
“We’ve had more cops gun down white people than Black people,” she said. “Do we throw a fit if a white guy gets killed by the cops? No.”
“I’m not racist,” she said. “I’m not. I have all kinds of friends. There’s good cops and there’s bad cops, I see that. We just need to weed them out. I think this George Floyd incident got escalated to be ridiculous.”
“He was doing such a great job,” Ms. Taylor said of the president. “They couldn’t impeach him. Everything was going good and wham, all of a sudden, we got a freaking virus.”
Ms. Taylor and others blamed the news media’s coverage of the virus, complaining that the media is being hypocritical when it condemns unmasked crowds in bars but not unmasked protesters in Portland and Seattle. They echoed a Gallup poll from March that showed Republicans’ trust in the media’s response to the pandemic was lower than for any institution.
Mr. Trump has called journalists “the enemy of the people” and has worked to undercut confidence in other institutions, including science, the electoral process and government.
Ludwig Pikulski, 57, of Pennsylvania, said he had stopped watching all TV news a couple of months ago. “There’s no real news sources anymore,” he said. “I don’t trust anything.” He even tried watching a French channel in English.
Kathleen O’Boyle, who sells real estate in the Pittsburgh suburbs, said she didn’t believe Mr. Trump had soft-pedaled the virus at all.
On the contrary, the coronavirus turned out to be “a lot less severe” than initially feared, with fatalities concentrated among older people but barely touching young ones, said Ms. O’Boyle, a law school graduate and former litigator.
Mr. Trump, she said, had “overreacted based on the information he had available.” She added, “I would have been opposed to an economic shutdown.”
Ms. O’Boyle, 60, who called herself a constitutional conservative, said those who fixate on the president’s behavior didn’t understand what supporters like her admire in him: He has accomplished what she would want from any Republican president.
“It seems there’s an argument that anybody who’s a Trump supporter is not rational, is a racist, just likes him for his personality,” she said. “None of that is true with me. I actually don’t particularly like his personality.”
“For some reason, people who are not Trump supporters can’t understand that Trump supporters are pleased because he’s done what they elected him for,” she added.
She ticked off a list: putting conservatives on the Supreme Court, withdrawing from the Paris climate accord, renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement and presiding over the lowest unemployment in 50 years before the pandemic. Moreover, she said, he did so amid a special counsel investigation and an impeachment.
“It’s a very chaotic atmosphere to accomplish those things, so I give him credit for that,” she said.
Robin Sinsabaugh, who lives outside Charlotte, N.C., supervises seven McDonald’s franchises. Many of her employees are African-Americans, and initially she was sympathetic to the outrage over Mr. Floyd’s killing.
“Obviously Black men, especially younger men, are targeted,” she said. “I say that because I’m able to talk to a lot of my employees. I talked to a young man who said, ‘I’ve been pulled over a dozen times when I’ve done nothing wrong.’”
But she believes that grievances that were peacefully expressed at first got out of hand in early June, when the police in Charlotte said that protesters had aimed rocks and fireworks at officers, and the authorities responded with pepper spray and tear gas.
“I’m not going to remember them for anything they said,” Ms. Sinsabaugh said of the marchers. “I’m going to remember them for what they did to their own city.”
Ms. Sinsabaugh, 47, is married to a retired police officer.
She said the nationwide fracture between the president’s support of aggressive policing and the protesters’ fury at law enforcement had split her own household. Her 17-year-old son, who will vote for the first time in November, is vehemently anti-Trump. When he watched the video of Mr. Floyd’s killing, he erupted, saying “all cops should be shot.”
Ms. Sinsabaugh hit the roof. She took her son aside, she recalled, and said: “From now on, I don’t want to hear you say one more word. We don’t talk about cops in this house. Your father being a cop for 26 years is why we have what we have. That level of respect needs to change.”
Polls show that Mr. Trump’s most unwavering supporters are white evangelical Christians. Despite the moral lapses in his life — his infidelity, his bankruptcies or questionable enterprises like his now-defunct charity — they have continued to stick with him.
When Sarah Danes was an adolescent, her parents were Christian missionaries on the Navajo Reservation. Today she, her husband and their five children, 8 to 17, live in rural Western Michigan. He works at a food processing plant and she is a homemaker. They both strongly oppose abortion, and believe Mr. Trump will further that cause.
They don’t spend much time on the internet. “I get a little news through a pro-life TV network,” said Ms. Danes, 39. “They said Trump was the first-ever president to speak at the March for Life,” she added, referring to the annual anti-abortion rally on the National Mall. “I’m like, wow, that’s awesome. When I hear him talk about life, it’s not just a social issue, it’s a God-says-it’s-wrong issue.”
She feels a long way from Washington and what elected officials there seem to understand about the lives of people like her.
“We’re in a lot better place financially than we used to be, but we’ve lived in a lot of trailers,” she said of her family. “I’ve had crazy neighbors dropping f-bombs at their children. I don’t think people up in Washington have much of any clue about what my life looks like.”
PHOTOS: SHELLEY TAYLOR, 59, of Deltona, Fla., who says bad police officers just need to be weeded out (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLOTTE KESL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); ROBIN SINSABAUGH, 47, who lives near Charlotte, N.C., about violence at protests (PHOTOGRAPH BY TRAVIS DOVE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); SARAH DANES, 39, who lives in rural western Michigan and strongly opposes abortion (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRITTANY GREESON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)

Load-Date: January 7, 2021


End of Document
Bill Dies, Views Divide and Immigrants Work On
The New York Times
June 30, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2335 words
Byline: By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD
Dateline: SAN DIEGO, June 29 
Body


Ediberto Perez pedaled his bicycle out of a canyon shantytown in this border city's northern outskirts where he and other migrant workers scratch out a living.
  ''So I won't get papers?'' he asked at  dawn on Friday, more curious than deflated about the defeat in the Senate of an overhaul to immigration law. ''Well, I am just going to keep working. What more can I do?''
  John Ladd, a rancher in southern Arizona, emerged at daybreak, too, to inspect a fence that illegal crossers routinely damage. Once, he called in a civilian patrol group to help deter illegal traffic but now he contemplated the inevitable.
  ''Until they dry up the jobs, they're never going to secure the border,'' Mr. Ladd said.
  The day after the Senate failed to move on a proposal for the broadest change in immigration law in two decades, it was a time to take stock of a debate that played out something like a neutron bomb: blasts of rhetoric, of speeches, marches and convulsing in Congress and on talk radio and television that has left everything pretty much standing as is. 
  And now in the fallout, the mayor of a small city in Pennsylvania that passed its own anti-immigrant ordinance found triumph in the federal government's inertia. A disappointed New York conservative engaged in some wishful plotting about what might come next. Townsfolk in a Mexican village worried that getting into the United States would become more perilous. Mr. Ladd braced for more crossers on his land.
  And Mr. Perez pedaled off to work, as the daily churn of immigration across the nation carried on. Farm work. Landscaping. Construction. Day jobs. It is all here in northern San Diego, where the stirrings of immigration largely reflect the national debate.
  With the first light of day, they trickle out of canyons and hills here, mostly men from the Mexican state of Oaxaca, their chattering in Spanish and Mixteco, an Indian language, filling the air.
  ''I was in an apartment downtown when the agents came and took us all to Tijuana,'' said Margarito Brito, describing his apprehension in March by Immigration and Customs Enforcement. ''But I came back in April. There is always work here. I have been coming for 20 years.''
  A crush of migrant workers and day laborers crowd street corners and parking lots and, with a dearth of affordable apartments and farm-worker housing in the area, they drag tarps, crates and spare wood into the hills and canyons for makeshift housing.
  At night they can see the glitter of million-dollar homes that brush against tomato fields and hills and ravines less than a mile away, at a closeness that has made some residents of those homes uncomfortable. 
  The migrant camps have been vandalized. Anti-immigration groups have protested the migrant workers' presence.
  But men like Mr. Brito keep coming, filling a demand for cheap, convenient labor. He said he never thought legalization would happen for him or his companions, but it is just as well.
  ''I have my wife and four children in Mexico,'' Mr. Brito said, sitting on a roadside crate, waiting for work. ''It would be good to be legal, but I am not, and I am still working.''
  THE FRONT LINE
  A Rancher Takes
  His Daily Inventory
  NACO, Ariz., June 29 -- It was 8 a.m., and John Ladd was taking a daily inventory to see what illegal immigration had done the night before to his 14,000-acre cattle ranch on the border here in southeastern Arizona. 
  Mr. Ladd pulled his Dodge pickup out of his driveway, through a gate and onto a dirt road leading into a rolling pastureland of desert grasses, mesquite scrub and darting jackrabbits. A few hundred yards away, he pointed to a section of cutaway fencing.
  ''They used to be somewhat responsible and just pull the fence apart,'' he said of the estimated 200 immigrants who cross his property from Mexico every day. ''Now it's just, 'Let's go as fast as we can.' ''
  Mr. Ladd has long been disappointed with Congress for not having solved the problems on the border, and though only lukewarm about the Senate bill, he was not particularly surprised that the politicians in Washington botched it again.
  In recent years, tighter border security, including three camera towers that the Ladds allowed the Border Patrol to install on the 111-year-old family ranch, have only made human smugglers more frantic, as well as more organized, Mr. Ladd said.
  And as illegal immigration has become more lucrative, he suggested, the drug cartels in the neighboring state of Sonora have taken a stepped-up role.
  Mr. Ladd said he had seen it in the way that the vehicles from sleepy Naco, Sonora, that used to shuttle illegal immigrants through the desert, had been replaced by taxicabs from an organized-crime hotbed, Cananea, Sonora, 45 minutes away on a bumpy dirt road.
  And he has heard it from his Mexican rancher buddies, whom he meets at the border fence to chat over a can of beer.
  ''I asked one guy about it, and he said, 'Oh, it's that darned cartel from Cananea,' '' Mr. Ladd recounted. 
  Even so, Mr. Ladd said, he is more concerned with his cut fences than with the people who send the fence cutters. 
  ''That's what irritates me more than anything,'' said Mr. Ladd, who manages two distinct herds on the ranch. ''I can't keep my cows separated anymore.''  JONATHAN CLARK 
  THE POST-MORTEM 
  Wishful Plotting
  For the Next Round
  After the Senate bill was stopped cold, Tamar Jacoby, a conservative Republican who helped to organize the movement to support it, went for a stiff drink and a few hours sleep. Then Ms. Jacoby returned for more Washington meetings for gloomy post-mortems and a little wishful plotting about what might come next. 
  Ms. Jacoby, 52, went from desk-chair intellectual to phone-calling door-knocking advocate in the last few years, after reading about illegal immigrants who died in the Arizona desert trying to cross into the United States.
  For her, defeat came at the hands of American voters from her conservative camp who, she acknowledged, did better at galvanizing their forces.
  ''The polls show that the public supports a practical answer to immigration,'' she said. ''We just didn't tap into those sentiments as well to sell the compromise.''
  Ms. Jacoby, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, a conservative research group in New York, helped organize business people, who are often hesitant to come forward, into groups in 13 states supporting the Senate package. Their button-down appeals were no match for the scorching radio, television and Internet blitz by the opponents. 
  ''Amnesty is a bumper sticker,'' she said, using the word that opponents used to tar the bill as rewarding illegal immigrant lawbreakers. ''We had a complicated compromise to defend. Some of us were ambivalent about it. They didn't have an ounce of ambivalence.''
  JULIA PRESTON
  THE FACE-OFF 
  Disappointment
  And Satisfaction
  HAZLETON, Pa., June 29 -- Wyoming Street, the heart of the Hispanic business district here, has been struggling because many customers are afraid. The fear set in about a year ago when the City Council passed an ordinance intended to crack down on illegal immigration.
  It turned to despair on Thursday, as many illegal residents across the country saw one of their few opportunities to become United States citizens evaporate.
  ''It's a tragedy for people in this situation that the Congress couldn't agree,'' said Rudy Espinal, 39, a real estate agent who is a citizen. He came to this city about 100 miles northwest of Philadelphia in 2001 from the Dominican Republic and is president of the Hazleton Hispanic Business Association.
  But one man's tragedy is often another man's triumph. Mayor Louis J. Barletta, who championed the town's assertive approach to immigration, used a breakfast in honor of Hazleton's 150th anniversary to welcome the demise of the legislation, which he characterized as amnesty. 
  ''I'm pleased that the American people's voice was heard loud and clear,'' Mr. Barletta, a Republican, said at the breakfast, where organizers sold T-shirts with the motto ''Hazleton: A City With Attitude.'' 
  Mr. Barletta said the pressure was back on places like Hazleton to deal with the country's illegal immigrants, a pressure he welcomes. The city's ordinance, which is the subject of a federal injunction pending court challenges, would penalize businesses that hire illegal immigrants, fine landlords who rent to them and establish English as the  official language.
  ''We had no confidence the federal government would solve this problem,'' he said.
  About a third of Hazleton's 31,000 residents are immigrants from Central and South America, many of whom have arrived in the last five years, drawn by affordable housing and factory jobs. According to some estimates, before the ordinance was passed, about a quarter of the immigrant population was illegal. -- JON HURDLE
  THE ANXIETY
  The Asian Face
  Of Immigration
   Flushing is one of New York City's most heavily Asian neighborhoods, and the immigrants who take job-training classes at the Chinese-American Planning Council in the shadow of the Whitestone Bridge are either United States citizens, like Jason Li, or green-card holders.
  ''I'm angry'' about the immigration bill, Mr. Li said in Mandarin as he took a break from a class in interviewing skills. ''It's difficult for the undocumented in America. They make their contributions to this country by working hard, mostly overtime; they work harder than the people who live here legally.''
  ''I talked to them after hearing about the vote,'' Mr. Li, 37, said, ''and they're scared. They're more scared than ever.''
  A Chinese construction worker, who is 28 and did not want his name used because he is in the United States illegally, agreed, but said he had never expected it to pass.
  ''This bill was about politicians playing games,'' he said. ''They never paid attention to what immigrants need. But my life won't be disturbed by the decision. I will still work day and night, go home, cook dinner and start over the next day. The main inconvenience is that I can't drive.'' KAI MA
  THE NEXT STEP 
  Technology Prepares
  To Go It Alone
  SAN FRANCISCO, June 29 -- Lesson learned. Ralph Hellman, a lobbyist for the technology industry, is now preparing to fly solo.
  With a tone befitting someone who has endured his share of Congressional battles, Mr. Hellman said technology companies had a better shot at getting what they wanted on immigration by staying away from measures that offered too much to too many.
  ''Some of the most hardcore opponents of the immigration bill are some of our strongest proponents,'' he said of the failed Senate bill. ''They really understand our issues, but they didn't support the comprehensive bill.''
  Above all, Mr. Hellman and other technology lobbyists wanted a bill that would have provided more temporary visas for scientists and engineers. Three years ago, a law tripling the number of H1B temporary visas expired, reducing them to 65,000 from 195,000 a year.
  The technology field never wanted the visas addressed in the comprehensive bill, Mr. Hellman said. Although the bill would have raised the cap on H1B visas, it did not adequately address the problems of workers who wanted to remain in the United States after their visas had expired. 
  Looking ahead, Mr. Hellman said technology representatives would act fairly quickly, perhaps creating a new bill for the fall. Where it goes from there, of course, is anyone's guess.
  ''We're patient,'' said Mr. Hellman, a senior vice president at the Information Technology Industry Council in Washington. ''We've been patient for three years.''  LAURIE J. FLYNN
  THE DISTANCE
  Broken Dreams,
  Broken Families
  TULCINGO DEL VALLE, Mexico, June 29 -- On most every street corner in this sun-baked town, dominated by a bright yellow church and a market cluttered with fresh produce, there are stories of sundered families and twisted versions of the American dream.
  Almost every family here has sent someone to the United States to find work, mostly in New York City.
  Miguel Romero, 36, loitered outside a restaurant, looking as forlorn as a deflated balloon. For 16 years, he had worked as a glazier in Brooklyn. He married and was raising five children.
  But earlier this year, immigration officials arrested him while he was installing glass in a storefront in lower Manhattan, Mr. Romero said. He was deported on May 21. 
  His wife, also in the United States illegally, decided not to join him, and he says he does not blame her, since wages here average about $10 a day. He has no idea where his family is living or how they are surviving. He does not dare cross the border illegally again, for fear of getting caught and serving time in jail.
  ''My whole life I spent up there, and it's hard for me to come back,'' he said in perfect English. ''We have been up there so many years, and most of us don't commit crimes. People that do nothing but work should get a break.''
  He shook his head. ''It's never going to happen,'' he said.
  Residents here are used to promises of change in United States immigration laws that never pan out, just as they are accustomed to being separated from family members and to lining up at money-transfer agencies to collect remittances from far-flung relatives.
  ''It's the same that they have always done -- they say they will do it but they don't,'' said Rene Leon, as he left a Western Union office where he had picked up some money wired by his brothers in New York. ''It's a game to them.''
  Palemon Gomez, a local hotel owner, said this town of 11,000 about 125 miles southeast of Mexico City had been watching the Senate immigration bill's fortunes with a mix of fear and hope. Many residents have relatives in the United States who would have benefited from it.
  ''There were a lot of people betting that they were going to get their residency papers through this law,'' Mr. Gomez said. ''If they had approved this law, the whole world would be happy.''  JAMES C. McKINLEY JR.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: TULCINGO DEL VALLE, MEXICO: Many in this city, where most have a family member in the United States, were let down. Silvester Sergio, 14, seated with his cousin Anderson Valle, 6
they were born in the Bronx.(Photograph by Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
SAN DIEGO: Day laborers hoping for jobs in construction, farming or landscaping, gathering at dawn in the northern part of the city, whose immigration dynamics reflect those of the nation, and where shantytowns exist less than a mile from million-dollar homes. (Photograph by Monica Almeida/The New York Times)(pg. A12)
NEW YORK CITY: Jason Li, a citizen, said he was angry the bill died. ''It's difficult for the undocumented in America,'' he said. ''They make their contributions to this country by working hard, mostly overtime
they work harder than the people who live here legally.'' (Photograph by Michael Nagle for The New York Times)(pg. A12)
 HAZLETON, PA.: Mayor Louis J. Barletta, who has led an assertive approach to immigration was relieved that the legislation died. ''I'm pleased that the American people's voice was heard loud and clear,'' he said at the city's 150th anniversary celebration.(Photograph by Mike Mergen for The New York Times)(pg. A12)      

Load-Date: April 2, 2008


End of Document
Craving Talent and Growth, Tech Giants Go East
The New York Times
December 14, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1324 words
Byline: By JACK NICAS and KAREN WEISE; Jack Nicas reported from San Francisco and Karen Weise from Seattle. Steve Lohr contributed reporting from New York.
Follow Jack Nicas and Karen Weise on Twitter: @jacknicas and @KYWeise.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- This generation's biggest technology companies -- including Apple, Amazon and Google -- have long been tied to their hometowns. Now these giants are increasingly outgrowing their West Coast roots.
Driven by a limited pool of skilled workers and the ballooning cost of living in their home bases of Silicon Valley and Seattle, as well as President Trump's shifting immigration policies, the companies are aggressively taking their talent hunt across the United States and elsewhere. And they are coalescing particularly around a handful of urban areas that are already winners in the new knowledge-based economy, including New York City, Washington, Boston and Austin, Tex. 
  This eastward expansion accelerated on Thursday when Apple said it would build a $1 billion campus in Austin, expanding its presence there to over 11,000 workers and becoming the area's largest private employer. The decision followed Amazon's highly publicized selection of Queens and Arlington, Va., last month for new offices that would house at least 50,000 employees. Google, too, is shopping for more real estate in New York that could enable it to more than double its work force of 7,000 in the city.
  ''They're expanding out,'' said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics. ''Tech talent is in very short supply. So if these tech companies want to grow and flourish, they need to find talent in other parts of the country.''
  The chase for tech talent has been global for decades, and Silicon Valley's older companies have had big offices all over the world for years. Intel, for example, has far more employees in Oregon than it does in California. Hewlett-Packard, which split into two companies three years ago, has had large outposts in Idaho and Oregon.
  Amazon, Apple and Google are now increasingly adopting the same strategy as they hire for growth and pursue the brightest minds in new technologies, in an effort to outmuscle one another. Over the past two years, Amazon's work force has doubled to 613,300 employees; Google's parent, Alphabet, has increased its head count by 35 percent, to 94,300; and Apple has grown nearly 14 percent, to 132,000 workers.
  Many of the companies are trying to cozy up to top engineering schools in cities like Pittsburgh, where Google recently opened an office and where Uber has had a center, or Zurich as they search for hard-to-find talent in artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. Cambridge, England, now hosts several A.I. research outposts for American tech companies, including Amazon, Microsoft and Apple.
  Like Cambridge, England, some cities in the United States have also become known for a particular area of tech expertise, in what has become a modern remake of the country's industrial era, when cities came to specialize in the production of cars, steel and coal.
  The Seattle area, home to Amazon and Microsoft, is known for experts in cloud-computing services thanks to Amazon's leadership in that field. Pittsburgh is known for A.I. because of Carnegie Mellon University's computer science program. Cambridge, Mass., is associated with robotics, thanks to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. And New York is often where cutting-edge work on financial services technology is done.
  The search for talent outside Silicon Valley and Seattle has also been prompted by issues in the companies' hometowns, which have not built enough housing to keep up with their growing work forces. San Francisco, San Jose, Oakland and Seattle are the four most expensive major cities in the country based on home values, according to data from Zillow. The median home in San Francisco is valued at almost $1.4 million and more than $733,000 in Seattle. Questions also abound over the quality and funding of the areas' public school systems.
  ''Every day as a C.E.O., you have employees coming to you saying, 'I don't make enough to buy a house for my family,' and you already feel like you are paying through the nose,'' said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, the real estate site based in Seattle. ''Almost everyone is looking at other affordable places where you can open an office.''
  Some economists said the Trump administration's tougher immigration policies could also restrict the tech giants from importing skilled workers from abroad to their West Coast headquarters. The Trump administration has increased the red tape in applying for H-1B visas for highly skilled workers and has denied petitions more often. Over a five-day window this April, employers submitted petitions for more than 190,000 specialized work visas, but only 85,000 can be granted annually.
  That has helped push some tech companies into building major outposts in Canada, particularly in Toronto and Vancouver. Edward Glaeser, a Harvard economics professor, said that even if H-1B workers were to come through in abundance, it would still make sense to put them in cheaper cities, like Austin. He said, ''$100,000 goes a lot further in Austin than in Silicon Valley.''
  Yet even as the tech companies move beyond the West Coast, their choices to converge on cities or towns that are already highly educated, wealthy and well employed do not spread the wealth.
  More than 44 percent of all digital-service jobs in the United States were located in just 10 metro areas last year, including Seattle, San Francisco and San Jose, as well as New York, Washington, Los Angeles and Boston, according to research by Mark Muro, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. From 2015 to 2017, only nine metro areas increased their share of the nation's tech work force, including the West Coast tech hubs, as well as Austin and Denver.
  ''The tech industry concentrates in very few markets,'' said Amy Liu, director of the Metropolitan Policy Program at the Brookings Institution. ''Our biggest concern is how do we make sure more cities, particularly midsized cities in the middle of the country, can be players in the tech economy?''
  Amazon, which has about 45,000 people at its Seattle headquarters, has also opened 16 tech hubs in the United States. About 85 percent of those satellite employees are in six booming, highly educated urban areas -- the Bay Area, Washington region, New York, Boston, Los Angeles and Austin. Each has at least 1,000 workers.
  (The bulk of Amazon's North American work force is made up of the more than 250,000 people who are dispersed in the company's roughly 110 warehouses around Canada and the United States and who make less money than their white-collar colleagues.)
  Apple, which has been criticized by President Trump for not creating more domestic jobs, said on Thursday that its plans for Austin included a new 133-acre campus that will initially have 5,000 workers in engineering, research and development, operations and other functions. It will ultimately be able to accommodate up to 15,000 workers.
  Apple already has about 6,000 workers in Austin. The company said it applied for a $25 million grant from Texas, payable over 15 years, as well as property-tax rebates from Williamson County.
  A person familiar with Apple's decision to expand outside Cupertino, Calif., where it just opened a new $5 billion headquarters, said the move into Austin was partly driven by the extreme housing prices in the Bay Area, as well as its aim to find more talent and add more diversity and military veterans to its work force.
  The company added that it also planned to open 1,000-worker operations in Seattle, San Diego, and Culver City, Calif., and to add hundreds of employees in Pittsburgh, Boston, New York and Boulder, Colo., over the next three years.
  Some economists said what was most remarkable was that it took the tech giants this long to aggressively expand beyond the West Coast.
  ''In a sense, what we're seeing is tech becoming a normal industry,'' Mr. Glaeser said, ''an industry that's not located in one incredibly expensive place.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/13/technology/tech-talent-apple-tech-giants-west-coast.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The current Apple campus in Austin, Tex. The company is planning a new $1 billion, 133-acre campus there, expanding its presence to over 11,000 workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TAMIR KALIFA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)       

Load-Date: December 14, 2018


End of Document
What Google and Twitter Say About Trump's First 100 Days
The New York Times
April 29, 2017 Saturday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Express; Pg. 
Length: 575 words
Byline: By MATT STEVENS
Body


The rulers of the social media and search worlds have run their high-powered analytics to give us incisive new insight into President Trump's first 100 days in office.
And the results, are ... well, basically what you'd expect. 
  We now have data to support the claim that, yes, our commander in chief posts often on Twitter about the media and making America great; we also now know that people spent his first few months in office searching mostly for information about immigration and other related topics.
  But let's start with Mr. Trump himself.
  In a report released on Friday, Twitter examined how Mr. Trump leveraged his favorite social media platform during this early stage. They said Mr. Trump had posted a total of 486 times as of 1 p.m. on Day 98. (The New York Times has published an interactive feature cataloging  posts from the start of his presidency.)
  A less rigorous analysis by yours truly found that, by comparison, former President Barack Obama sent out a dozen messages on Twitter over that span; Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, however, sent a ton; Beyoncé did not send any.
  Mr. Trump sent Twitter messages containing the word ''great'' most often, followed by ''America/American'' and ''news/media,'' according to Twitter. Other words in the top 10 included: ''jobs,'' ''big'' and ''fake news.''
  Given that so many of his favorite phrases involved the news, it only makes sense that some of the Twitter handles that Mr. Trump mentioned most were media companies. The handle @Whitehouse topped the list, but @CNN and @FoxNews were close behind. The handles @nytimes and @foxandfriends tied for second -- presumably for different reasons.
  In its 100-days report, Twitter said Mr. Trump was mentioned most on Jan. 20 -- his inauguration. Users also mentioned the president frequently on Twitter when he signed controversial executive orders, when he claimed that Mr. Obama had him wiretapped and when one of Mr. Trump's senior advisers urged television viewers to buy fashion products marketed by his daughter.
  Google similarly found in its analysis that search interest in Mr. Trump peaked during his first day in office before beginning a gradual decline.
  Still, if Mr. Trump seeks a ''win'' over Mr. Obama, he can now say that he was searched 140 percent more than the former president during their respective first 100 days, according to the Google Trends analysis released Wednesday.
  Among the questions people asked Google to answer the most in that period:
   ''How many executive orders has Trump signed?''
   ''What countries did Trump ban?
   ''Why did Trump bomb Syria?''
  Unsurprisingly, topics like immigration and Syria also topped the list of topics people searched for frequently during the first 100 days. Terms related to immigration such as H-1B visas, which allow employers to bring in foreign workers for years at a time, and DACA, which refers to a program called Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, also garnered big interest.
  And although many of the issues that divide the country were among those that people searched most, one needs only to turn back to Twitter for a possible sign of unity.
  The president's most reposted message since Jan. 20?
  Peaceful protests are a hallmark of our democracy. Even if I don't always agree, I recognize the rights of people to express their views. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 22, 2017
  Maybe, just maybe, we all can just get along.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/us/politics/trump-twitter-google.html

Load-Date: April 29, 2017


End of Document
IBM Makes a Big Bet on India
The New York Times
October 1, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1536 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


BANGALORE, India -- IBM dominated the early decades of computing with inventions like the mainframe and the floppy disk. Its offices and factories, stretching from upstate New York to Silicon Valley, were hubs of American innovation long before Microsoft or Google came along.
But over the last decade, IBM has shifted its center of gravity halfway around the world to India, making it a high-tech example of the globalization trends that the Trump administration has railed against. 
  Today, the company employs 130,000 people in India -- about one-third of its total work force, and more than in any other country. Their work spans the entire gamut of IBM's businesses, from managing the computing needs of global giants like AT&T and Shell to performing cutting-edge research in fields like visual search, artificial intelligence and computer vision for self-driving cars. One team is even working with the producers of Sesame Street to teach vocabulary to kindergartners in Atlanta.
  ''IBM India, in the truest sense, is a microcosm of the IBM company,'' Vanitha Narayanan, chairman of the company's Indian operations, said in an interview at IBM's main campus in Bangalore, where the office towers are named after American golf courses like Peachtree and Pebble Beach.
  The work in India has been vital to keeping down costs at IBM, which has posted 21 consecutive quarters of revenue declines as it has struggled to refashion its main business of supplying tech services to corporations and governments.
  The tech industry has been shifting jobs overseas for decades, and other big American companies like Oracle and Dell also employ a majority of their workers outside the United States.
  But IBM is unusual because it employs more people in a single foreign country than it does at home. The company's employment in India has nearly doubled since 2007, even as its work force in the United States has shrunk through waves of layoffs and buyouts. Although IBM refuses to disclose exact numbers, outsiders estimate that it employs well under 100,000 people at its American offices now, down from 130,000 in 2007. Depending on the job, the salaries paid to Indian workers are one-half to one-fifth those paid to Americans, according to data posted by the research firm Glassdoor.
  Ronil Hira, an associate professor of public policy at Howard University who studies globalization and immigration, said the range of work done by IBM in India shows that offshoring threatens even the best-paying American tech jobs.
  ''The elites in both parties have had this Apple iPhone narrative, which is, look, it's O.K. if we offshore the lower-level stuff because we're just going to move up,'' he said. ''This is a wake-up call. It's not just low-level jobs but high-level jobs that are leaving.''
  While other technology titans have also established huge satellite campuses in India, IBM caught the attention of President Trump. At a campaign rally in Minneapolis just before the November election, he accused the company of laying off 500 Minnesotans and moving their jobs to India and other countries, a claim that IBM denied.
  Although he has not singled out the company for criticism since, Mr. Trump has tried to curb what he viewed as too many foreigners taking tech jobs from Americans. In April, he signed an executive order discouraging the granting of H-1B temporary work visas for lower-paid tech workers, most of whom come from India. IBM was the sixth-largest recipient of such visas in 2016, according to federal data.
  IBM, which is based in Armonk, N.Y., is sensitive to the perception that Americans are losing jobs to Indians. After Mr. Trump won the election, IBM's chief executive, Ginni Rometty, pledged to create 25,000 new American jobs. Ms. Rometty, who helped carry out the India expansion strategy when she was head of IBM's global services division, has also discussed with the new administration plans to modernize government technology and expand tech training for people without four-year college degrees. She also joined one of Mr. Trump's now-defunct business advisory councils.
  IBM declined to make Ms. Rometty or another top executive available for an interview. But the company noted that it is investing in the United States, including committing $1 billion to training programs and opening new offices.
  Ms. Narayanan, who spent 12 years working at IBM in the United States and China before moving to India in 2009, said the company decided where to put jobs based on where it could find enough qualified workers and the customer's budget. ''It's not as if someone says, 'Oh, jeez, let me just take these jobs from here and put them there,''' she said.
  William Lazonick, a professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business, said IBM and other tech companies had benefited greatly from the emergence of a low-cost, technically skilled English-speaking work force in India.
  ''IBM didn't create this,'' he said. ''But IBM would be a totally different company if it wasn't for India.''
  IBM, which opened its first Indian offices in Mumbai and Delhi in 1951, is now spread across the country, including Bangalore, Pune, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Chennai.
  Most of the Indian employees work in IBM's core business: helping companies like AT&T and Airbus manage the technical sides of their operations. Indians perform consulting services, write software and monitor cloud-based computer systems for many of the world's banks, phone companies and governments.
  But researchers here also try out new ideas. Looking to build a new system for searching with images instead of words, a team in Bangalore turned to Watson to index 600,000 photos from the world's top fashion shows and Bollywood movies. Last spring, a major Indian fashion house, Falguni Shane Peacock, tried the tool, which helps designers avoid direct copies or even do a riff on an old look, and generated new patterns for three dresses.
  ''It has the capability of doing research in a couple of seconds that would take a long time,'' Shane Peacock, who runs the Mumbai firm with his wife, said in an interview.
  IBM even has a Bangalore ''garage'' full of app designers who build corporate iPhone and iPad apps to simplify tasks like helping airline agents rebook passengers, bankers make loans and doctors update patient files.
  During a recent visit, Ramya Karyampudi, a user experience designer, was at the whiteboard sketching out an app for a smart refrigerator that would solve the universal problem of what to make for dinner.
  Starting with a drawing of a husband trying to plan a surprise meal for his wife, Ms. Karyampudi depicted the internet-connected refrigerator looking at what food was inside, sending over relevant recipes, telling him what extra ingredients he needed to pick up, and playing a video showing him how to cook it all.
  IBM's outsize presence in India today is all the more striking given that it left the country entirely in 1978 after a dispute with the government about foreign ownership rules.
  IBM re-entered the country through a joint venture with Tata in 1993, initially intending to assemble and sell personal computers. IBM's leaders soon decided that India's potential was far bigger -- both as a market and as a base from which to serve customers around the world. The company took full control of the venture, established an Indian branch of its famed research labs, and in 2004, landed a landmark 10-year, $750 million contract from Bharti Airtel, one of India's biggest phone companies, which remains a major customer.
  IBM's chief executive at the time, Samuel J. Palmisano, was so proud of his India initiative that he rented out the grounds of the Bangalore Palace in June 2006, flew out the board, and told a crowd of 10,000 that IBM would invest $6 billion in India over the next three years.
  Today, India does not just deliver services to IBM's global clients. It is also a crucial market and the center of IBM's efforts to help businesses serve the next big slice of customers: the billions of poorer people who have been largely ignored by the tech revolution.
  For example, teams here have been applying IBM technology to process very small loans so that banks can make a profit on them.
  IBM has also been working with Manipal Hospitals, a chain based in Bangalore, to adapt Watson to help doctors treat certain cancers. Presented with a patient's medical history, the system taps into a database that includes advice from doctors at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York to recommend the best treatments -- including the price, a big consideration since most Indians lack health insurance.
  Dr. Ajay Bakshi, Manipal's chief executive, said the biggest potential for the technology was in rural hospitals with few doctors. Manipal has just begun offering online ''second opinions'' from Watson for 2000 rupees, or about $31. ''It never sleeps. It never forgets. It doesn't get biased,'' he said.
  IBM executives say projects like these represent the company's future. ''I am looking for India to be my hub for affordable innovation,'' Ms. Narayanan said.
  Follow Vindu Goel on Twitter @vindugoel.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/28/technology/ibm-india.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: IBM employees collaborating in a casual work space at the company's new offices in the Bhartiya Center of Information Technology in Bangalore. (BU1)
Top, an IBM display in Bangalore
above, an IBM building at Manyata Tech Park
 below, a model in a dress designed with the help of IBM's artificial intelligence technology. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PHILIPPE CALIA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU5)       

Load-Date: October 1, 2017


End of Document
Trump Releases Plan on Illegal Immigration, Calling for Stricter Enforcement
The New York Times
August 17, 2015 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 815 words
Byline: By NICK CORASANITI
Body


After staking his early campaign on caustic and contentious remarks about undocumented immigrants, Donald J. Trump on Sunday outlined his plan to fix the country's immigration system and deal with people who are in the country illegally.
The position paper, published on Mr. Trump's website, centered on three principles. The first stated that ''a nation without borders is not a nation'' -- a theme Mr. Trump has made a constant in his stump speeches -- and called for a wall to be built along the southern border. 
  He also repeated his promise to make Mexico pay for the wall and laid out how he would do it: largely through increasing fees on border movement between the United States and Mexico.
  ''We will not be taken advantage of anymore,'' the plan states.
  Mr. Trump's proposal also calls for strengthening the ''enforcement arm'' of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement office, to be paid for by ''eliminating tax credit payments to illegal immigrants.'' 
  The third principle says that ''any immigration plan must improve jobs, wages and security for all Americans.''
  Mr. Trump's campaign released the plan moments after the candidate appeared in a wide-ranging interview on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' during which he spoke broadly about his plans to deport undocumented immigrants.
  ''We have to keep the families together, but they have to go,'' Mr. Trump said. 
  When asked how he might accomplish this, especially given the cost, Mr. Trump responded with a question of his own.
  ''Do you think there's tremendous cost for the illegals that are in here right now?'' Mr. Trump asked. ''Do you think there's tremendous crime being committed by illegals?''
  He promised to ''expedite it so people can come back in'' after the deportation. ''The good people can come back,'' he said.
  The crimes committed by undocumented immigrants have been a focus of Mr. Trump's early campaign. He has accused Mexico of sending criminals and rapists to the United States, and has often infuriated Latinos with his remarks.
  In his formal policy, as he has many times before, Mr. Trump maintains that ''Mexico's leaders have been taking advantage of the United States by using illegal immigration to export the crime and poverty in their own country.''
  Other parts of the plan are similar to the proposals of his rivals in the Republican race. He proposed enforcing the nationwide e-verify system, ending birthright citizenship for the children of illegal immigrants and increasing the prevailing wage for the temporary H-1B visas.
  While Mr. Trump spent much of the interview reaffirming his stance on illegal immigrants, at times he struggled to answer questions on other issues.
  On foreign policy, Mr. Trump indicated that he was staking out most of his early positions without much outside counsel.
  ''I watch the shows,'' Mr. Trump said when asked whom he talked to for military advice. ''I mean, I really see a lot of great -- you know, when you watch your show and all of the other shows and you have the generals and you have certain people that you like.'' He later added that he was a fan of former Ambassador John R. Bolton and retired Col. Jack Jacobs.
  When it came to criticizing his Republican rivals, Mr. Trump mentioned only one by name: Jeb Bush.
  He went after Mr. Bush repeatedly and unprompted, calling him a ''puppet'' to donors and arguing that Mr. Bush's comment regarding federal funding for women's health was his ''47 percent'' moment -- a comparison to a comment made by Mitt Romney during the 2012 presidential campaign that many said made him appear out of touch with voters.
  ''He's made so many flubs, I don't even understand it,'' Mr. Trump said of Mr. Bush.
  Mr. Trump again was the topic du jour on the Sunday morning political talk shows, even those on which he did not appear.
  Two candidates whose profiles have risen in the past week after the first Republican debate -- Carly Fiorina and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio -- were both asked about Mr. Trump.
  Mr. Kasich made no direct comments about Mr. Trump, and even avoided saying his name when answering a question about the real estate mogul's view of the electorate.
  ''I want people to know what I'm all about right now, because I think the country needs lifting,'' Mr. Kasich said in an interview with CBS's ''Face the Nation.'' ''I think it needs uniting.''
  Mrs. Fiorina, who has been the subject of criticism from Mr. Trump, took a slightly different tone when asked about him on ABC's ''This Week.''
  ''Honestly, you know, I find it sort of amusing,'' Ms. Fiorina said of Mr. Trump's attacks against her. She claimed not to have spent much time thinking about Mr. Trump, but added that ''insults are not helpful to the political process.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/17/us/politics/trump-releases-plan-to-combat-illegal-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Donald J. Trump at the Iowa State Fair on Saturday. His plan to combat illegal immigration appeared on his website on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIC THAYER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)        

Load-Date: August 17, 2015


End of Document
Laughing and Crying
The New York Times
May 23, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 754 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Body


First I had to laugh. Then I had to cry. 
  I took part in commencement this year at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, one of America's great science and engineering schools, so I had a front-row seat as the first grads to receive their diplomas came on stage, all of them Ph.D. students. One by one the announcer read their names and each was handed their doctorate -- in biotechnology, computing, physics and engineering -- by the school's president, Shirley Ann Jackson.
The reason I had to laugh was because it seemed like every one of the newly minted Ph.D.'s at Rensselaer was foreign born. For a moment, as the foreign names kept coming -- ''Hong Lu, Xu Xie, Tao Yuan, Fu Tang'' -- I thought that the entire class of doctoral students in physics were going to be Chinese, until ''Paul Shane Morrow'' saved the day. It was such a caricature of what President Jackson herself calls ''the quiet crisis'' in high-end science education in this country that you could only laugh.
  Don't get me wrong. I'm proud that our country continues to build universities and a culture of learning that attract the world's best minds. My complaint -- why I also wanted to cry -- was that there wasn't someone from the Immigration and Naturalization Service standing next to President Jackson stapling green cards to the diplomas of each of these foreign-born Ph.D.'s. I want them all to stay, become Americans and do their research and innovation here. If we can't educate enough of our own kids to compete at this level, we'd better make sure we can import someone else's, otherwise we will not maintain our standard of living.
  It is pure idiocy that Congress will not open our borders -- as wide as possible -- to attract and keep the world's first-round intellectual draft choices in an age when everyone increasingly has the same innovation tools and the key differentiator is human talent. I'm serious. I think any foreign student who gets a Ph.D. in our country -- in any subject -- should be offered citizenship. I want them. The idea that we actually make it difficult for them to stay is crazy. 
  Compete America, a coalition of technology companies, is pleading with Congress to boost both the number of H-1B visas available to companies that want to bring in skilled foreign workers and the number of employment-based green cards given to high-tech foreign workers who want to stay here. Give them all they want! Not only do our companies need them now, because we're not training enough engineers, but they will, over time, start many more companies and create many more good jobs than they would possibly displace. Silicon Valley is living proof of that -- and where innovation happens matters. It's still where the best jobs will be located.
  Folks, we can't keep being stupid about these things. You can't have a world where foreign-born students dominate your science graduate schools, research labs, journal publications and can now more easily than ever go back to their home countries to start companies -- without it eventually impacting our standard of living -- especially when we're also slipping behind in high-speed Internet penetration per capita. America has fallen from fourth in the world in 2001 to 15th today.
  My hat is off to Andrew Rasiej and Micah Sifry, co-founders of the Personal Democracy Forum. They are trying to make this an issue in the presidential campaign by creating a movement to demand that candidates focus on our digital deficits and divides. (See: http://www.techpresident.com.) Mr. Rasiej, who unsuccessfully ran for public advocate of New York City in 2005 on a platform calling for low-cost wireless access everywhere, notes that ''only half of America has broadband access to the Internet.'' We need to go from ''No Child Left Behind,'' he says, to ''Every Child Connected.''
  Here's the sad truth: 9/11, and the failing Iraq war, have sucked up almost all the oxygen in this country -- oxygen needed to discuss seriously education, health care, climate change and competitiveness, notes Garrett Graff, an editor at Washingtonian Magazine and author of the upcoming book ''The First Campaign,'' which deals with this theme. So right now, it's mostly governors talking about these issues, noted Mr. Graff, but there is only so much they can do without Washington being focused and leading. 
  Which is why we've got to bring our occupation of Iraq to an end in the quickest, least bad way possible -- otherwise we are going to lose Iraq and America. It's coming down to that choice. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: May 23, 2007


End of Document
Showing Support for Trump, Intel Announces Plant
The New York Times
February 9, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1114 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Intel, the world's largest computer chip manufacturer, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory in Arizona, adding 3,000 jobs, the company's chief executive said on Wednesday after meeting with President Trump at the White House.
The completion of the factory, which will complement two other Intel semiconductor plants in Chandler, Ariz., had been under consideration for several years. 
  Standing beside Mr. Trump in the Oval Office, Brian Krzanich, Intel's chief executive, said the company had decided to proceed now because of ''the tax and regulatory policies we see the administration pushing forward.''
  Mr. Trump said: ''The people of Arizona will be very happy. It's a lot of jobs.''
  He said Intel called the White House several weeks ago to coordinate the announcement. That outreach illustrates the tightrope that Silicon Valley companies are walking as they deal with a president most of them did not want to see in office.
  Intel was one of nearly 130 companies that signed a legal brief challenging Mr. Trump's Jan. 27 executive order temporarily blocking the entry of all refugees and of immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim nations. Earlier, Mr. Krzanich criticized the order on Twitter, declaring, ''As a company co-founded by an immigrant, we support lawful immigration.'' (Intel's third employee and longtime chief executive, Andrew S. Grove, survived the Holocaust and arrived in the United States after fleeing the Soviet invasion of his native Hungary in 1956.)
  Yet Intel, like Apple and other large technology companies, also supports the Trump administration's plans to reduce corporate taxes and regulations. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Krzanich planned and then canceled a fund-raiser for Mr. Trump.
  Stacy J. Smith, the executive vice president who oversees manufacturing and sales, said Intel considered itself apolitical. ''Intel engages, whatever the administration,'' he said in an interview after Wednesday's announcement. ''We focus on the issues that we care about.''
  Intel said it agreed with Mr. Trump's desire to improve the investment climate for American manufacturers. ''In places where we believe the policies are in the best interest of the company, we lean in,'' Mr. Smith said.
  In other areas, such as Mr. Trump's desire to curb immigration and end free-trade agreements, Intel disagrees, and it is telling the White House so. ''We care about hiring the best and brightest people around the world,'' Mr. Smith said. ''We care about exporting our products all over the world.''
  Mr. Krzanich said in a message to employees that he had chosen to announce the expansion at the White House to signal his support for the administration's efforts to make American manufacturing more competitive.
  ''When we disagree, we don't walk away,'' he wrote. ''We believe that we must be part of the conversation to voice our views on key issues such as immigration, H1B visas and other policies that are essential to innovation.''
  Intel's strategy of engagement mirrors that of Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla Motors and SpaceX, who serves on a presidential advisory council. Other Silicon Valley leaders, such as Travis Kalanick of Uber, have distanced themselves from the administration under pressure from employees and customers.
  Intel's political action committee gave about equally to Democratic and Republican candidates during the last election cycle. Individual employees donated far more to Hillary Clinton's campaign than to Mr. Trump's. But over all, the company is not a major political donor.
  New chip plants are tremendously expensive, requiring large tracts of land, reliable electricity and water, and a skilled work force that includes people with doctorates in chemistry and technicians who can repair a malfunctioning robot. Sophisticated equipment is necessary to deposit and etch microscopic layers of material on silicon wafers, which are then cut and packaged into the microprocessors that run personal computers, servers, smartphones and, increasingly, other electronic devices.
  Countries compete to land such plants, especially modern factories that produce the most valuable chips and bring high-paying research and development jobs. Government subsidies are common, with China vowing to spend tens of billions of dollars to expand its domestic chip industry.
  While most technology manufacturing, such as computers and smartphones, has moved overseas, American factories still account for about one-seventh of global chip production and produce many of the most valuable computer chips, including Intel's flagship processors. Seventy-six chip plants are scattered across the United States, from South Portland, Me., to Newport Beach, Calif., according to the Semiconductor Industry Association.
  The industry is seeking corporate tax cuts and incentives for research and development. In addition, chip makers would like to see the United States government relax longstanding national security restrictions on the export of new chip technology. In Intel's case, the regulations forbid the company from making its high-end processors in China.
  Mr. Smith said Mr. Trump had offered Intel no financial incentives to complete the Arizona factory.
  The plant was conceived in 2011. President Barack Obama visited the site in 2012, when construction had just begun, and he praised the plant as an example of ''an America where we build stuff and make stuff and sell stuff all over the world.''
  But it was mothballed in 2014 after sales of personal computers -- and the Intel chips that go into them -- started to slide. Intel restructured its business and announced last year that it was laying off 12,000 people, including 560 in Chandler. The company now employs about 50,000 people in the United States and 106,000 worldwide.
  As Intel looks beyond servers and personal computers to new markets like other Internet-connected devices, cars and tablets, sales are growing again, and it will need the new factory when it is completed in a couple of years. ''We're building it for our own business reasons,'' Mr. Smith said.
  The plant will build ultradense chips that Intel refers to as seven nanometer, with transistors packed more closely together than in the chips the company now builds. The tighter spacing allows for faster, more energy-efficient chips. ''This factory will produce the most powerful computer chips on the planet,'' Mr. Krzanich said.
  Intel, one of the original chip companies, from which Silicon Valley gets its name, is based in Santa Clara, Calif. But most of its chip production is in Oregon and Arizona. It also has factories in China, Ireland and Israel.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/technology/trump-intel-chip-factory-arizona.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: After meeting with President Trump, Brian Krzanich, left, Intel's chief executive, said the company would invest $7 billion to finish a factory conceived in 2011. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)       

Load-Date: February 9, 2017


End of Document
In India, Obama Elevates the Nation's Self-Esteem
The New York Times
January 27, 2015 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 939 words
Byline: By ELLEN BARRY and PETER BAKER
Body


NEW DELHI --  India's military forces marched past President Obama and India's president and prime minister in great waves of color on Monday morning.
Crimson-clad border troops with identical mustaches, astride camels decked out in gold braid and multicolored pompoms. A bagpipe and drum corps in plaid and leopard skin. Sikh regiments in dress turbans, their starched fringes fanning out like gold lamé pie plates. A formation of combat helicopters that thudded past, releasing drifts of marigold petals. 
  On one level, of course, it was just a parade. But it served as a fitting geopolitical metaphor as well. Russian-made Sukhoi-30 fighter jets roared over, so low that the scent of jet fuel settled over the V.I.P. section, and Russian-made T-90 tanks trundled by, a reminder of India's ties to Moscow dating to the Cold War.
  Yet it was Mr. Obama who took the seat of the chief guest, the first American leader to do so. In the 65 previous parades, the chief guest has twice been Soviet, once Russian, twice Yugoslav, three times French, twice British, once Chinese. Even Pakistan has been invited. Mr. Obama's acceptance of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's invitation this year was seen here as a great tribute to India, a sign of the country's arrival on the world stage.
  ''The crowd is getting understandably excited and ecstatic at the arrival of the motorcade of the president of the United States, Barack Obama,'' the parade announcer said when Mr. Obama's Cadillac pulled up. At that point, a military policeman in a red-fringed turban gestured sternly for spectators to remain seated, but they ignored him completely, scrambling atop their chairs for a view. Two men unfolded a banner that read ''I love Obama.''
  Mr. Obama's presence required extensive security preparations, as he has not spent such a long stretch outdoors in public in a foreign country during his six years in office. As is typical for outdoor events, he was seated behind bulletproof glass shields. Indian security was so tight that ballpoint pens were confiscated from reporters covering the parade.
  Republic Day is a major holiday in India, commemorating the day in 1950 when the post-partition democratic Constitution came into force. Seats are provided for 125,000 people, according to the Defense Ministry, which arranges the event. Spectators began streaming through the streets toward the parade ground at dawn, some wrapped in wool blankets against the chilly rain. Though elaborate, snaking barriers had been erected along the routes leading to the site, the crowds quickly spilled over them and surged into the road.
  ''I came because of Obama,'' said Vinay Kumar, 32, who had woken at 4:30 a.m. to catch a bus from his home on the city's outskirts. ''We hope he and Modi together will help grow the economy. And help us to get H-1B visas to visit America.''
  ''I am not looking for a permanent visit,'' he added, ''just one year or two.''
  Many said they came out of pride. Indian crowds adore military spectacle, a fact that British colonial powers recognized in the 19th century, adopting the fabulous displays of the maharajahs who preceded them. George Curzon, the British viceroy, at one point ''issued instructions that European officials were not outshined by the Indian princes who came wearing their jewelry,'' said Rana China, who heads the Center for Armed Forces Military History in New Delhi.
  ''The colonial state was of the view that the Indian people loved a parade, loved pageantry, and they wanted to give it to them,'' he said. ''Pomp, pageantry, all of this -- they are symbols of power.''
  For all his socialist leanings, India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, retained those flourishes when he introduced the Republic Day parade, in addition to a display of heavy weaponry directed toward Pakistan. As members of a Sikh regiment passed on Monday, swinging their arms so vigorously that they seemed in danger of dislocating them, the announcer remarked in a tweedy British accent that ''this regiment has the reputation of creating terror among the enemy.''
  Monday's parade included all-women contingents from the army, navy and air force. Mr. Obama seemed particularly impressed by a display of motorcycle trick-riding, showing a thumbs-up. There were also many reminders that India has been the world's largest consumer of Russia's arms industry, particularly after a series of flyovers by MIG-29 and Su-30 fighter jets.
  Mr. Obama and the American delegation have made it clear they want to compete for India's defense dollars, renewing the defense pact between the two countries on Sunday and agreeing to cooperate on aircraft carrier and jet engine technology. They also agreed to work on joint production of small-scale surveillance drones.
  That did not mean that Russia was about to cede a lucrative, longtime market. Sergei K. Shoigu, the Russian defense minister, made a point of visiting last week, just before Mr. Obama arrived, to discuss joint production of a light utility helicopter and to resolve disagreements about a long-delayed fifth-generation fighter aircraft.
  But as he left the parade on Monday, Sunil Mudgal, 39, an army officer, said he saw India's relationships beginning to shift, in part because the United States' ''outlook toward the neighboring countries, especially Pakistan, has changed.''
  ''Ten years back, we were only reliant on Russia,'' he said. That morning, added his wife, Anuradha, the couple's young son could think of nothing but Mr. Obama, who was seated across the parade route from the family. ''He asked me,'' she said, '''If I wave to him, will he see me?'''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/27/world/asia/obama-makes-the-most-of-indias-republic-day-parade.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: President Obama attended the Republic Day parade celebrating India's Constitution on Monday, the first American president to do so. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: January 27, 2015


End of Document
BACKSLASH; Survivor: The New Economy
 The New York Times
May 13, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 762 words
Byline:  By MATT RICHTEL;  Matt Richtel reports on technology for The Times. His column about living and working in the technology maelstrom appears the second Sunday of each month. E-mail: , mrichtel@nytimes.com.
Body


REALITY-BASED television shows are heavy with sexual themes and romance, with the action often set against exotic backdrops. It's captivating stuff, no doubt, but the formula is growing a bit tired.
     In order for reality TV to thrive, it needs new material, inspired by action found closer to home, and in a world filled with the elements of great television -- big money, power struggles and heated intellectual property disputes. 
 Yes, this is reality TV drawn from Silicon Valley. Real shows about real people, all watching their stocks tank. The lineup might look something like this:

TECH SUPPORT ISLAND -- On a tiny island, a man finds himself stranded with a laptop computer and an ample power supply. To walk away with a cool $1 million, all he has to do is install a new software upgrade. Fortunately, a crack seven-member technical support staff is marooned with him.
The man needs only to get the support staff's attention and to enlist its help in installing the software. Following is a sample of dialogue from the season opener. 
Man: "Excuse me, can I get some help with this upgrade?" 
Tech support staff member: "For technical assistance, press 1." 
Man: "Press 1? On what? You're standing in front of me!" 
Tech support staff member: "I'm going on break." 

REBOOT CAMP -- Eight people in their 50's try to log on to the Internet while their drill instructor, a tech-wise 10-year-old, yells at them. ("It's an internal modem, maggot! Now drop and give me 20!")

VIRTUAL REAL WORLD -- Silicon Valley's answer to MTV's "Real World" chronicles the daily adventures of six young people living under one roof in Palo Alto, Calif. The twist is that the residents are all electrical engineers. The fast-paced action centers on 20-somethings dealing with growing up, romance and taut, sexually charged discussions of the alternative minimum tax.
A synopsis of the first week: Noel calls a house meeting after someone spills a juice shake on his algorithm. Annie and Rick argue over the value of "X." Jay wants to use the garage for a keg party, but Andy wants to use it for a start-up. 

THE WALKER -- A team of nine strangers is assembled to track down one man. That man has been set down on one coast and is trying to cross the country, undetected. He is Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman. The team is equipped with cellular phones, radio-tracking devices and the Consumer Price Index.
If Mr. Greenspan is not found, he wins a season-long reprieve from public scrutiny. If he is found, the team splits $1 million in Treasury bills, while Mr. Greenspan must announce a lowering of interest rates on national television and read excerpts from his diary. 

ULTIMATE POWER STRUGGLE -- Twelve Californians are locked in an opulent Silicon Valley mansion. At their disposal are the latest technology gadgets -- so advanced that they surpass anything at NASA's disposal. There are ultrafast computers, an electric toothbrush that doubles as a global positioning system, and a microwave oven that can receive e-mail messages. There is one catch: they have no electricity. The object is for the participants to figure out how to feed themselves, communicate with the outside world and elect a legislature with a clue.

CHAINS OF ANGST -- A die-hard user of a Macintosh and a die-hard user of a Windows-based PC are chained together. The room is empty except for two computers, one of each variety, at opposite ends. Each player must use his wile, zeal and muscle to drag his opponent to the computer with the preferred operating system. The winner is the first to log on. Nothing is at stake, but the winner can be completely secure in the notion that he has no life.
Next season: a 12-year-old video-game enthusiast is chained together with someone addicted to chocolate. 

LOW-COST-OVERSEAS-LABOR ISLAND -- Thousands of indigenous laborers, vying for H-1B visas to come to the United States, work in factories that make computer goods for distribution around the world. The big American companies that employ these contract workers do not pay benefits and provide wages far beneath the wages available in the United States. Shot on location in Taiwan.

MULTITASKING SURVIVOR -- Fifteen people race around the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. As they drive, they must talk on cell phones and place day trades constantly. The object is to make the most money in the stock market while making the fewest number of pit stops (during which tires are changed, gas is replenished and hands-free headsets are returned for ones that actually work). All the cars are sport utility vehicles.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (Randy Jones) 

Load-Date: May 13, 2001


End of Document
Trump Takes Back Seat At Modi Rally, but Sees The Crowd as His Own
The New York Times
September 23, 2019 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 1286 words
Byline: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR; Reporting was contributed by Jeffrey Gettleman from New Delhi, Vindu Goel from Mumbai, India, Alisha Haridasani Gupta from New York and Ana Swanson from Washington.
Body


HOUSTON -- President Trump played second fiddle on Sunday to Narendra Modi, the prime minister of India, at a boisterous cultural rally in which the American president was technically just an invited guest.
But never one to let a good crowd go to waste, Mr. Trump treated the giant gathering at NRG Stadium in Houston as his own, declaring that ''you have never had a better friend as president than President Donald Trump, that I can tell you.'' 
  Tens of thousands of Indian-Americans gathered to celebrate the recent re-election of India's fiery populist leader at an event cheekily called ''Howdy, Modi!'' Big screens throughout the stadium displayed the face of the prime minister, who arrived to thunderous cheers on a red carpet.
  There were no Trump signs in the crowd, as there would be at one of his ''Make America Great Again'' rallies. And the president mostly stuck to his prepared remarks as the crowd of mostly Indian-Americans responded with polite applause.
  Mr. Trump praised Mr. Modi, marveling that some 600 million people voted in India's recent elections. ''That's a lot of people,'' the president said, adding that Indian-Americans enrich the culture of the United States and that the two nations are ''grounded in our common values.''
  But he mostly seized on his own rally themes, bragging about slashing regulations, lowering unemployment, implementing a tax cut and hardening the nation's borders against ''those who would threaten our security.''
  ''There are those in Washington who would raid your health care to fund free benefits to those who enter our country illegally,'' he said, previewing his attacks on Democrats during the presidential campaign. ''I will never allow politicians to take away your health care or give it to illegal immigrants.''
  The rally brought together two leaders with similar styles. Both rose to power by embracing right-wing populism, portraying themselves as champions of the masses fighting against an entrenched establishment. Both presented voters with a vision to make their respective countries ''great again,'' and both have fanned tensions along religious, economic and social fault lines.
  Mr. Modi, who is in the United States for a week largely to attend the United Nations General Assembly in New York, won a landslide re-election in May. But Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi are also both polarizing figures among the people they lead. While many Indians see Mr. Modi as a strong, decisive leader, a small but vocal minority say he is becoming an autocrat, rapidly consolidating power, going after political enemies inside his country and sowing division between Hindus and Muslims.
  In the United States, Mr. Trump is preparing to run for re-election in a bitterly divided country with polls regularly showing him receiving well short of 50 percent support. His participation in Sunday's rally with Mr. Modi offered a chance to woo a constituency -- the four million American residents of Indian descent -- whose support could prove helpful.
  Mr. Modi delivered in English an over-the top introduction of Mr. Trump, declaring that the president's name is ''familiar to every person on the planet'' and ''comes up in almost every conversation in the world on global politics.''
  Standing next to Mr. Modi, the president beamed with pleasure as the prime minister delivered a twist on his own election slogan: ''Abki baar Trump sarkar'' or ''This time, a Trump government.''
  But earning votes from Indian-Americans will not be easy for Mr. Trump, even with Mr. Modi by his side.
  Indian-Americans have supported both Democrats and Republicans in the past, though they have gravitated away from Mr. Trump's party more recently. Although the president's tax and economic policies appeal to many Indians, his tough stance on immigration, including legal immigrants from India, has caused great angst, especially in Silicon Valley, which relies heavily on Indian workers who come on H-1B visas.
  An overwhelming majority of Indian-American voters are registered as Democrats and voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, according to the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund.
  M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a group that tries to organize Indian-Americans, said events like Sunday's rally help the community become more relevant in the United States. He said Mr. Trump's appearance here was an opportunity to increase his 14 percent showing among Indian-Americans in 2016.
  ''He could hope he could change some minds,'' Mr. Rangaswami said. ''It could happen.''
  Mr. Trump crowed last week that his decision to join Mr. Modi at the event on Sunday enlarged the crowd at the stadium, which can hold up to about 70,000 people.
  ''I have a very good relationship with Prime Minister Modi. By the way, great relationship with Pakistan and with India,'' Mr. Trump told reporters on Air Force One several days ahead of the Modi event. ''But he's got a big crowd coming, and I guess the crowd just got a lot bigger because they just announced -- he asked would I go, and I will go.''
  Mr. Trump's appearance at the event, which was followed by a stop with the Australian prime minister at an Ohio recycled packaging plant owned by an Australian company, comes as his administration is finalizing plans for a modest trade deal with India. That step that would help resolve earlier tensions between Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi over India's trade balance with the United States and other trade issues.
  The trade agreement, which could be finalized by the two leaders as soon as this week, is expected to help American farmers and manufacturers by eliminating Indian restrictions on electronics, medical devices and a few agricultural goods. In return, Mr. Trump would restore a special trade status for developing countries, something the president stripped from India this year.
  Resolving a nettlesome trade dispute with India presents Mr. Trump with an opportunity for a public relations victory amid increasing frustration over his global trade wars with China and other countries.
  Mr. Modi, 69, is at his best outside India. He has prioritized, more than any other Indian leader in recent decades, India's brand around the world and projected an image of a muscular India, an emerging superpower. He travels all across Asia, he was the first Indian prime minister to visit Israel, he has journeyed across Africa and during a visit to New York in 2014 he packed Madison Square Garden with ecstatic crowds cheering: ''Modi! Modi! Modi!''
  He has come a long way. Years ago, he was banned by American authorities from even entering the United States because of allegations that as chief minister in Gujarat in the early 2000s he was responsible for an explosion of religiously driven violence that claimed more than 1,000 lives, most of them Muslim.
  The goal of this trip is to attract investment to India, and there is a little extra urgency: India's economy is suffering its biggest downturn in years. Mr. Modi is also eager to shore up diplomatic support. But a controversy threatens to cast a shadow over his visit.
  Human rights groups and three Nobel Peace Prize winners have criticized the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for a prestigious award they plan to bestow upon Mr. Modi this week. The peace activists say that under Mr. Modi's leadership, ''India has descended into dangerous and deadly chaos that has consistently undermined human rights.''
  A group of protesters gathered in Houston on Sunday to denounce Mr. Modi.
  But Mr. Modi has typically drawn strong support from the Indian diaspora, even those who disagree with some of his domestic policies, because he has been so successful at burnishing India's image on the world stage.

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/22/us/politics/trump-modi-houston-rally.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Attendees of a 'Howdy, Modi!' rally for the prime minister of India in Houston on Sunday. President Trump largely stuck to his script. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       

Load-Date: September 23, 2019


End of Document
I.N.S. Is Looking the Other Way As Illegal Immigrants Fill Jobs
The New York Times
March 9, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk
Section: Section C;; Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1903 words
Byline: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

By LOUIS UCHITELLE
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


Salvador Silva often used to worry that immigration agents would raid the commercial laundry where he works. If they did, he had a plan. He would jump onto a table, hoist himself into an air-conditioning duct, and hide there until the agents left. He practiced this more than once.
"We lived with the uncertainty of raids," said Mr. Silva, who is 26 and has worked illegally in this country for 10 years, ever since he walked across a bridge from Juarez in Mexico to El Paso and flew to Chicago to join a brother. Only now is he beginning to relax. "For the first time," he said, "I don't fear the raids."
Such raids have all but stopped around the country over the last year. In a booming economy running short of labor, hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants are increasingly tolerated in the nation's workplaces. The Immigration and Naturalization Service has made crossing the border harder than ever, stepping up patrols and prosecuting companies that smuggle in aliens or blatantly recruit them. But once inside the country, illegal immigrants are now largely left alone. Even when these people are discovered, arrests for the purpose of deportation are much less frequent; such arrests dropped to about 8,600 last year from 22,000 just two years earlier, the I.N.S. reports.
The agency now concentrates on picking up aliens who have committed a crime. The rest are in effect allowed to help American employers fill jobs. "It is just the market at work, drawing people to jobs, and the I.N.S. has chosen to concentrate its actions on aliens who are a danger to the community," said Robert L. Bach, the agency's associate commissioner for policy and planning.
The new lenience helps explain why overall wage increases have been less than many economists and policy makers had expected, given an unemployment rate of only 4 percent and a strong demand for people to fill jobs that pay $8 an hour or less, which is 25 percent of all jobs. Immigrants -- legal and illegal -- have fed the pool of people available to take these lower-paying jobs. But Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, told Congress last month that as job growth expands, the pool keeps shrinking. That is one reason the Fed is raising interest rates to slow the economy before wage pressures become inflationary.
Mr. Greenspan and many other economists, though, are looking only at people living in this country, including an estimated six million illegal immigrants, as potential candidates to feed that pool. But the more tolerant I.N.S. policy may be inducing more workers to immigrate, particularly from Mexico, because -- once they manage to get here -- they face less risk in taking a job. That would dilute the labor shortage -- and the wage pressure that worries Mr. Greenspan. In fact, it may already be doing so.
"None of us really knows how big the pool of available workers is," said Jared Bernstein, a labor economist at the Economic Policy Institute, "but the more lenient stance can only increase the number of people available abroad for jobs in the United States."
The commercial laundry industry in Chicago, where Mr. Silva works, clearly benefits from the Immigration Service's live-and-let-work approach. Thirty companies wash and iron the city's hospital and restaurant linens, hotel sheets and towels, and factory uniforms. Half of their 2,800 employees are illegal immigrants, mainly Hispanics, according to Unite, the union that has organized most of them in recent months.
Last fall, Unite negotiated contracts that recognized the illegal status of some workers, and shielded them. One clause requires an employer to bar an I.N.S. raid unless the agents have a search warrant. And a company must notify the union if it gets wind of a coming raid.
"Sometimes I did not want to go to work," Mr. Silva said. "I saw reports on TV of immigration raids and people being led away and I worried that would happen to me. Now the union contract is reassuring, and I no longer see raids on television."
A third clause states that when former employees are rehired with new papers -- even new names -- after their original documents are found to be false, they retain their seniority and resume their old pay level. Union scale goes as high as $8.75 an hour.
"The Immigration Service has never had the resources to arrest every illegal alien, and now there is a large number and a demand from many companies to employ them," said Brian R. Perryman, the agency's director in Chicago. "Once they come into the Chicago metropolitan area, with its 6.5 million people, it is hard to stop the process."
A downturn in the booming economy and any resulting uptick in unemployment could lead the I.N.S. to revive its pursuit of illegal immigrants at work. Even now, some Republican members of Congress are pushing for legislation that would step up efforts to prevent illegal immigrants from working in the United States. Certainly, the more open policy today stands in sharp contrast to the 1980's and even the mid-1990's, when unemployment was higher.
The new attitude here is the opposite of the approach in most European countries, where unemployment rates are higher than in the United States and governments have tightened immigration laws.
But right now the route to work in the United States is fairly smooth. One reason is that employment laws are easy for illegal immigrants to evade. Workers are required to offer proof of eligibility -- a Social Security card and a picture ID. But counterfeits are easily purchased for $60 to $80 in this city's immigrant neighborhoods, a favorite being a rose-colored resident-alien card, which two immigrants showed to this reporter.
The laminated cards displayed photographs that were accurate but fingerprints the workers said were not theirs. "The birth date isn't mine either, or the signature, although the name is right," said Angel Hernandez Lopez, a 25-year-old Mexican. "For $80, they do everything," he said of the counterfeiters.
Employers can be fined for knowingly hiring illegal workers, but they also risk being sued for discrimination if they challenge documents that on the surface seem authentic. What's more, the Social Security Administration checks only once a year for numbers that fail to match legitimate pension accounts, and when it finds a discrepancy, it never assumes it is immigrant fraud as opposed to a mismatch resulting from a divorce, a job switch or a name changed through marriage.
"We know that illegal immigrants are a factor," said Norman Goldstein, a senior financial executive at Social Security, "but I cannot quantify for you how that factor compares with other factors."
When a letter calling attention to a discrepancy does finally go out, it goes to the employer or the employee, or both, but not the Immigration Service, which cannot by law be privy to tax matters. Even when the I.N.S. does get involved, the employee is now usually given time to correct the problem. For illegal workers that means time to change names, get new papers or change jobs.
An illegal immigrant is at little risk these days, Mr. Bach said, "unless the employer turns a worker in, and employers usually do that only to break a union or prevent a strike or that kind of stuff."
Curtailing undocumented workers, then, rests as much with employers as with the I.N.S., and in an economy short of workers, employers are not rushing into action. On the contrary, they want the I.N.S. to go easier as well on highly skilled, college-educated immigrants -- the engineers, chemists, computer experts and college professors who now enter the country on special H-1B visas. A coalition of business groups is lobbying Congress to raise the ceiling on these visas to 195,000 a year from 115,000.
"In a perfect world, immigration at all levels would be entirely market-driven, with appropriate protections of course for native workers," said Sandra J. Boyd, of the National Association of Manufacturers, who leads the coalition.
Short of this goal, the temporary- help agencies that have sprung up in storefronts in Chicago's Hispanic neighborhoods are benefiting from the new leniency. The $5.15-an-hour minimum-wage jobs these agencies offer are usually the first that arriving immigrants manage to land. They have settled by the thousands in old blue-collar neighborhoods like Pilsen, southwest of the Loop. Their growing presence in this city has given Illinois the nation's fifth-largest immigrant population, behind California, New York, Florida and Texas.
Six temp agencies near West 18th Street and Blue Island Avenue, in the heart of Pilsen, become predawn gathering places for immigrants seeking work. More than 30 waited expectantly one day in late February at Ron's Temporary Help Services, some perched in what was once the window display of this former store. An old iron radiator heated the room.
The immigrants, mostly from Mexico, hoped that Gloria de la Torre, the 36-year-old manager -- herself an illegal immigrant until three years ago, she says -- will favor them with one of the jobs that go out by the thousands each day from 100 agencies like Ron's in Hispanic neighborhoods. That is up from 50 in 1985, according to Nik Theodore, research director at the Center for Urban Economic Development at the University of Illinois in Chicago.
During the peak demand for these workers, from April through September, more than 30,000 a day are placed by the temp agencies, Mr. Theodore says, basing his estimate on his field research. The Ron's office that Ms. de la Torre manages sends out 1,000 workers over three shifts in those months, she says. But in late February, the flow is down to 100 a day, and two vans are double- parked outside waiting to take some immigrants to jobs in the suburbs.
The temp agencies deal in a variety of work -- assembling coolers, eyeglass cases and other products; making sandwiches for airline meals; stuffing envelopes; construction; packaging perfumes; painting machinery; staffing warehouses that ship merchandise ordered over the Internet.
Motorola is a regular customer, using workers from the temp agencies to pack computer monitors in shipping cartons, among other tasks. The agencies, not Motorola, have the responsibility for making certain that the people sent to Motorola are legally authorized to work, a Motorola press officer said.
The people Ms. de la Torre sends out all present her with the necessary documents, which she accepts at face value. Paychecks come with stubs that detail deductions for taxes, Social Security and, for those who travel in vans to their jobs, $3.50 a day for transportation.
"I have never been visited by Immigration," Ms. de la Torre said.
But the precarious status of an illegal immigrant makes them easy victims for exploitation, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. says. They are filling the low-wage jobs readily enough, but they lack the bargaining power to get higher on the pay scale, or upgrade their working conditions, the labor organization says. That is a big reason they are in demand, it adds.
Unite's contracts covering laundry workers are an attempt to counter this situation. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. also called for the legalization of those already in the country so they can be more easily represented.
Mr. Bach, the immigration official, said, "Workers are supposed to make gains in tight labor markets, but what you are seeing is employers using illegal immigrants to undercut the expectations of labor."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: "Doing Less"
Arrests for deportations of noncriminal illegal aliens already in the United States have dropped sharply in the last two years.
 
Graphs shows these trends from 1993-99 (Source: Immigration and Naturalization Service)      

Load-Date: March 9, 2000


End of Document
Evidence of High-Skill Work Going Abroad
The New York Times
June 16, 2004 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 746 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Body


In the debate over high-technology work migrating abroad, there has been widespread agreement on at least one thing: the jobs requiring higher levels of skill are the least at risk. 
   Routine software programming and testing jobs, analysts agree, are the ones most susceptible to being grabbed by fast-growing Indian outsourcing companies. By contrast, the people who devise the early blueprints for projects -- the software architects -- have been regarded as far less likely to see their jobs farmed out.
   But Microsoft contract documents show that as far back as 2001 the big company had agreed to pay two Indian outsourcing companies, Infosys and Satyam, to provide skilled ''software architects'' for Microsoft projects. The documents were obtained this month by WashTech, an organization of technology workers based in Seattle, which gave copies to The New York Times.
   ''The policy prescription you hear from people again and again as the response to the global competition of outsourcing is for Americans to move to high-end work,'' said Ronil Hira, an assistant professor for public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology. ''It's important to dispel the myth that high-end work is immune to offshore outsourcing.''
   ''What is not clear,'' Mr. Hira added, ''is how much of that high-end work will go abroad.''
   A Microsoft spokeswoman, Stacy Drake, said that as a matter of policy the company did not comment on individual contracts with suppliers. But, she said, ''we often use outside companies for projects.''
   The outside contractors, Ms. Drake said, are used to bring in specialized expertise Microsoft may not have internally or to bring additional technical support to a project. 
   Still, Ms. Drake said, building the ''core intellectual property'' in Microsoft products is left to full-time company employees. 
   Though definitions vary, software architects are highly skilled workers who often earn six-figure salaries in the United States. The Microsoft contracts with Infosys and Satyam show that the work of software architects, senior software developers and software developers was being done by employees of the Indian companies working at Microsoft facilities in the United States.
   Their work did not come cheap for Microsoft, which was billed $90 an hour for software architects, or at a yearly rate of more than $180,000. Senior software developers were billed at $72 an hour and software developers $60 an hour.
   The on-site work, said Mr. Hira, an expert on offshore outsourcing, is usually done by Indian software engineers who come to the United States on H-1B visas, which allow foreign workers to be employed in the United States for up to six years.
   The Indian workers themselves are paid a fraction of what their employers collect. The top annual salaries paid by Indian outsourcing companies to Indian software experts working in the United States range up to $40,000 or so, Mr. Hira said.
   The contracts also say that for short stints of work, less than 90 days, Microsoft will pay for round-trip economy airfare for travel between India and the United States.
   The contracts also include work done in India, by project managers and by software development and testing engineers. The billing rate for this work ranges from $36 an hour to $23 an hour.
   A spokeswoman for Infosys said the company did not comment on its contracts, and a Satyam spokesman could not be reached.
   Critics of the outsourcing trend regard such agreements with Indian contractors, with work done both in the United States and in India, as a step toward shifting more and more skilled technology jobs overseas. 
   ''Microsoft has hired vendors whose whole reason for being is to transfer work offshore,'' said Marcus Courtney, president of WashTech, an affiliate of the Communications Workers of America.
   The foreign competition for work at Microsoft, Mr. Courtney said, will help the company's management put more pressure on wages for its American workers and reduce employee benefits. 
   Last month, Microsoft announced that it planned to cut costs by an estimated $80 million a year by trimming prescription drug benefits, tightening parental leave policies and making it more expensive to buy Microsoft shares through the employee stock purchase plan.
   Despite its use of foreign contract workers, Microsoft expects to add 3,000 to 3,500 full-time employees to its United States payroll of 37,000 in the fiscal year that ends in July.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, with the directors of Infosys in Bangalore, India, in 2002. The two companies had an outsourcing agreement in 2001. (Photo by Bloomberg News)      

Load-Date: June 16, 2004


End of Document
THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO;
Bush Is Pointing to the Cloud in the Silver Lining
The New York Times
September 27, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1014 words
Byline: By JAMES DAO 

By JAMES DAO 
Dateline: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 26
Body


For decades, political scientists have considered the economy the single best predictor of the electorate's mood. Good times favor incumbents, bad times insurgents. And so for Gov. George W. Bush, one challenge has loomed high above the others in his quest for the White House: how to defeat a sitting vice president during these roaring good times.
For a while, it seemed as if Mr. Bush might defy history, as he stayed ahead of Vice President Al Gore in polls even as the economy hummed along. But his lead in those polls has vanished. And the issue that once seemed to play so well for him, character, has diminished in importance, the polls show.
It is largely for that reason, many political analysts say, that the Texas governor has adopted a new slogan this week: "education recession." Ostensibly, it refers to what he calls a "crisis" in the nation's public schools. But at its heart, the slogan is also meant to raise alarms about the health of the nation's economy in the not-too-distant future.
And in raising those red flags, the analysts say, Mr. Bush has turned his signature issue, education, into a weapon for slashing at the central arguments for electing Mr. Gore: peace and prosperity.
"Gore's advantage on the economy is critical for Bush to try to overcome," said Evans Witt, president of the Princeton Survey Research, a polling firm. "If you say we're in a recession long enough, it certainly has an economic connotation, even if you are using it to discuss education."
Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, acknowledged as much, saying, "The point of this is that while the economy is strong, there are problems in society."
During a tour of the West Coast this week, Mr. Bush said he saw warning signs in America. Then he ticked them off: Gasoline prices spiraling out of control. Farmers struggling to survive. The nation in danger of losing its technological edge. And illiterate youths on the cusp of criminality.
"In some places, there is a recession in America," Mr. Bush said today at a high school in Northern California. "In some school districts there is a recession, and this country needs to do something about it early, before it's too late."
He went on to say, "If American students don't lead the world in math and science, the next generation of Americans may not lead the world."
Raising concerns about the economy represents something of a tactical shift for Mr. Bush, who has spent much of the campaign attacking Mr. Gore's character and credibility. But several recent polls indicate that voters now see little difference between the candidates in terms of their morality and honesty.
"It's much harder for Bush because he can't hammer at character anymore," said Mr. Witt.
But some analysts said Mr. Bush would have trouble tapping into voters' anxieties about the economy, because there is so little there to tap. According to a Fox News poll taken last week, 60 percent of voters said they thought the country was headed in the right direction, one of the highest readings since January 1998.
And a Gallup Poll conducted in June showed that only 22 percent of Americans said that the most important issues in the race were economic, as compared with 69 percent who felt that way in the fall of 1992.
"I don't think it makes much sense," said James Campbell, a professor of political science at the State University of New York at Buffalo who has studied the effects of the economy on presidential elections. "There are no obvious clouds on the horizon."
Still, Frank Newport, editor in chief of the Gallup Poll, said he could see the logic to Mr. Bush's strategy because voters care deeply about economic issues even in good times.
"It's not top of mind this year," Mr. Newport said. "But when we mention the economy, people say: 'Oh yes, that will be very important. How the candidates handle the economy is important."
Some analysts also said that raising concerns about the economy could strike a chord with working-class voters, typically families who earn less than $40,000 a year and live from pay check to pay check. Polls show those people tend to be swing voters whose allegiances could easily change if they felt the economy were turning sour.
Aides to Mr. Bush said their internal polls had shown that the slogan "education recession" had played well among independent voters and women.
Mr. Witt noted that many such swing voters live in the industrial Midwest, where the presidential race is most closely contested, including Missouri, Michigan and Ohio, as well as in Pennsylvania. And they are a group that might find Mr. Bush's plan for across-the-board income tax cuts appealing, he asserted.
"Bush has hit pretty heavily on the idea that Gore's tax cut may leave people out," Mr. Witt said. "That's a point that I think might resonate with some people in this group." Because they are on the edge."
Several analysts also said they thought it was clever of Mr. Bush to tie two major issues together in a way that could undermine Mr. Gore's support. "It has a subliminal quality to it," said Stephen Hess, a presidential scholar at the Brookings Institution, a research organization in Washington.
 
In His Own Words
 
GEORGE W. BUSH
Remarks last night on "Larry King Live" on CNN:
 
"I'm going to win California. I am. . . . I was up in Silicon Valley. I've got a huge base of support in Silicon Valley for a lot of reasons. One, I support H-1B visas, free trade, tort reform. I've got a good chance amongst the Hispanic voters here in California.
My reputation as an inclusive governor preceded me here in this campaign. People, you know, the Republicans have been associated, rightly or wrongly, with being anti-immigrant in the state of California. We've turned that around. I've got a great record when it comes to public schools and education is a very important issue in the state of California.
My job is going to be to find those Republicans that were strong Republicans up until 1992 that Perot peeled off from us and get them back in the party. And I think I can do so by being a positive, optimistic, forward-looking candidate."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Gov. George W. Bush spent most of yesterday talking about education. He was greeted by students at Sequoia High School in Redwood City, Calif., after holding a town meeting there. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)

Load-Date: September 27, 2000


End of Document
Senate Votes to Keep Plan To Make Immigrants Legal
The New York Times
May 25, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 941 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 24 
Body


The Senate on Thursday turned aside the most significant challenge to the comprehensive immigration bill now under debate, voting 66 to 29 to keep a provision that offers legal status to most of the nation's 12 million illegal immigrants.
  The legalization program is, by far, the most contentious part of the bill. But it is also an indispensable element of the fragile bipartisan compromise that the bill embodies.
Senator David Vitter, Republican of Louisiana, who offered the proposal to eliminate the program, called it ''amnesty, pure and simple.'' He said it would act like a magnet, encouraging more illegal immigration.
  Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, the chief Democratic architect of the bill, defended the program. To obtain legal status, he said, illegal immigrants would have to pay fines, pass background checks and, in most cases, hold jobs.
  ''Legalization is important for our national security,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''We have to know who is in the United States. Legalization is important in terms of our economic prosperity. And legalization is important for the families. Do we think we're going to deport children -- 3.5 million American children who have parents that are undocumented?''
  President Bush endorsed that argument. Referring to illegal immigrants, he said, ''You can't kick them out.'' That solution is ''just not real,'' he said Thursday at a news conference, where he urged the Senate to pass the immigration bill.
  The bill, a product of secret negotiations between the White House and a dozen senators, has survived four days of impassioned debate on the Senate floor. It is uncertain whether it has gained enough momentum to survive continuing attacks from both ends of the political spectrum.
  Senators return home on Friday for a weeklong recess over the Memorial Day holiday. Many said they expected a barrage of questions from constituents upset with the legalization program.
  But architects of the bill said they were pleased. 
  One of them, Senator Mel Martinez, Republican of Florida, said: ''It's been a good week. The bill is moving forward.'' 
  A co-author of the bill, Senator Ken Salazar, Democrat of Colorado, said, ''We are still together, and we are moving forward,'' despite opposition from ''bomb-throwers'' on the right and the left.
  Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, said the architects of the bill were confident that they would prevail when the Senate resumes work next month.
  ''We've got a long, tough road ahead of us,'' Mr. Specter said. But he added, ''We see essentially no enormous roadblocks, no poison pills, no killer amendments ahead that we can't deal with.''
  Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said: ''Time is on our side. The longer we have to discuss the bill among our colleagues, the bigger the buy-in.'' 
  Critics, Mr. Graham said, will feel better if they have time ''to vent their frustrations about the bill and to amend it.''
  In other action on Thursday, the Senate approved an amendment that would increase fees imposed on employers who hire highly skilled temporary workers with H-1B visas. The money would be used to finance scholarships for American citizens studying mathematics, engineering, health care and computer science.
  The vote was a victory for Senator Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont, who had proposed the amendment, which was approved 59 to 35. 
  With the scholarships, he said, ''young Americans can get the education they need for these jobs, so employers don't have to go abroad.'' 
  The Senate narrowly rejected two proposals that could have upset the deal on immigration. In both cases, the vote was 49 to 48.
  One proposal would have ended a guest worker program for less-skilled workers after five years. 
  The other would have encouraged state and local officials to help enforce federal immigration laws -- its purpose being to prevent cities from offering sanctuary to illegal immigrants.
  Many Republicans see the guest worker program as an essential element of the bill. 
  But the proposal to end it after five years looked as if it might pass. During the roll call, Mr. Kennedy persuaded another Democratic senator, Daniel K. Akaka of Hawaii, to switch his vote, thereby preserving the program.
  Defending the guest worker program, President Bush said, ''I would much rather have people crossing the border with a legitimate card, coming to work on a temporary basis, than being stuffed in back of an 18-wheeler.''
  The proposal encouraging state and local agencies to help enforce the immigration laws was offered by Senator Norm Coleman, Republican of Minnesota. It said that state and local employees could ask people about their immigration status whenever the employees had ''probable cause'' to believe that the people were not here legally.
  ''Several cities have passed ordinances or issued executive orders forbidding local law enforcement to even ask the question as to whether a person is in the United States lawfully,'' Mr. Coleman said.
  In adopting such ''gag orders,'' Mr. Coleman said, cities prevent their employees from finding and arresting illegal immigrants who may go on to commit violent crimes.
  Senator Salazar denounced the proposal, saying it would force schoolteachers and hospital emergency room workers to become ''the cops of our immigration laws.''
  Mr. Kennedy said Mr. Coleman's amendment would deter illegal immigrants from reporting crimes or cooperating with the public health authorities.
  For example, he said, illegal immigrants with tuberculosis might be reluctant to seek treatment, and they could infect United States citizens.  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, at a hearing on immigration yesterday. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)                                                                 

Load-Date: May 25, 2007


End of Document
The Fate of Most Silicon Valley Drones: ‘Live Work Work Work Die’; Nonfiction
The New York Times 
May 25, 2018 Friday 05:00 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOKS; review
Length: 1257 words
Byline: Nikil Saval
Highlight: Corey Pein delves into the dark heart of the tech industry, where most are destined not to make it.
Body


LIVE WORK WORK WORK DIE A Journey Into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley By Corey Pein 309 pp. Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt & Company. $28.
It was not long ago that it seemed as if the companies of Silicon Valley were poised to renew and reshape American capitalism. In the late ’90s, companies like AltaVista and Razorfish received the most extraordinary valuations in the history of the stock market, and their foosball-table-filled offices were the subject of breathless coverage. Their employees were rich — congenital dorkiness having become phenomenally lucrative — and a “new economy” was on the horizon. The proof? In some parts of the country, you could log onto America Online through a dial-up modem, sign into Kozmo.com and order a Coca-Cola to be delivered in about an hour. Ah, liberty! In 2001, the bubble burst, but the dream of a genuinely profitable, internet-fueled economy remained.
That economy is now here, most visibly in the form of a sleek slab of phone on which you might be reading (or, really, scrolling) this, and the bloom is off the digital rose. You can still get a Coke delivered, but it will be handed to you by an independent contractor for Caviar, cycling around town with a humiliating giant orange box on his back, as he makes well under minimum wage. Or it will eventually come in the back seat of a robot UberEats car, which might well have slammed into a few pedestrians on the way — the price of progress. Now, or soon, anything you want can be paid for and delivered, virtually at any time, at nearly any speed. For this great convenience, Amazon can now pretty much gull every mayor in America into selling their schools, transportation systems, birthrights, etc., in order to draw 50,000 tech employees — among the least beloved specimens of humanity — to invade and comprehensively ruin their city, block by blessed block. Those employees will be mostly white, mostly men, and mostly known for upholding an industry whose sexism is towering, peerless and, according to charmers like James Damore, not even as sexist as it should be.
The effects of this bargain on all of us have been well documented — even if some of its political consequences, as with the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica scandal, are continually ramifying — but the lives of the people who work in the industry and have foisted it on us are less well known, and this is where Corey Pein’s “Live Work Work Work Die” attempts to fill in the picture. Pein, a staff writer for the caustic and essential little magazine The Baffler, is a former newspaper reporter, who experienced the depredations of tech “disruption” firsthand. Thinking he was following the money, in 2012 he joined a Seattle-based “avant-garde online news service” called Demotix as its editor in chief. Soon into his tenure, Demotix was bought by Corbis, an online photography database, which proceeded to reassign photographers from war zones to “chase reality TV stars around red-carpet events”; not long after, Pein learned that Corbis also planned to lay off half of Demotix’s employees.
So, in the spirit of gonzo journalism, he decides to high-tail it to the Bay Area to sell a start-up and document the horrors of his temporarily adopted home along the way. The idea he comes up with is called “Laborize,” a company that would hire itself out to one organization to unionize a rival — it would, say, contract with Uber to unionize Lyft — and therefore ruin the competitive advantage that comes from denying health care, steady wages and other benefits of unionization. It is a clever ploy that cuts to the heart of what makes Silicon Valley a very pure example of capitalism: the fact that it screws over, or tries to automate into the digital ether, a vast proportion of the American work force, in order to enrich, artificially and enormously, a small proportion of investors and owners, whose companies are — more often than not — profoundly unprofitable.
It probably doesn’t ruin the surprise to point out that Pein’s efforts are a failure: His start-up plans stall out. Nor does his exhaustive, scathing description of what Silicon Valley companies do make for a serious contribution to journalism about the tech industry. More than gonzo, an aura of laziness pervades the exercise. In an emblematic passage, Pein visits the Googleplex in Mountain View, but doesn’t manage to get inside any of the buildings, which in my experience is not so hard to do. Instead he wanders around outside, telling us that it “looks like pretty much any other dismal suburban office park” and that “the real story hid behind the blackened windows of the squat office buildings.” The real story — digitizing, data mining, etc. — turns out to be what is already widely available in reporting elsewhere, in any case uncited in Pein’s book.
Still, despite and perhaps a little because of its lackadaisical approach to its subject, “Live Work Work Work Die” manages to capture something essential about Silicon Valley that has eluded other authors. This is because Pein starts from the grimy underbelly of tech and never makes it out, which accurately reflects the experience of many tech workers. We only learn of those who make it big — Steve Jobs, Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg. We rarely hear of the people who fail, or work uselessly and endlessly hard, without much in the way of reward.
Struggling to find an apartment in San Francisco’s stratospherically overheated rental market, Pein settles for an Airbnb in which he has to share a room with four people and, because of what appears to be its uncertain legal status, has only one key. Calling it the Hacker Condo, he notes that all four residents are “immigrants or the children of immigrants, and therefore accustomed to getting jerked around,” and that the foreign-born residents are on H-1B visas, an arrangement that requires them to stay employed. But the lure of making it big keeps everyone working insane hours. Many of the people he meets “had a mysterious ‘side project’ — a start-up in the making — that was inevitably too ill formed to talk about, or far too technically complicated to remember.” Pein realizes that most of these “tech bros” were “doomed to be desk jockeys for life, forever dreaming of their star turn as Job Creators.”
This is an exhausting, one-note book, but the tinny, grating note Pein repeatedly strikes may nonetheless be one the world needs to hear more often. As Pein migrates from the Hacker Condo to, eventually, a literal tent ($35 a day on Airbnb), he passes through lurid publicity parties for companies like Nerdwallet, which raised $64 million in its first round of fund-raising and makes money from advertising and referral fees earned when it steers users toward certain loans or insurance policies. Its employees describe their executives (on the review site GlassDoor) as “treacherous, languishing souls who want to claw as much money as possible” from their investors and clients, and claim not even to know “what the product is.” He pays $29.70 to join a start-up pitch competition — a kind of live “Shark Tank” — whose theme is captured in the downer of a phrase “Hack immigration.”
His failed journey around the depressing periphery of the tech industry, its warrens suffused with the distinct scent of unadulterated bull, is a preview of the bleak, airless future it aims to deliver, by driverless car or drone, to all of us.
Nikil Saval is the author of “Cubed: The Secret History of the Workplace.” 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tamara Shopsin FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Load-Date: May 28, 2018


End of Document
Geek Hell
The New York Times
May 27, 2018 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 19; NONFICTION
Length: 1271 words
Byline: By NIKIL SAVAL
Nikil Saval is the author of ''Cubed: The Secret History of the Workplace.''
Body


LIVE WORK WORK WORK DIE A Journey Into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley By Corey Pein 309 pp. Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt & Company. $28.
It was not long ago that it seemed as if the companies of Silicon Valley were poised to renew and reshape American capitalism. In the late '90s, companies like AltaVista and Razorfish received the most extraordinary valuations in the history of the stock market, and their foosball-table-filled offices were the subject of breathless coverage. Their employees were rich -- congenital dorkiness having become phenomenally lucrative -- and a ''new economy'' was on the horizon. The proof? In some parts of the country, you could log onto America Online through a dial-up modem, sign into Kozmo.com and order a Coca-Cola to be delivered in about an hour. Ah, liberty! In 2001, the bubble burst, but the dream of a genuinely profitable, internet-fueled economy remained. 
  That economy is now here, most visibly in the form of a sleek slab of phone on which you might be reading (or, really, scrolling) this, and the bloom is off the digital rose. You can still get a Coke delivered, but it will be handed to you by an independent contractor for Caviar, cycling around town with a humiliating giant orange box on his back, as he makes well under minimum wage. Or it will eventually come in the back seat of a robot UberEats car, which might well have slammed into a few pedestrians on the way -- the price of progress. Now, or soon, anything you want can be paid for and delivered, virtually at any time, at nearly any speed. For this great convenience, Amazon can now pretty much gull every mayor in America into selling their schools, transportation systems, birthrights, etc., in order to draw 50,000 tech employees -- among the least beloved specimens of humanity -- to invade and comprehensively ruin their city, block by blessed block. Those employees will be mostly white, mostly men, and mostly known for upholding an industry whose sexism is towering, peerless and, according to charmers like James Damore, not even as sexist as it should be.
  The effects of this bargain on all of us have been well documented -- even if some of its political consequences, as with the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica scandal, are continually ramifying -- but the lives of the people who work in the industry and have foisted it on us are less well known, and this is where Corey Pein's ''Live Work Work Work Die'' attempts to fill in the picture. Pein, a staff writer for the caustic and essential little magazine The Baffler, is a former newspaper reporter, who experienced the depredations of tech ''disruption'' firsthand. Thinking he was following the money, in 2012 he joined a Seattle-based ''avant-garde online news service'' called Demotix as its editor in chief. Soon into his tenure, Demotix was bought by Corbis, an online photography database, which proceeded to reassign photographers from war zones to ''chase reality TV stars around red-carpet events''; not long after, Pein learned that Corbis also planned to lay off half of Demotix's employees.
  So, in the spirit of gonzo journalism, he decides to high-tail it to the Bay Area to sell a start-up and document the horrors of his temporarily adopted home along the way. The idea he comes up with is called ''Laborize,'' a company that would hire itself out to one organization to unionize a rival -- it would, say, contract with Uber to unionize Lyft -- and therefore ruin the competitive advantage that comes from denying health care, steady wages and other benefits of unionization. It is a clever ploy that cuts to the heart of what makes Silicon Valley a very pure example of capitalism: the fact that it screws over, or tries to automate into the digital ether, a vast proportion of the American work force, in order to enrich, artificially and enormously, a small proportion of investors and owners, whose companies are -- more often than not -- profoundly unprofitable.
  It probably doesn't ruin the surprise to point out that Pein's efforts are a failure: His start-up plans stall out. Nor does his exhaustive, scathing description of what Silicon Valley companies do make for a serious contribution to journalism about the tech industry. More than gonzo, an aura of laziness pervades the exercise. In an emblematic passage, Pein visits the Googleplex in Mountain View, but doesn't manage to get inside any of the buildings, which in my experience is not so hard to do. Instead he wanders around outside, telling us that it ''looks like pretty much any other dismal suburban office park'' and that ''the real story hid behind the blackened windows of the squat office buildings.'' The real story -- digitizing, data mining, etc. -- turns out to be what is already widely available in reporting elsewhere, in any case uncited in Pein's book.
  Still, despite and perhaps a little because of its lackadaisical approach to its subject, ''Live Work Work Work Die'' manages to capture something essential about Silicon Valley that has eluded other authors. This is because Pein starts from the grimy underbelly of tech and never makes it out, which accurately reflects the experience of many tech workers. We only learn of those who make it big -- Steve Jobs, Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg. We rarely hear of the people who fail, or work uselessly and endlessly hard, without much in the way of reward.
  Struggling to find an apartment in San Francisco's stratospherically overheated rental market, Pein settles for an Airbnb in which he has to share a room with four people and, because of what appears to be its uncertain legal status, has only one key. Calling it the Hacker Condo, he notes that all four residents are ''immigrants or the children of immigrants, and therefore accustomed to getting jerked around,'' and that the foreign-born residents are on H-1B visas, an arrangement that requires them to stay employed. But the lure of making it big keeps everyone working insane hours. Many of the people he meets ''had a mysterious 'side project' -- a start-up in the making -- that was inevitably too ill formed to talk about, or far too technically complicated to remember.'' Pein realizes that most of these ''tech bros'' were ''doomed to be desk jockeys for life, forever dreaming of their star turn as Job Creators.''
  This is an exhausting, one-note book, but the tinny, grating note Pein repeatedly strikes may nonetheless be one the world needs to hear more often. As Pein migrates from the Hacker Condo to, eventually, a literal tent ($35 a day on Airbnb), he passes through lurid publicity parties for companies like Nerdwallet, which raised $64 million in its first round of fund-raising and makes money from advertising and referral fees earned when it steers users toward certain loans or insurance policies. Its employees describe their executives (on the review site GlassDoor) as ''treacherous, languishing souls who want to claw as much money as possible'' from their investors and clients, and claim not even to know ''what the product is.'' He pays $29.70 to join a start-up pitch competition -- a kind of live ''Shark Tank'' -- whose theme is captured in the downer of a phrase ''Hack immigration.''
  His failed journey around the depressing periphery of the tech industry, its warrens suffused with the distinct scent of unadulterated bull, is a preview of the bleak, airless future it aims to deliver, by driverless car or drone, to all of us.
  Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/25/books/review/silicon-valley-live-work-work-work-die-corey-pein.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY TAMARA SHOPSIN)       

Load-Date: May 29, 2018


End of Document
The Idled of Silicon Valley
The New York Times
June 28, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1144 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- As the Senate voted on a landmark immigration bill that would let Silicon Valley companies import more foreign engineers, some Americans remain locked in a deeply emotional argument over whether outsiders are taking jobs away from people like Joey Doernberg.
Mr. Doernberg worked in chip design, before that industry shrank, and then for a solar energy company, before that industry shrank, and has been unemployed since the middle of last year. By his own account, his skills are not ideal for the current job market. Nor does it help, he says, that at 53, he looks older than he is; youth is at a premium in his industry. So, too, is optimism.
''It's a question of convincing someone that with these skills, I can do this job, even though I haven't done it before,'' he said. ''I'm very optimistic. I know I will find a job.''
The questions of skills, jobs and nationality are a combustible mix these days.
Silicon Valley companies, warning of an acute labor shortage, say it is too costly to retrain older workers like Mr. Doernberg, and that the country is not producing enough younger Americans with the precise skills the industry needs. Their arguments have persuaded a majority of senators to give them what they want: a provision in the immigration bill to let in many more foreign professionals.
But Americans like Mr. Doernberg and the powerful labor lobby say that what the tech industry really wants is to depress wages and bring in more pliant, less costly temporary workers from overseas. If there is such a talent shortage, they ask, why are wages for most engineers not rising faster? Labor groups have pushed for a requirement to offer jobs to equally qualified Americans before hiring foreigners, a provision that the industry has fiercely resisted.
The pitched arguments of both sides, which are likely to resurface in the House when it takes up its version of an immigration overhaul, cloud a complicated reality. There is little empirical evidence to suggest that foreign engineers displace American engineers as a whole. If anything, one recent study suggests, the growth of immigrant workers in American companies helps younger American technical workers -- more of them are hired and at higher-paying jobs -- but has no noticeable consequences, good or bad, on older workers.
''In the short run, we don't find really any adverse or superpositive effect on the employment of Americans,'' said William R. Kerr, a Harvard business professor who conducted the study on the work force of 300 American companies. ''People take an extremely one-sided view of this stuff and dismiss any evidence to the contrary.''
A recent analysis by the Brookings Institution reached a similar conclusion. It found that in the top 10 cities that bring in the largest number of high-skilled guest workers on H-1B visas, college-educated Americans -- those who could compete for jobs with high-skilled guest workers -- are not more likely to be unemployed.
At the same time, though, the industry's claims of a labor shortage may be somewhat overblown. Most H-1B workers hold entry-level positions. Economists say that bringing in more of these workers would serve to keep wages down. It also saves employers the trouble of having to retrain workers.
There is a difference between what companies say they need and want, said Peter Cappelli, a management professor at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. ''Saying we need people with these skills is like me saying I need a four-wheel drive,'' he said. ''They could retrain people.''
It is true that for certain categories of engineers, wages are not going up as sharply as one would expect if good engineering talent were indeed hard to find. But it is also true that engineers with certain specialties, like software development, are hard to find.
Intel, for instance, which has more than 50,000 employees in the United States, said it has 1,000 openings. Motorola Solutions said it was scrambling for software engineers. And unemployment among technology professionals is generally about half the national average, buttressing the industry's claims.
Economists say there may be other reasons for opening the door to high-skilled immigrants. In cities where there are large concentrations of such immigrants in science and engineering, overall wages tend to go up, especially among college-educated American residents, and eventually, so do housing prices, according to a study by Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis.
The Congressional Budget Office weighed in this week too, concluding that the growth in high-skilled immigration would lead to ''slightly higher'' productivity and in turn higher wages overall.
Already, the fight over high-skilled immigration has led to arguments and counterarguments on the Senate floor, with one side warning that jobs will go to workers from overseas and the other rallying for Americans first.
But Ardine Williams, the vice president for human resources at Intel, said that hiring Americans is not always practical. Asked about hiring unemployed engineers in this country, she said, ''I encounter those folks as well. They are skilled and have expertise outside of an area where we need engineers. In some cases they haven't kept their skills current.''
The debate over the effect of foreign engineers on American ones has obscured the critical issue of why more Americans are not going into the thriving technology sector. Students in the United States consistently rank low on global math and science tests, suggesting that relatively few are prepared to go into rigorous science and engineering programs.
In engineering programs at American universities, a little more than 40 percent of all graduate students were from abroad, according to data from the National Science Foundation. Even among Americans who do graduate with computer science or engineering degrees, a third pursue careers outside the tech sector.
Mr. Doernberg is keeping his fingers crossed. A resident of Woodside, Calif., an upscale town south of San Francisco, he spends his days scouring online job boards and attending networking sessions at diners and church halls across Silicon Valley. One of them is a Thursday morning group that meets in a church in Saratoga, a short drive from his home.
It was set up years ago by Hamid Saadat, an electrical engineer who came to this country from Iran as a graduate student in 1978, worked at a series of semiconductor companies in the area, became a United States citizen and went through the same rite of passage as Mr. Doernberg.
In 2001, just as the technology industry slumped, he lost his job. He was 47 and he soon learned one lesson. In Silicon Valley, it may not matter where you were born, but when.
''As much as we like to believe there's no discrimination, being younger usually helps,'' Mr. Saadat said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/28/technology/a-bill-allowing-more-foreign-workers-stirs-a-tech-debate.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: At a networking meeting in Saratoga, Calif., Joey Doernberg, an unemployed engineer, said his skills were not ideal now. (B1)
Hamid Saadat, an electrical engineer from Iran, with other job seekers
 he worked in Silicon Valley until he lost his job in 2001. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NOAH BERGER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)       

Load-Date: June 28, 2013


End of Document
Subject, Meet Verb
The New York Times Blogs 
(After Deadline)
November 10, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMESTOPICS
Length: 1609 words
Byline: PHILIP B. CORBETT
Highlight: Singular subject, singular verb; plural subject, plural verb. What could be simpler? And yet, we stumble with embarrassing frequency over this most basic grammatical rule. 
Body


Singular subject, singular verb; plural subject, plural verb. What could be simpler? And yet ...
We stumble with embarrassing frequency over this most basic grammatical rule. Haste and overly complicated syntax are often the root causes. Several specific constructions create problems: "neither" expressions, compound subjects, and prepositional phrases following the subject. 
Some recent lapses:
 But neither of those proposals are in a bill to increase H-1B visas that Mr. Rubio sponsored this year with other senators. 
The subject is "neither," which is singular. Here's what The Times's stylebook says:
 neither, neither ... nor. When neither is the subject, the verb is singular: Neither of the cars is available. When neither and nor link singular terms, the verb is singular: Neither the car nor the truck is available. When neither and nor link a singular term and a plural one, put the plural term second and use a plural verb: Neither the car nor the trucks are available. If the mixture of terms and verbs gets awkward, recast the sentence: The car is not available, and neither are the trucks. 
 Among the class actions thrown out because of the clauses was one brought by Time Warner customers over charges they said mysteriously appeared on their bills and another against a travel booking website accused of conspiring to fix hotel prices. 
The complicated sentence and inverted order disguised the fact that we had a compound subject that required a plural verb: "Among the class actions were one brought by Time Warner customers and another against a travel-booking website."
 Carolina's success is not so neatly defined, but strong defense, excellent fourth-quarter play from quarterback Cam Newton and a friendly schedule has helped the Panthers remain unbeaten. 
Another compound subject - "strong defense, excellent fourth-quarter play from quarterback Cam Newton and a friendly schedule" - that requires a plural verb, "have helped."
 The suspicions that the right always had about Boehner, and would have had about McCarthy - that they care more about the deal than about the outcome, more about the party's donors than any defined small-government principle - does not attach to Ryan in the same way. 
Here the subject is so far away from the verb, with so much intervening, that we seemed to have lost track. Make it "The suspicions ... do not ..."
 Their bill of particulars against Mr. Ryan have shifted from the national debt and spending to immigration. 
The prepositional phrase "of particulars" fooled us, but the subject is the singular noun "bill."
 After presiding over a three-week trial, she concluded that N.C.A.A. rules prohibiting college athletes from receiving cash compensation was a violation of the nation's antitrust laws. 
Make it "rules ... were a violation," of course.
  The proceedings became so tense that it even featured a bench-clearing incident in the 13th when Texas reliever Keone Kela got into a shouting match with Josh Donaldson, who had homered in the first. 
Here the agreement problem concerns pronoun and antecedent rather than verb and subject. "Proceedings" is plural, so we needed "they even featured" (or we could use a different noun).
 
 In a Word 
This week's grab bag of grammar, style and other missteps, compiled with help from colleagues and readers.
 Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's repeated insistence that Israel had not and would not change anything at an Old City holy site was endorsed over the weekend by the United States and Jordan, which administers the contested Jerusalem complex that is at the center of this month's violent Palestinian uprising.    
This construction doesn't work because "had not" requires "changed," not "change." 
Example No. 1:
 After the raid, a photograph of a bloodied press card held by one of the channel's journalists went viral. 
Example No. 2:
 Videos of a classroom arrest that quickly went viral have put a spotlight on the proliferation of armed, uniformed officers in schools. 
Example No. 3:
 A recording of the call went viral, and like Mr. Flores before him, Will in Queens - a 42-year-old middle-school teacher named Will Collins - became a folk hero. 
This slang was once an exciting metaphor but it has grown tired with overuse and is not always accurate. We mean the content "was popular online," "was widely shared," or "spread quickly online."
 In 2014, people age 50 and above were twice as likely to go through a divorce than in 1990, according to the National Center for Family and Marriage Research at Bowling Green State University in Ohio. 
Make it "twice as likely ... as."
 Mrs. Clinton was ahead in national polls in 2007 by nearly a two-to-one margin. 
A margin is the difference between two numbers; make this "nearly a two-to-one ratio."
 With the Mets starting the World Series here Tuesday against the Kansas City Royals, Murphy was one home run away from tying the record for home runs in a postseason, which was eight, set originally by Barry Bonds. 
"Set originally" is redundant.
 The militants were wary of anybody who had served in the Iraqi police or army, or whom they thought might have had contact with Americans or Kurds. 
Make it "who"; it's the subject of "might have had," just as the first "who" is the subject of "had served."
 In a sign of their uncertainty about who to support, none of the six hopefuls tested found enthusiastic support from a majority of their party's primary voters. 
Aargh. Here it should be "whom," the object of "to support."
 Out of view to tourists, the first family has installed more than a dozen pieces of contemporary and modern art throughout the upstairs living quarters of the White House residence, where the family spends most of their private time. 
Make it "the family spends most of its private time" or "family members spend most of their private time."
 This took us through the beach traffic; we grew quiet as the SUV zipped along beach cliffs above blue water. 
Use periods for the abbreviation.
 Valeant strips out a laundry list of expenses from its revenue, including those related to stock-based compensation, legal settlements and costs associated with restructuring and acquisitions. 
"Laundry list" is a cliché; we could just say "list" or "long list."
 Deborah L. Pierce, an emergency room doctor in Philadelphia, was optimistic when she brought a sex discrimination claim against the medical group that had dismissed her. ... 
When Ms. Pierce showed up one day for a hearing, she said she noticed Mr. Kalogredis having a friendly coffee with the head of the medical group she was suing.
She should be Dr. Pierce, particularly since the story involved her work as a doctor; this was eventually fixed. 
 Ms. Casimir, a Haitian-American whose parents did not graduate college, calls her 1580 (out of 2400) SAT score "an embarrassment" after graduating high school with a 4.0 G.P.A. 
Our style is "graduate from."
 These are the Mets, and this was their first home World Series game in 15 years, and the first-ever at Citi Field. 
No need for a hyphen.
 In a telephone interview, the donor and former ambassador under Presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush, Mel Sembler, said that the super PAC supporting Mr. Bush, Right to Rise, is holding strong with Florida supporters. 
This identification is awkward and hard to digest. Why not put the name first, then the long identifying phrase?
 Rattled but impressed, Mr. Utekar realized: This was going to be a lot different than India. 
Make it "different from."
 But overall, he added, "anything that brings down the costs of attorneys providing indigent defense is a good thing." 
In this use, make it two words, "over all."
 She swiftly sent whomever it was to voice mail. 
Make it "whoever."
 That is one of the things that makes this transcendent horror series, which returns to SundanceTV on Saturday (Halloween), so transfixing and unsettling. 
Recorded announcement: The verb should be plural in a relative clause like this. The subject "that" is plural because it refers to "things," not to "one."
 In 2012, officials forbade Quintarius from attending his local high school and said a transfer to a school with a nurse was mandatory. 
From the stylebook:
 forbid, prohibit. Use to with forbid and from with prohibit: forbid them to attend; prohibit them from attending.
 While most species are named after islands or British explorers, the new species, Chelonoidis donfaustoi, has a distinctly local namesake: "Don Fausto" - Fausto Llerena Sánchez, a 75-year-old park ranger who recently retired after 43 years of helping to save endangered tortoises. 
And more from the stylebook:
 namesake properly describes the receiver of a shared name, not the giver. A grandchild may be the namesake of her grandmother, but not the other way around.
 The researchers found that large chain groceries had the lowest percentage of misidentified salmon, and were eight times less likely to offer such mislabeled salmon than small groceries. 
And again from the stylebook:
[D]o not write times less or times smaller (or things like times as thin or times as short). A quantity can decrease only one time before disappearing, and then there is nothing left to decrease further. Make it one-third as much (or as tall, or as fast).
 The jump in temperatures was probably caused by a combination of atmospheric warming and warm water carried into the gulf by a northward shift of the powerful Atlantic current known as the gulf stream, according to the researchers, who include scientists at the University of Maine, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and other institutions. 
It's amazing what's in the stylebook:
 Gulf Stream for the ocean current. 

Load-Date: November 10, 2015


End of Document
The Country I Love; Op-Ed Contributor
The New York Times 
July 4, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 908 words
Byline: PRAMILA JAYAPAL
Highlight: America embraced me when I was 16. Now I’m a member of Congress.
Body


SEATTLE — Seventeen years ago, I celebrated my first Independence Day as a United States citizen. I couldn’t have predicted then that I would one day have the enormous privilege of being the first Indian-American woman to serve in the United States House of Representatives, and one of only six members of Congress who are naturalized citizens.
After arriving here from India at age 16, I spent more than a dozen years on an alphabet soup of visas — F1, H1B and more — before I finally got my green card through marriage to an American. Some years later, I was awarded a fellowship from the Institute of Current World Affairs, which allowed me to spend two years living in my birth country. I just had to come back to the United States once a year to keep my permanent resident status current. When I became pregnant during the second year of the program, my husband and I planned to return to the United States in time for my last trimester, so I could deliver the baby at home, and then return to India.
That plan did not work out. Just two weeks before we were scheduled to board our flight back to the United States, I developed a leak in my amniotic sac. My son was born prematurely at 26.5 weeks, weighing less than two pounds. I was now faced with a choice. In order to preserve my permanent resident status, I needed to return to the United States within weeks of his birth. But he was so tiny and in such critical condition that he could not fly, and I refused to leave his bedside knowing he might die.
So I stayed in India. I lost my green card status and only through the help and hard work of the institute was I able to regain my permanent residence status and return to the United States three months later when my son was finally able to fly.
I became determined to get my citizenship as soon as I was eligible so that I would never again face the prospect of being separated from my son, who was a United States citizen by virtue of being the child of a United States citizen father. Part of the agreement that had allowed me to return to the United States again and regain my permanent residence status was that I would have to start from zero to qualify for citizenship again. That process took three years.
When I finally walked into the cavernous hall at the old location of Immigration and Naturalization Services (now called United States Citizenship and Immigration Services) south of downtown Seattle, I was prepared for a simple transaction that would finally grant me citizenship and ensure that I would always be with my son. I did not anticipate the emotion that would come with the moment, or the way it would shape my future, and my understanding of this country.
There were hundreds of others at the ceremony from all over the world, and I could hear languages from every continent spoken. We all carried small American flags. Grandparents held children; moms and dads held hands. As we took the oath of citizenship, the solemnity of the moment spiked through me. Tears welled up and rolled down my cheeks as I took in the mixed emotions of renouncing any allegiance to my birth country of India where I had been a citizen for 35 years and embracing my new country.
America, a country that had embraced me as a 16-year-old who had come here by myself to study and build a life of better opportunity.
America, a country built on the idea of being a refuge for those in need, “the tired masses, yearning to breathe free.”
America, a country that has always celebrated itself as a nation of immigrants.
In that moment, as I took my oath, I realized how lucky I was. I knew that my future had opened up, and that citizenship would offer me the chance to seek opportunity and to take part in our democracy. I knew, too, that with those freedoms and opportunity came enormous responsibility: to do everything I could to preserve and build our democracy, to vote, and to use my life to pay it forward and ensure opportunity for others.
I became an immigrant, civil and human rights advocate, then the first South Asian elected to the Washington State Legislature and the only woman of color in the Washington State Senate, and then was elected in 2016 to the United States Congress.
These are difficult times for immigrants and for Americans across our country. President Trump has harnessed the fear and prejudice that have accompanied every wave of immigrants in United States history, and stoked those fears to further his own agenda.
Restricting immigration from Muslim-majority countries, and cracking down on unauthorized immigration in a way that tears families apart and creates an atmosphere of fear, cuts at the very fabric of what really does make America great: the diversity that is our greatest strength.
This Fourth of July, as I remember my own naturalization ceremony and give thanks for the honor of being a United States citizen and a member of Congress, I call on the president and my fellow Americans to remember our history. What makes America great is our commitment to our values of inclusivity and opportunity for all. Immigration is about more than just who comes here and who is allowed to stay. It is about who we are as a country and what we are willing to stand up for.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and            Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the            Opinion Today newsletter. 
Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat, is the United States representative for Washington’s Seventh Congressional District.

Load-Date: July 6, 2017


End of Document
How Stephen Miller Seized the Moment to Battle Immigration
The New York Times 
August 17, 2019 Saturday 16:33 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 4800 words
Byline: Jason DeParle
Highlight: Behind Mr. Miller’s singular grip on the Trump anti-immigrant agenda are forces far bigger than his own hostility toward the foreign-born.
Body


WASHINGTON — When historians try to explain how opponents of immigration captured the Republican Party, they may turn to the spring of 2007, when President George W. Bush threw his waning powers behind a legalization plan and conservative populists buried it in scorn.
Mr. Bush was so taken aback, he said he worried about America “losing its soul,” and immigration politics have never been the same.
That spring was significant for another reason, too: An intense young man with wary, hooded eyes and fiercely anti-immigrant views graduated from college and began a meteoric rise as a Republican operative. With the timing of a screenplay, the man and the moment converged.
Stephen Miller was 22 and looking for work in Washington. He lacked government experience but had media appearances on talk radio and Fox News and a history of pushing causes like “Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week.” A first-term congresswoman from Minnesota offered him a job interview and discovered they were reading the same book: a polemic warning that Muslim immigration could mean “the end of the world as we know it.”
By the end of the interview, Representative Michele Bachmann had a new press secretary. And a dozen years later, Mr. Miller, now a senior adviser to President Trump, is presiding over one of the most fervent attacks on immigration in American history.
The story of Mr. Miller’s rise has been told with a focus on his pugnacity and paradoxes. Known more for his enemies than his friends, he is a conservative firebrand from liberal Santa Monica, Calif., and a descendant of refugees who is seeking to eliminate refugee programs. He is a Duke graduate in bespoke suits who rails against the perfidy of so-called elites. Among those who have questioned his moral fitness are his uncle, his childhood rabbi and 3,400 fellow Duke alumni.
Less attention has been paid to the forces that have abetted his rise and eroded Republican support for immigration — forces Mr. Miller has personified and advanced in a career unusually reflective of its times.
Rising fears of terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks brought new calls to keep immigrants out. Declining need for industrial labor left fewer businesses clamoring to bring them in. A surge of migrants across the South stoked a backlash in the party’s geographic base.
Conservative media, once divided, turned against immigration, and immigration-reduction groups that had operated on the margins grew in numbers and sophistication. Abandoning calls for minority outreach, the Republican Party chose instead to energize its conservative white base — heeding strategists who said the immigrant vote was not just a lost cause but an existential threat.
Arriving in Washington as these forces coalesced, Mr. Miller rode the tailwinds with zeal and skill. Warning of terrorism and disturbed by multicultural change, he became the protégé of a Southern senator especially hostile to immigration, Jeff Sessions of Alabama. And he courted allies in the conservative media and immigration-restriction groups.
Mr. Miller, who declined to comment for this article, affects the air of a lone wolf — guarded, strident, purposefully provocative. But he has been shaped by the movement whose ideas and lieutenants he helped install across the government as he consolidated a kind of power unusual for a presidential aide and unique in the Trump White House.
“I don’t agree with his policy on reducing legal immigration, but I’m in awe of how he’s been able to impact this one issue,” said Cesar Conda, who battled Mr. Miller on Capitol Hill as an aide to Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. “He’s got speech writing, he’s got policy, he’s got his own little congressional-relations operation, he’s got allies whom he’s helped place across the government.”
“Years ago, the restrictionist movement was a ragtag group” with no strong ties to either party, he added. Mr. Miller “embodies their rise into the G.O.P. mainstream.”
Country and Party in Motion
The story that has defined Mr. Miller’s life began two decades before his birth, when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed a 1965 law ending quotas that chose immigrants based on their national origin and heavily favored white people from Northern Europe. Although Mr. Johnson called the new law a largely symbolic measure that would neither increase immigrants’ numbers nor alter their ethnic mix, it did both on a vast scale — raising the foreign-born share of the population to near-record highs and setting the United States on course for non-Hispanic whites to become a minority of the population.
Opposition initially came from the left, especially from environmentalists worried about population growth.
The first major immigration-control group, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, or FAIR, was founded in 1979 by Dr. John Tanton, a Michigan ophthalmologist and Sierra Club member,            with funding from Cordelia Scaife May, an heiress to the Mellon banking fortune. Mindful of the bigotry in earlier anti-immigration movements, Dr. Tanton vowed to keep it “centrist/liberal in political orientation.”
[Newly unearthed personal writings by Cordelia Scaife May reveal why she dedicated her fortune to the cause.]
But his arguments about environmental harm and wage competition found little traction in a Democratic Party eager to court minorities. By the mid-1980s, Dr. Tanton was making the racial arguments he had pledged to avoid, decrying the “Latin onslaught” and insisting on the need for “a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
At the time, the Republican Party was divided on immigration. While cultural conservatives were wary of rapid demographic change, businesses wanted cheap labor and Cold Warriors embraced anti-Communist refugees, including large waves of Cubans and Vietnamese. Running for president, a conservative as definitional as Ronald Reagan hailed “millions of immigrants from every corner of the earth” as a sign that God had made America a “city on a hill.”
But by the 1990s, the Cold War had ended, and globalization was sending manufacturing abroad. The business wing of the Republican Party, its main pro-immigrant faction, had less need for foreign workers. “It’s not that the business lobby became anti-immigration; it’s just that they cared a lot less,” said Margaret Peters, a political scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Not least among the forces shaping the debate was immigration itself: It accelerated and spread to the South, with the number of unauthorized immigrants growing especially fast.
In 1986, President Reagan signed a compromise law that gave legal status to nearly three million people while adding new penalties to curb flows of illegal immigrants. But enforcement proved weak, and the unauthorized population reached a record 12 million. Restrictionists, feeling betrayed, swore never to allow another “amnesty.”
After a Republican backlash in the 1990s led more immigrants to vote for Democrats, Mr. Bush ran in 2000 as a pro-immigrant conservative. He saw Latinos as proto-Republican — religious, entrepreneurial, family-oriented — and was considering a legalization plan when the Sept. 11 attacks consumed his administration.
By the time he returned to the issue in 2007, his party’s skepticism toward legalization had hardened into implacable opposition. Amplified by talk radio, populist critics denounced his plan as “shamnesty”; one called it an effort to make America a “roach motel.” Three-quarters of Republican senators opposed it.
Just a year before, a rising Republican star had urged fellow conservatives not to abandon the party’s Reaganite support for immigration.
“We are either going to prove that we believe in the ideas enshrined on the Statue of Liberty, or the American people will go looking elsewhere,” said a congressman from Indiana, Mike Pence.
But the party’s shift proved decisive. Now, as vice president, Mr. Pence loyally defends the policies set by the president and Mr. Miller.
Early Provocations
The forces that pushed the Republican Party to the right also shaped Mr. Miller.
Born in 1985, he grew up in a post-Cold War world where the acceptance of refugees was no longer seen as part of America’s resistance to a hostile foreign power. Rapid ethnic change was shaping his world.
The son of an affluent real estate investor, he entered high school in a self-consciously multicultural Santa Monica in 1999, just as California became a majority-minority state. At the start of his junior year, the attacks on Sept. 11 took nearly 3,000 lives.
The terrorist plot was central to his political awakening. Complaining that school officials were insufficiently patriotic, Mr. Miller won an uphill fight to make them enforce regulations requiring the Pledge of Allegiance. “Osama bin Laden would feel very welcome at Santa Monica High School,” he wrote in 2002 in a local publication.
Tellingly, he took his case to talk radio, as a frequent guest on “The Larry Elder Show.” It was a pattern Mr. Miller would repeat in subsequent years: airing hyperbolic claims of liberal treachery to conservative media allies. “He loved being the provocative conservative behind liberal lines,” said Ari Rosmarin, who was editor of the school newspaper and now works on criminal justice issues at the American Civil Liberties Union.
Mr. Miller’s main issue was assimilation, or what he saw as its failures. Writing in a local paper, he complained that “a number of students lacked basic English skills,” and his yearbook page quoted Theodore Roosevelt: “There can be no fifty-fifty Americanism.” The school paper ran a parody of him railing against ethnic food and demanding white bread and “fine Virginia hams, just as the founding fathers used to enjoy on their bountiful plantations.”
Classmates were often unsure whether his provocative views were sincere or a bid for attention. “Am I the only one who is sick and tired of being told to pick up my trash when we have janitors who are paid to do it for us?” he said in a speech for student government. A video shows him flashing a self-satisfied smile as classmates jeer.
His uncle, Dr. David S. Glosser, a vocal critic, dismissed the antics as “just an early adolescent desire to be noticed.”
“This talk of his philosophy seems disingenuous to me,” he said in an interview. “It’s very seductive. All the sudden, you become the darling of media big shots and you get notoriety for it at home.”
Some of Mr. Miller’s Latino classmates say his comments made them feel personally attacked. In an interview, Jason Islas said Mr. Miller told him he was ending their friendship for reasons that included “my Latino heritage.” He added, “I think he is a racist.”
But with prominent allies like David Horowitz, a conservative author and organizer, Mr. Miller headed to Duke in 2003 with the beginnings of a national reputation.
The defining issue of Mr. Miller’s college career was the arrest, when he was a junior, of three white lacrosse players accused of raping a black stripper. Mr. Miller leaped to the players’ defense, charging that administrators and faculty members saw them as emblems of white privilege and simply assumed they were guilty — a case he made on the Fox News show “The O’Reilly Factor,” then the most-watched cable news program. He demanded that the school president be fired and the prosecutor jailed.
The case collapsed. North Carolina’s attorney general declared the players innocent, the prosecutor was disbarred for misconduct and the accuser was later convicted of murdering her boyfriend. For Mr. Miller, it was a two-part vindication — reinforcing his conviction that liberal dogma about racial oppression was wrong and that his scorched-earth tactics were effective.
In his last column for the Duke Chronicle before graduating, he called himself “a deeply committed conservative who considers it his responsibility to do battle with the left.” Then he headed for Washington.
Taking the Fight to Congress
Most of Mr. Miller’s work for Mrs. Bachmann was unrelated to immigration. He wrote news releases about gas prices and fire department grants. But in February 2008, soon after he began the job, an undocumented immigrant in rural Minnesota, Olga Franco, drove through a stop sign and killed four children. Mrs. Bachmann appeared on “The O’Reilly Factor,” where she framed the issue as “anarchy versus the rule of law.”
Although Ms. Franco was convicted of vehicular homicide, the National Academy of Sciences, a group founded to convey academic consensus, has written that immigrants are “much less likely than natives to commit crimes,” and recent evidence suggests that the undocumented are no exception.
But immigrant crime would be a running theme in Mr. Miller’s career, and his emphasis on the issue borrowed from the broader restrictionist movement. To erode public support for immigration, FAIR maintains an online archive of “serious crimes by illegal aliens.”
In a 2008 congressional campaign debate, Mrs. Bachmann’s opponent accused her of exploiting the tragedy, but she argued that unauthorized immigrants were “bringing in diseases, bringing in drugs, bringing in violence” — language nearly identical to what Mr. Trump would later employ with Mr. Miller as his aide — and she mustered a slender win.
Soon after that election, Mr. Miller went to work for Representative John Shadegg of Arizona, and then quickly crossed the Capitol to work for Mr. Sessions. Perhaps the leading immigration foe in the Senate, Mr. Sessions was a product of a region where immigration had soared, largely in places unaccustomed to it. In two decades, the number of immigrants had grown fourfold in Alabama, Kentucky and South Carolina; fivefold in Arkansas, Georgia and Tennessee; and sixfold in North Carolina.
Mr. Miller had opposed immigration mostly on cultural grounds, warning that newcomers were failing to learn English and endangering public safety. But Mr. Sessions emphasized economic concerns and what he called “the real needs of working Americans,” saying foreigners threatened their jobs and wages.
As a defender of the working class, Mr. Miller had uncertain credentials. If his high school gibe about janitors was a joke, he returned to the issue at Duke. He mocked a campaign to have students thank their dorm-cleaning staff, arguing that employment was thanks enough. “The janitors need a job, which we provide,” he wrote.
Striking a self-consciously elitist pose, he ridiculed calls for improved relations with working-class Durham, N.C. (“one of the last spots in America anyone would visit”) and asked for a student smoking lounge with “plenty of mahogany and leather.”
The impact of immigrants on jobs and wages is much debated — they take jobs but make jobs, too. Most economists see greater downward pressure on wages coming from other forces, including the decline of the minimum wage (adjusted for inflation), weak unions, outsourcing and technological change.
The National Academy of Sciences concluded in 2017 that immigration’s overall effect on wages was “very small,” but added that “some studies have found sizable negative short-run impacts for high school dropouts” (who account for about 8 percent of the work force). Even among dropouts, some economists find the effects modest or nonexistent.
One prominent scholar, the Harvard economist George Borjas, consistently finds negative impacts much larger than his peers do. He is the figure Mr. Miller most often cites.
A Sign of Things to Come
In moving to Mr. Sessions’s Senate suite, Mr. Miller arrived at a crossroads for the restrictionist movement’s people and ideas.
As head of communications, Mr. Miller acquired a deep knowledge of the movement’s players and policy goals. Others in the office would also go on to influential jobs in the Trump administration, not least Mr. Sessions himself, who as attorney general presided over a policy that separated thousands of young immigrant children from parents illegally crossing the border.
Mr. Miller’s minor moment of Capitol Hill renown stems from his efforts to defeat the so-called Gang of Eight bill, a bipartisan attempt to pair new enforcement measures with legalization for most of the country’s 11 million undocumented immigrants, and to offer them a long path to citizenship.
He opposed the bill with the same zeal that had inspired high school parodies, haranguing reporters into the night and earning a gadfly reputation.
In retrospect, three elements of Mr. Miller’s approach foreshadowed his future exercise of power. One was his rejection of the view that Republicans needed to court minorities. The Gang of Eight bill was born after the 2012 presidential race, in which the defeated Republican, Mitt Romney, lost the Latino vote by 44 points.
No less a hard-liner than the Fox News host Sean Hannity called for legalizing most of the country’s undocumented immigrants. “Pathway to citizenship — done,” he said on his radio show. The Republican National Committee urged the party “to empower and support ethnic minorities” and “champion comprehensive immigration reform,” meaning legalization.
Mr. Miller took the opposite view, which the party ultimately followed: Mobilize the white working-class base, among whom turnout had fallen.
While Mr. Bush had seen Latinos as natural Republicans, most restrictionists saw them as an electoral threat. “If four out of five Latinos are registering with the Democrats, perhaps less immigration would be in the interest of the Republican Party, no?” wrote Jon Feere of the Center for Immigration Studies, a spinoff of FAIR. (Mr. Feere later joined the Trump administration as an immigration adviser. )
A second feature of Mr. Miller’s efforts was his symbiotic relationship with conservative media, especially online publications like Breitbart News.
Lacking gatekeepers, the internet was a medium tailor-made for anti-establishment causes. Right-wing populism had long flourished on talk radio, but Breitbart, with few restrictions on space, could cover the issue in greater depth, bringing intense scrutiny to hot-button issues. And social media made articles easy to share.
Breitbart ran three stories making the false charge, circulated by Mr. Sessions’s staff, that the bill offered undocumented immigrants free cellphones.
Mr. Miller and Breitbart worked together closely.
“Sessions: Special Interest, Extremist Groups Wrote Immigration Bill,” claimed one Breitbart headline.
“Sessions: ‘Tide is Beginning to Turn’ Against Immigration Bill,” announced another.
A third element of Mr. Miller’s work involved his alliance with outside groups, especially three that Dr. Tanton helped create and that received millions of dollars from Mrs. May’s foundation. (Over a recent 12-year period alone, the foundation gave the Center for Immigration Studies $17.6 million, FAIR $56.7 million and NumbersUSA $58.2 million.)
Once a lonely cause, restrictionism had grown into a mature movement — an intellectual ecosystem of sorts — with groups specializing in areas as diverse as litigation and voter mobilization.
When Mr. Sessions claimed on a conference call that the Gang of Eight bill threatened jobs, an analyst from the Center for Immigration Studies was on the line to vouch for the data, and Breitbart covered it as news. When the center presented its journalism award, Mr. Miller was the speaker, and his first-name references to the Center’s staff — “all the great work that Mark and Jessica and Steve are doing”— made it clear that he felt among friends.
Despite Mr. Sessions’s opposition, the bill passed in the Democratic Senate in 2013. As it headed to the Republican House, Mr. Miller drafted a 30-page memo that Mr. Sessions shared with the House Republican caucus, urging members to oppose the bill on behalf of “millions of struggling American workers.”
House leaders were mulling how to proceed when, in June 2014, an obscure Virginia professor toppled the majority leader, Eric Cantor, in a Republican primary. Though vastly outspent, the newcomer, Dave Brat, prevailed in large part by attacking Mr. Cantor for being “in cahoots” with Democrats on immigration.
“The world just changed,” Mr. Miller exulted the next day.
Indeed, it had. Among those commenting in Breitbart was the “conservative provocateur” Donald J. Trump, who said the upset showed that the Republican establishment was at risk. “Everybody is now vulnerable,” he said.
Circulating the article, Mr. Miller told friends that he wished Mr. Trump would run for president. When Mr. Trump did — demanding a wall and a ban on Muslims entering the country — Mr. Miller soon signed on.
The Right Kind of Candidate
Mr. Miller rose quickly on the small staff. A prolific writer and combative surrogate, he was the person most knowledgeable about the campaign’s central issue, and he lavished Mr. Trump with praise. (The Trump candidacy, Mr. Miller said, had altered “Western civilization.”) He also served as an ideological chaperone to a candidate given to sudden reversals of signature policies, a role Mr. Miller continues to play in the White House.
Mr. Trump scored a coup by winning the support of some tech workers who, after being laid off by the Walt Disney Company, were forced to train foreign replacements admitted on temporary H-1B visas.
The workers embodied Mr. Trump’s larger argument that immigration hurt American employment. Yet days after appearing with them at a rally, Mr. Trump said in a televised debate that he would drop his plan to restrict the H-1B program.
“I’m changing, I’m changing,” he told the stunned interviewer. “I’m softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.”
Within hours, Mr. Trump reversed himself again, issuing a statement to assure his followers that he planned to “end forever the use of H-1B as a cheap labor program.”
Despite the president’s public image as an unrelenting immigration foe, some restrictionist leaders view him as soft — a businessman whose desire for labor will lead him to support more immigration. That unreliability, they say, makes Mr. Miller’s presence especially important.
“If he weren’t there, I’m pretty sure it’d be worse,” said Mark Krikorian, director of the Center for Immigration Studies.
To Remake America’s Self-Image
Mr. Miller now occupies a large West Wing office and has influence on virtually every element of immigration policy, from the words the president uses to the regulations he promulgates. Mr. Miller is a speechwriter, policy architect, personnel director, legislative aide, spokesman and strategist. At every step, he has pushed for the hardest line.
When Mr. Trump wavered on his pledge to abolish protections for 800,000 so-called Dreamers — people brought illegally to the United States as children — Mr. Miller urged conservative states to threaten lawsuits. Mr. Trump then canceled the protections.
When the president later mulled a deal to restore them, Mr. Miller stacked the negotiations with people who opposed the move, leading Mr. Trump to abandon compromise and rail against immigrants from “shithole countries.”
“As long as Stephen Miller is in charge of negotiating immigration, we are going nowhere,” complained Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who supported a deal.
The Trump effort to curb immigration has played out amid so much chaos — judicial setbacks, congressional defeats, personnel purges, Twitter wars — that it can be hard to keep a running tally of its impact.
The attempt to revoke Dreamer protections has been blocked in court. An effort to bar travelers from certain predominantly Muslim countries was struck down twice. The promised border wall has not been built. A campaign to deter illegal immigration by separating thousands of children from their mothers was abandoned amid blistering criticism, including some from the right.
Still, Mr. Miller has left a big mark, in ways both obvious and obscure. After two highly publicized failures, he helped craft a travel ban that passed court muster. A fervent critic of refugee programs, he has helped cut annual admissions by about three-quarters since the end of the Obama administration.
Writing in Politico, his uncle, Dr. Glosser, expressed an “increasing horror” at his nephew’s hostility to refugees and noted that their ancestor, Wolf-Leib Glosser, arrived at Ellis Island after fleeing Russian pogroms. Had Mr. Miller’s policies prevailed then, he wrote, the Glossers probably “would have been murdered by the Nazis,” as most in their village were.
With less fanfare, Mr. Miller has guided a series of policy changes that critics liken to building an “invisible wall.” The Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan research group, counted more than 100 of them, noting that “most have moved forward untouched.”
The Trump administration quadrupled the number of work site investigations. It slowed the processing of temporary H-1B visas. It imposed new performance measures on immigration judges, to encourage faster deportations.
Though Mr. Miller was often the driving force, many of these changes were longstanding goals of the restrictionist movement. “He comes from a community of people who’ve been working on this, some of them, since the ’90s,” said Roy Beck, the president of NumbersUSA.
Beyond the commas and clauses of government rules, Mr. Miller and Mr. Trump are trying to change something deeper: America’s self-conception as a land of immigrants. Mr. Trump is the son of an immigrant. Two of the three women he married are immigrants. Four of his five children have an immigrant parent. Yet his immigration agency rewrote its mission statement to remove the phrase “nation of immigrants.”
Mr. Miller even took to the White House briefing room to offer a revisionist view of the Statue of Liberty. Like many in his movement, he argued it should not be seen as welcoming immigrants because it was originally built for a different purpose (to celebrate political freedom) and that the Emma Lazarus poem hailing the “huddled masses” carries little meaning because it was added later.
The border wars intensified this spring as large numbers of Central American families sought asylum and Mr. Trump, with Mr. Miller urging him on, purged top officials from the Homeland Security Department, including the secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen; he argued they weren’t doing enough to keep them out.
But a quieter bureaucratic story may have revealed as much about Mr. Miller’s priorities and bureaucratic skill.
After long deliberation, the administration last week released a 217-page rule making it easier to deny admission or permanent residency to low-income immigrants deemed likely to receive public benefits. Unlike the border disputes, this so-called public charge rule affects only legal immigrants, since the unauthorized are already barred from most safety-net programs.
Critics say the rule is already causing needy immigrants to forgo health care and nutritional aid. They call it a backdoor way of circumventing Congress and creating a new immigration system that admits fewer people, excludes the “huddled masses,” and favors Europeans over poorer Mexican and Central Americans.
Mr. Miller was so eager to see the rule enacted, he helped push out a one-time ally, L. Francis Cissna, the head of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, for not moving fast enough.
Mr. Krikorian of the Center for Immigration Studies argued that the rule would have only modest effects on immigrant numbers but praised Mr. Miller for asserting a principle. “The point of immigration policy is to benefit Americans,” he said, not “strain the social safety net.”
While the restrictionist movement had long taken that principle to heart, he said “Stephen understood how to operationalize it.”
Michael D. Shear contributed reporting, and Kitty Bennett contributed research. 
PHOTOS: Stephen Miller has the ear of the president on immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); Long vocal against immigration, Stephen Miller, at left above, has consolidated power over a single issue in a way that’s unusual for a presidential aide and unique in the Trump White House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES); President Ronald Reagan signing the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986, which gave nearly three million people legal status. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN, VIA GETTY IMAGES); PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN/CORBIS, VIA GETTY IMAGES) (A22); PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LUKE SHARRETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES); President Trump at the United States-Mexico border in April with the Home- land Security secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen, left, shortly before she was pushed out. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A23)
Related Articles
    • Why an Heiress Spent Her Fortune Trying to Keep Immigrants Out
    • Trump Policy Favors Wealthier Immigrants for Green Cards

Load-Date: December 14, 2019


End of Document
Texas: Deal Reached Over Claims That Company Misused Visas
The New York Times
October 29, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14; NATIONAL BRIEFING | SOUTHWEST
Length: 112 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal prosecutors in Texas have reached a civil settlement with Infosys, an Indian outsourcing company, over charges that it misused temporary visas to bring Indian technology workers to the United States, justice officials said. In an investigation started in February 2011, prosecutors have examined whether Infosys systematically used short-term visitor visas to bring software programmers and technology engineers from India to work in American companies, instead of more costly H-1B visas, deceiving immigration authorities and undercutting wages for American workers. Infosys has said it set aside $35 million for the settlement, which will be announced on Wednesday.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/29/us/texas-deal-reached-over-claims-that-company-misused-visas.html

Load-Date: October 29, 2013


End of Document
Foreigners on the Job
The New York Times
October 8, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Column 6;; Letter
Length: 146 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re "Congress Approves a Big Increase in Visas for Foreign Workers" (front page, Oct. 4):
Harris Miller, the president of a software industry group, wonders whether 195,000 new H-1B visas for high-tech workers will be enough to satisfy the demands of the industry. But he already knows the answer: there will never be enough visas, because companies will never tire of replacing American citizens and permanent residents with lower paid foreign workers.
The myth of a "programmer shortage" in this economy needs to be debunked. There are thousands of programmers who are looking for work but can't get interviews because employers assert that the applicants lack whatever new skill the employers are looking for. This is shortsighted, because any competent programmer can easily learn a new computer language if given a few weeks.
 
KEITH CRAW
Oakland, N.J., Oct. 4, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: October 8, 2000


End of Document
No Headline In Original
The New York Times
April 18, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections
Length: 96 words
Body


An article on Saturday about a lottery by immigration authorities to select applicants for 65,000 visas for highly skilled foreign workers misstated the requirements employers must meet in order to sponsor the visas, known as H-1B. For most of these visas, employers must affirm to the Labor Department that they will pay the immigrant at least the prevailing wage for the job and that hiring the immigrant would not negatively affect the labor conditions of United States workers in similar jobs. Employers do not have to show that no American workers were available for the job.

http://www.nytimes.com

Load-Date: April 18, 2007


End of Document
