
Higher Quota Urged for Immigrant Technology Workers
The New York Times
February 23, 1998, Monday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1354 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR 

By ROBERT PEAR 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 22
Body


Under pressure from Congress and the computer industry, the White House is seriously considering proposals to increase the immigration quota for computer scientists and other information technology workers, so that foreigners can fill thousands of job openings in this country.
The issue is extremely divisive. President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore want to placate friends in Silicon Valley, who say there is a critical shortage of technology workers, but they risk offending organized labor.
Under current law, employers can bring in up to 65,000 skilled foreign workers each year. The workers receive visas, known as H-1B visas, that last up to six years.
In 1997, for the first time, the Government issued the maximum number of such visas, and it expects to reach the limit again in May or June, several months before the end of the current fiscal year.
High-tech companies, which depend on foreign workers for essential services, have been lobbying the Administration to support an increase in the annual limits. They say there is an urgent need for Congress to act this year, and some lawmakers are eager to do so.
The initial, public response from the Administration was negative. In January, Commerce Secretary William M. Daley said, "This Administration does not support an increase in the caps on visas."
But confidential White House documents show that the Administration is seriously considering proposals that would increase the quota by 50 percent or more. The Administration contends that any increase should be linked to education and training and new protections for American workers.
One industry group, the Information Technology Association of America, sees "a severe shortage of competent and skilled information technology workers." It says there are 346,000 vacancies, representing 10 percent of all the jobs for computer programmers and engineers and systems analysts.
Harris N. Miller, president of the association, said, "The shortage threatens not only the information technology industry, but the growth of the entire U.S. economy, our global competitiveness and the wage stability that is the bedrock of this country's low inflation."
Senator Spencer Abraham, the Michigan Republican who heads the Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, shares this concern.
"If American companies cannot find home-grown talent and if they cannot bring talent to this country," Mr. Abraham said, "some of them will move their operations overseas, taking American jobs with them. That is why I am going to use my position to propose that we increase the number of more highly skilled temporary workers we allow into the United States."
Speaker Newt Gingrich said he too supported an increase in the quota for "people of high talent."
The Commerce Department predicts that the United States will need more than 1.3 million new information technology workers -- an average of 138,000 a year -- in the coming decade.
The openings come in the context of a tight labor market. Over all, the national unemployment rate last year, averaging 4.9 percent, was the lowest since 1973.
The options for increasing the immigration quota are described in a memorandum requested by Elena Kagan, deputy director of the Domestic Policy Council at the White House. The memorandum, prepared and approved by senior officials at the Departments of Commerce, Labor and State and the Immigration and Naturalization Service, begins by saying, "This is a very controversial issue."
Seth Harris, the Acting Assistant Secretary of Labor for Policy, said Ms. Kagan had "asked the Labor and Commerce Departments to draft a memorandum setting forth options with respect to the proposal to increase the cap on H-1B visas."
White House documents show that the Commerce Department, the State Department and the immigration service favor an option that would set the quota for skilled foreign workers at 80,000 to 100,000 a year. Information technology and other industries with shortages of skilled workers would have priority in getting the extra visas, above the current 65,000.
At present, employers seeking H-1B visas do not have to show a shortage of American workers, nor do they have to show that they tried to recruit Americans for the jobs.
The Labor Department would prefer to keep the cap at its current level, but might give priority within the quota to industries that have shortages of skilled workers, the documents say. Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, the ranking Democrat on the immigration subcommittee, favors this approach.
Technology companies say that, while they support more education and training for Americans, they need skilled labor immediately and therefore want to bring in additional foreign workers.
Administration officials said they would prod Congress to adopt new protections for American workers as lawmakers consider raising the quota for foreign workers. The President's proposals would require employers to recruit Americans before importing foreign labor, would ban the use of foreign workers to replace laid-off Americans and would reduce the maximum stay for H-1B workers to three years, from six.
The memorandum to Ms. Kagan notes that "critics of raising the H-1B cap, such as the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the Institute for Electrical and Electronic Engineers and the American Engineering Association, say industry drastically overstates any problem."
Hal Ponder, a lawyer with the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s department for professional employees, said organized labor opposed increasing the quota until there was more careful study of the problem.
"We question whether there is a shortage of information technology workers," Mr. Ponder said in an interview. "If there is a shortage, there are skilled workers in the United States who could meet that need."
Norman S. Matloff, a professor of computer science at the University of California at Davis, said that many technology companies were seeking cheap labor. As a result, he said, they prefer to hire recent graduates and foreign workers and often discriminate against American computer programmers over the age of 40, who are perceived as requiring higher salaries.
"Foreign nationals are willing to take lower salaries in exchange for the prospect of becoming permanent residents of the United States," Mr. Matloff said. "Even though they often earn less than U.S. citizens with comparable jobs, they still receive more than they would be paid back home in India or Russia."
The memorandum to the White House from the Departments of Labor, Commerce and State says: "The H-1B program seldom operates as a temporary worker program with workers coming to this country for a short duration and then returning to their homes. Instead, it operates often as a probationary employment program. Employers bring workers to the United States and, if they perform well, sponsor them for permanent admission to this country. This linkage permits employers to hire foreign workers without first recruiting U.S. workers."
Under this arrangement, the memorandum says, "U.S. workers are never provided a genuine opportunity to compete for these jobs."
Stephen H. Leven, director of human resources at Texas Instruments, said that most of the people hired by his company on H-1B visas were foreign citizens who graduated from American universities with degrees in electrical engineering.
"Employers expect to hit the H-1B ceiling as early as May this year," Mr. Leven said. "Once the cap is reached, companies will be unable to hire additional foreign workers until the new fiscal year begins in October. That will be devastating to U.S. companies seeking to bring new products to market."
In their memorandum to the White House, Administration officials said the industry's conclusion about a dire shortage of skilled technology workers was "not entirely accurate." While there seem to be shortages of technology workers in selected occupations and some local areas, the memorandum says, "wage data do not suggest acute skill shortages nationwide."
By contrast, the Information Technology Association of America says, "Our industry is facing a national labor shortage of historic proportions."      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (89%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (89%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); SHORTAGES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ESSENTIAL BUSINESSES & WORKERS (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LOBBYING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (77%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (73%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); INFLATION (66%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (61%)

Company: WHITE HOUSE  (85%);  US DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  (76%)

Organization: WHITE HOUSE  (85%);  US DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  (76%); WHITE HOUSE  (85%);  US DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE  (76%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (90%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (62%)

Person: AL GORE (58%); BILL CLINTON (58%); NEWT GINGRICH (58%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: February 23, 1998


End of Document
Foreign Affairs;
Help Wanted
The New York Times
April 14, 1998, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 19; Column 5; Editorial Desk ; Column 5; ; Op-Ed
Length: 727 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 

By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN 
Dateline: PALO ALTO, Calif.
Body


T. J. Rodgers, founder of Cypress Semiconductor, is angry, and he is not a man to hide his feelings. An entire wall of his office is proudly decorated with framed lawsuits filed against his company by rivals. Today what Mr. Rodgers is angry about is immigration -- the lack of it.
Silicon Valley has a huge shortage of computer engineers, and each year it makes up for that shortage by trying to cream off the best brains from around the world and bring them here. But the Clinton-Gore team, caving in to organized labor, has been trying to limit their entry, even though there are not enough Americans to fill these high-tech jobs.
"For every foreign engineer you let me bring into this country and put to work at Cypress, I will guarantee you five new jobs locally to manufacture a microchip, sell the chip, ship the chip, market the chip and administrate the chip," says Mr. Rodgers. "Do I want to take away jobs from Americans? Heck no. If I could hire all the engineers I need locally, I'd love to do it. But I can't. They're just not here. So if we don't bring them here, they will still be engineers in their home countries, only instead of working for us they will be working for Hitachi or Samsung, and they will compete with us from overseas and take away our wealth."
The facts: Since 1990, there has been a cap of 65,000 H-1B visas per fiscal year (Oct. 1 to Sept. 30) for foreigners coming into America for high-tech and other specialty jobs. In 1997, the 65,000 cap was reached a month before the end of the fiscal year, and this year the cap will be reached in May, so there will be a huge shortage. Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan, the grandson of Lebanese immigrants, has sponsored a bill, the American Competitiveness Act, that would lift the cap to 95,000, but also increase spending on high-tech education for low-income students in America. It's a good bill, and it just passed the Judiciary Committee by 12 to 6, despite Administration opposition.
The crazy thing is that a computer engineer working in India makes $6,000 a year, and one in Silicon Valley makes $60,000 a year. So this is a case of American business not wanting to move high-paying U.S. jobs to lower-paying countries, but just the opposite. This is because in the high-tech business there is a real advantage to having your knowledge team together in one place -- and right now the place that is the core of this knowledge industry is America. But if U.S. companies are told to put up "No Vacancy" signs, they are inevitably going to move more knowledge operations overseas, and that will spur more innovation, wealth creation and jobs over there. The idea that we would educate all these foreign computer engineers in U.S. universities and then send them home to compete with us is nuts.
Personally, I favor a very liberal approach to all legal immigration and refugee asylum. Any Haitian who has the guts and energy to build a boat from milk cartons and sail to our shores is someone I'd never turn back. But in the case of high-tech workers, it's so obvious that they are the key to the future. One only hopes the Senate will ignore the Administration and approve the increase.
"Look," says Mr. Rodgers, "the winners and losers in the information age will be differentiated by brain power. But we have Senators, like Ted Kennedy, who don't see that. They want to send back the first-round draft choices of the intellectual world so that they can compete against us in their homelands. Four out of my ten vice presidents are immigrants. Some 35 percent of my engineers are immigrants. My V.P. of research -- the guy who designs my most advanced chips -- is from Cuba."
Would you like the jobs in your country depending on only the engineers your country could produce, or would you like to have access to the top 10 percent of all engineers in the world? We are the only country that really has that access today. Japan, Switzerland, Germany -- they have no tradition of immigration, and that will be a huge disadvantage.
"It takes 2 percent of Americans to feed us all, and 5 percent to make everything we need," notes Mr. Rodgers. "Everything else will be service and information technology, and in that world humans and brains will be the key variable. Any country that would limit its brain power to a single select group from that country alone is going to self-destruct."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: EMOTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); ENGINEERING (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); LABOR SHORTAGES (77%); SHORTAGES (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (76%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (75%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (60%); LABOR UNIONS (55%); GRANDCHILDREN (50%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (50%)

Company: AMERICAN BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY  (51%);  AMERICAN BUSINESS ADVERTISING  (51%);  AMERICAN BUSINESS MACHINES  (51%); AMERICAN BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY  (51%);  AMERICAN BUSINESS ADVERTISING  (51%);  AMERICAN BUSINESS MACHINES  (51%)

Ticker: CY (NYSE)  (57%)

Industry: COMPUTER CHIPS (90%); SEMICONDUCTOR MFG (90%); SEMICONDUCTORS (90%); ENGINEERING (89%); COMPUTER & ELECTRONICS MFG (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); MICROPROCESSORS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (76%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%)

Person: BILL CLINTON (58%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 14, 1998


End of Document
Accord Would Increase Cap on Visas for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
July 25, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1008 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR 

By ROBERT PEAR 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 24
Body


House and Senate Republican leaders reached agreement today on a bill to increase the number of foreign computer programmers, engineers and other skilled workers who can be admitted to the United States to fill job openings at high-technology companies.
Under the agreement, the annual limit on the number of visas for such workers, now 65,000, would rise to 115,000 over three years, an increase of 77 percent.
High-tech companies and their chief executives, including William H. Gates of the Microsoft Corporation, have lobbied heavily for an increase in the quota, saying that their industry suffers from shortages of qualified employees and that they desperately need skilled foreign workers to help develop new products.
"This is a big victory for those who care about the critical high-tech sector of our economy," said Senator Spencer Abraham, the Michigan Republican who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration. "There is probably no more important legislation that Congress will pass this year to create jobs and continue the enormous growth of the high-tech and computer industries."
The Republican-led Senate passed a similar bill in May by a vote of 78 to 20, with support from many Democrats, including their floor leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota. But the legislation bogged down in the House, prompting Speaker Newt Gingrich and other Republican leaders, from both chambers, to meet this week and help work out a compromise.
Senator Abraham said the situation was urgent. The 1998 cap on the visas for the skilled workers was reached on May 7, he said, and since then "no company, university or nonprofit organization in America has been able to hire these highly skilled professionals" from abroad.
Mr. Abraham said he expected the Senate and the House to approve the compromise before lawmakers leave town for their summer recess early next month.
Representative Lamar Smith, the Texas Republican who heads the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, had expressed skepticism that there were labor shortages in the computer industry. But today he said, "This agreement is good for business, good for workers, good for America."
President Clinton had threatened to veto the bill if it did not do enough to protect American workers. But Administration officials said they welcomed changes reflected in the compromise bill, which was written in part to address the President's concerns.
"There has clearly been some progress in our direction," said Gene Sperling, assistant to the President for economic policy, "but it's unclear at this point whether things have improved enough for us to support it. We need to see the details."
The compromise legislation would require a company to certify, before hiring a foreign worker, that it had tried to recruit an American worker for the opening and that it had not laid off an American to hire the foreigner. Congressional aides said this requirement would not apply to big companies like Microsoft or Sun Microsystems Inc., where foreign workers perform important jobs but account for a small proportion of the work force.
Aides to Senator Abraham said the agreement also included his proposal to provide training for unemployed American workers and college scholarships for low-income students, so that they could pursue careers in high-tech industries. The training and scholarships would be financed with fees to be collected from employers who use the foreign-worker program, but the amount has not been determined.
Whether there is in fact a shortage of high-tech workers is a hotly debated question. An industry group, the Information Technology Association of America, says there are 346,000 openings, amounting to 10 percent of all American jobs for computer programmers, engineers and systems analysts.
But the Labor Department, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and several groups representing American engineers say the high-tech industry, trying to hold down its labor costs by hiring from abroad, has overstated the problem.
India provides by far the largest number of skilled foreign workers under the special-visa program. Its citizens received 44 percent of the visas, known as H-1B visas, issued in the first half of the current fiscal year.
The next largest share went to China, with 9 percent, Britain (5 percent) and the Philippines and Canada (3 percent each). Japan, Germany, Pakistan and France each received 2 percent of the visas, with other countries getting 28 percent.
One person who may be affected by the legislation is Valenita Videva, 26, from Macedonia. She came to the United States in 1995 on a student visa and studied mechanical engineering at Norwich University in Vermont. She graduated at the top of her class and was hired by Texas Instruments Inc. after gaining a one-year work authorization from the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
But the authorization expired on June 1, leaving Ms. Videva unable to work and unsure whether she could stay in the country.
"I applied for an H-1B visa two months before my work permit was to expire," Ms. Videva said in a telephone interview from the Texas Instruments office in Attleboro, Mass. "I was told that the quota was reached for this year. Until today it was so deadlocked, I started losing hope. It meant that I would have packed my things and told my landlord I was going home, and that's not something I wanted to do."
The agreement would provide 20,000 additional visas this year, for a 1998 total of 85,000. It would raise the annual limit to 95,000 next year, 105,000 in 2000 and 115,000 in 2001.
Representative Ron Klink, a Democrat from a Pennsylvania district that has lost tens of thousands of manufacturing jobs in the last 20 years, criticized the agreement.
"This is a shame," Mr. Klink said. "This is a loophole for big companies to hire cheap indentured labor. It's a huge loss to American workers, especially young people who have made their educational decisions based on an expectation of jobs when they get out of school. Instead, these companies will be hiring cheaper foreigners."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); AGREEMENTS (89%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); APPROVALS (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); JOB CREATION (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); VETO (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); SHORTAGES (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ECONOMIC NEWS (68%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (66%)

Company: MICROSOFT CORP  (71%); MICROSOFT CORP  (71%);    SENATE JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE  (81%)

Organization: SENATE JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE  (81%); SENATE JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE  (81%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ)  (71%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS  (71%);  SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE  (71%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (78%)

Person: BILL GATES (79%); BILL CLINTON (58%); LAMAR SMITH (58%); NEWT GINGRICH (58%); TOM DASCHLE (58%)

Geographic: TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: July 25, 1998


End of Document
The Streets Are Paved With PC's;
Wall Street and Silicon Alley Lure a New Breed of High-Tech Immigrants
The New York Times
August 16, 1998, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: The City Weekly Desk 
Section: Section 14; ; Section 14; Page 1; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 3356 words
Byline: By EDWARD WONG 

By EDWARD WONG 
Body


SOON after arriving in New York, Marjon Rivera fell into his morning routine. On weekdays, shortly before 7 A.M., he stops at a small chapel on the corner of Pine and William Streets, in the heart of the financial district.  Burnished light falls through stained-glass windows. About a dozen other Wall Street workers, dressed like Mr. Rivera in suits and ties, sit or stand facing the altar. Mr. Rivera, 27, raised Roman Catholic in the Philippines, often stands at the rear of the silent nave. When he's not in a rush, he kneels in the front row. The prayers he whispers rarely vary.
"I start thanking the Lord for the previous day and the new day," he says softly. "I pray that I don't mess up at work. I pray to Him to take care of my family. And I pray for safe travel."
When Mr. Rivera, a computer technician, boarded a plane last April for the trip that would take him from the tropical streets of Manila to the headquarters of J. P. Morgan at 60 Wall Street, it seemed that earlier prayers had been heard. For years, he had longed to work abroad. Wall Street in particular held a mythical allure.
"I don't know why I wanted to work here so bad, but it's a status symbol if you work overseas," said Mr. Rivera, whose parents once worked in Saudi Arabia. "It's kind of sick, but that's the way it is."
So when he learned that computer consulting companies were recruiting high-tech workers from the Philippines, he jumped at the chance. He sent out 10 resumes and received an offer from a New York company that he declined to identify but that he said promised to provide him with a visa under the controversial H-1B program for highly skilled foreign workers, which has drawn criticism from American labor. The offer also promised Mr. Rivera an assignment with Computer Sciences Corporation, which helps maintain J. P. Morgan's computer networks. It meant leaving behind, at least for a time, family, friends, even his fiancee, Raquel Vasquez, who works at a bank in Manila.
In return, he would make $50,000 -- more than four times his salary in the Philippines -- with the promise of a raise within a year. He would be able to apply for a green card for himself, which carries permanent resident status, and visas for his family and for Ms. Vasquez. And there was the prestige. "Back home, if you're a 'techie guy' and you're working overseas, that means you're good," he said, with just a hint of swagger.
Mr. Rivera is one of thousands of foreign workers who have arrived in New York in the last three years, most carrying H-1B visas, in response to a huge growth in financial services companies and their increasing reliance on information technology. Many work as highly paid computer consultants, a far cry from the blue-collar jobs that newly arrived immigrants in New York have traditionally filled. For the most part, they are young, single and male. They often hold the equivalent of a bachelor's or master's degree from their home countries. Their tools are laptops and the latest software, and they consider languages like Visual Basic, Cobol and C++ as useful as English, which some speak with less of an accent than most native New Yorkers.
The city, particularly Wall Street and Silicon Alley, has emerged as a lucrative destination for these tech-savvy immigrants. A recent Internet survey by Janet Ruhl, a former consultant from Massachusetts and the author of "The Computer Consultant's Guide" (John Wiley & Sons, 1997), found that the median pay rate for freelance consultants in New York was $80 per hour, the highest in the country.
"There's quite a bit of change on Wall Street," said Byron Yu, 49, founder of Novax Group, a Manhattan computer consulting firm. "It has always been a United Nations there, but now it is even more so."
One of the most palpable signs of the new immigrant presence is the boom in ethnic restaurants in the financial district. In 1994, Inder Jeet opened Tandoor Palace, an Indian takeout counter, on Fulton Street. It did not take long, he said, for six other South Asian restaurateurs to follow his lead. Within two years, he rented the space next door to Tandoor Palace, adding 45 seats and creating a Punjabi-flavored dining hall. "Our people have come," he said. "Business has increased a lot."
Immigration and Naturalization Service statistics show that the largest group of immigrant consultants nationwide comes from India, which has a booming high-tech industry of its own. Many others come from China, Russia, Israel, Pakistan and the Philippines.
The foreign workers "have exceptionally strong technical skills, especially in areas of high demand in this country," said Ravi Swamy, a partner in Informatic Systems, a consulting company that has its headquarters in the Empire State Building and recruiting offices in Bombay, Dubai and Singapore. "They usually have a responsibility to support parents, sisters and brothers back home, and it makes them work harder."
Every month, Mr. Rivera sends $500 to his parents and two sisters. Since the Philippine peso has plummeted during the Asian financial crisis, he said, those payments go a long way toward meeting his parents' daily expenses and his younger sister's medical school tuition. He and Ms. Vasquez talk two or three times a week, and Mr. Rivera's phone bill often tops $150 a month. He is also saving for their wedding, planned for October in Manila. Meanwhile, halfway around the world, he takes some comfort in being able to buy Frank Sinatra CD's, dress shirts and, last March, a silver Mitsubishi Mirage.
"The first six months were really tough," he said. "The thing that would make us happy is if we get good pay. That pretty much takes care of the loneliness."
 
The American Dollar As a Second Language
The new immigrants usually sign on as freelance contractors with computer consulting firms, also called brokers. Some were started by other immigrants who once worked as consultants. The brokers bill companies like Merrill Lynch, Chase Manhattan Bank and AT&T an average hourly rate of about $110 per consultant for short-term projects, Ms. Ruhl said, and keep 20 to 30 percent of that.
Occasionally the corporations themselves will hire the immigrant "techies" directly as full-time in-house consultants. Those jobs pay an average of $70,000 a year, according to the Information Technology Association of America, well above the average full-time salary of $46,000 for all jobs in New York, according to the State Department of Labor.
"For a foreign student like myself, or immigrants who don't speak English as a first language or who were brought up in a different culture, you can really survive in a technical field," said Cheiko Ohashi, 25, who arrived in New York from Tokyo six years ago and works as a Web site administrator at Chase Manhattan in downtown Brooklyn. "This field gives us hope for reaching a higher stage in our career."
Ms. Ohashi, who studied computer science at Mercy College in Westchester County, signed on with Mr. Yu's company, Novax Group, last December. Her hobby, she said, is reading computer manuals.
Like many immigrant consultants, Ms. Ohashi is also studying the risks and rewards of opening her own business. She said she hoped to start her own commercial Web site.
"The fact that they're here, they're already taking a big risk," said Harvi Sachar, publisher of Silicon India, a monthly magazine run from Broad Street that covers high-tech Indian expatriates. "Starting their own company is only one more risk to take to try and make it big."
For Ms. Ohashi, making it on her own may happen in Japan. "Computer skills are something that's universally wanted," she said. "If the consultants decide they're going back to their homeland, there's a great chance of opening their own businesses."
 
A Middle-Class Life Among Those Who Toil
Last March, Yichuan Li said, he moved from his basement apartment in Woodside, Queens, where he had lived for three years, to a Flushing studio so that he could be in the middle of a thriving Asian community. His new neighborhood held the promise of familiar food and language, of customs shared. But Mr. Li, 26, who came to the United States from Xiamen, China, in 1993, is aware that his life style differs from that of most of his neighbors, who toil long hours for little pay in restaurants and other service jobs.
Mr. Li's $90,000-a-year salary as a high-tech consultant, meanwhile, allows him to eat nearly every meal out. When he's not working out at Bally's Total Fitness in midtown, he gets his exercise by practicing golf swings at a driving range near his home.
"Our cultural backgrounds are similar, but the way I live is different," he said of his neighbors. "I'm lucky enough to get such a good job. I can go do sports a lot. I'm interested in a lot of community events. But those people in my neighborhood, they feel it wastes their time."
Like other foreign high-tech workers with high salaries, Mr. Li has been freed from the constant hustle that many first-generation immigrants face. As an office worker in Xiamen, he earned the equivalent of $40 per month. Now he has joined the class of upwardly mobile foreign workers who can afford to buy new cars, play the stock market and go bar hopping.
"They're exposed to a whole cultural set and media set of images," said Arjun Appadurai, a professor at the University of Chicago who studies transnationalism. "A single way to phrase that is the 'MTV world.' There's a whole set of beliefs about products, about images, about life style."
But even though Mr. Li's salary allows him a middle-class life, he said he had trouble adapting to a mainstream American workplace. He once tried his hand selling Bibles door to door and computers at a retailer. He entered the consulting field in 1996 when, like Ms. Ohashi, he signed on with Novax Group, which gave him an H-1B visa and hired him as a systems engineer.  "Novax is owned by a Taiwanese man, so they have more Asians than other places," Mr. Li said. "And it was a technology company, so people were easier to hang out with."
But looking to work for a larger company, he joined another Manhattan broker, Mediaserv, last September, and was assigned to help develop a new E-mail system for NBC. Suddenly thrust into the broadcasting giant's corporate culture at Rockefeller Center, Mr. Li said he found it "kind of difficult to get used to such an environment." Language and popular culture were the biggest barriers. Mr. Li rarely laughed at jokes made by his American colleagues. He didn't recognize the names of pop singers dropped in conversation. ("I can't even remember them today," he said with a laugh.) Every day, he walked past framed posters of cast members of "Seinfeld" and "E.R." without knowing who they were.
"Some of the topics people talked about around here, I didn't have a clue about them," he said. "Most of the time, I just listened."
It is a predicament that Xu Cheng, 34, who has worked as a consultant for Wall Street firms since 1993, understands well. "For Chinese, I think a big problem is language," said Mr. Cheng, who arrived in the United States in 1989 to pursue a Ph.D. at the New Jersey Institute of Technology, but eventually dropped out to pursue the big money of consulting. "A lot of people come here on student visas. They can have some buffer time. When you first come, you feel you can't adapt to this society. If you go to work directly, the first thing you have to do is produce something."
Mr. Li's buffer time was spent getting a master's degree at Indiana University of Pennsylvania and then studying computers at Baruch College downtown. Several months after he started at NBC, he said, he began to feel more at home among his colleagues. Although his closest friends tend to be computer consultants from China, he said he now felt "very comfortable" on the job. Last December, he was promoted to lead Mediaserv's E-mail project team there. He has begun working on the side, providing technical training for employees of different companies. And he even watched the final episode of "Seinfeld."
"People from my team, they don't treat me differently," he said. "I've demonstrated my skills, my abilities."
An American colleague of Mr. Li, Richard Ameye, who works as a computer technician for NBC, said that he has witnessed the recent influx of foreign high-tech workers and that he has seen little animosity toward them. "In computers in general, you have a lot of people coming from overseas," he said. "That's not an issue. With computers, you end up talking the same language anyway."
 
For an Entrepreneur, Opportunities Unbounded
When Kamal Singh thinks back to his boarding school days in the Punjab, in India, he remembers one thing above all else. In each classroom, Mr. Singh said, the teacher lectured from a podium. And nailed to each podium was a wooden plaque inscribed with a saying from a former Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru: "Success often comes to those who dare and act. It seldom goes to the timid."
"I get goose bumps just thinking about it," said Mr. Singh, 33, leaning over a conference table at Maestro Technologies, the consulting company he owns on Broad Street in the financial district. "It has really stayed with me."
For Mr. Singh, who dresses in crisp Oxford shirts and exudes energy, starting his own business was the apotheosis of his military-style upbringing as a Sikh. Not only did he memorize the sayings of Nehru, he said, but also ran obstacle courses on weekends and learned the meaning of "duty, discipline and education."
"We were taught what you need to run a business from sixth or seventh grade," he said. He came to the United States in 1987 and received his master's degree from SUNY-Buffalo before settling in New York City.
"It was a very exciting concept for me to come here and be something," he said of opportunities in America. "The freedom people have here, it amazes me."
In striking out on his own, Mr. Singh has also realized the goal of entrepreneurship that many immigrant consultants dream of. He said the move came after he got "fed up" with his former employer, Sharp Decisions, on Park Avenue. From 1993 until last year, he said, he was assigned to Computer Sciences Corporation, the same company as Mr. Rivera. For the first two years, he said, Sharp kept an average of 30 percent of the $90 an hour it billed Computer Sciences for his services, a cut that Mr. Singh said was much too high.
"I was being exploited," he said. "Then late last year, I decided enough is enough."
The founder of Sharp Decisions, Michael Baer, said the 30 percent cut was fair. "Kamal is quite an entrepreneur in spirit," Mr. Baer said. "We knew he would not be happy until he was his own boss. He is not the typical personality."
In 1993, Mr. Singh started as a side business Maestro Technologies, one of New York's first Internet service providers. He remembers squeezing computer units, monitors and cables into a room the size of a walk-in closet on the top floor of a ramshackle building at 29 John Street. When problems cropped up, he would drive in at night from his apartment in Rego Park, Queens, step past homeless people sleeping in the doorway and ride the rickety elevator to the office.
When he quit Sharp Decisions last December, he said, it seemed natural to contract his consulting services directly through Maestro. Since January, he has hired five more consultants: two United States citizens, two Indians and one Russian. Three of the four employees on Maestro's Internet side are also foreign. Mr. Singh said he valued a multi-ethnic workplace, where everyone sometimes sat around the austere offices and shared a lunch of Indian takeout from Tandoor Palace nearby.
"I hate it when I hear people refer to New York cabbies as mostly Indians or Pakistanis or whatever," he said. "That's a generalization."
Companies like Maestro "understand the needs of foreign workers," said Jacqueline Miao, 20, a Brooklyn College student from Malaysia who works as a Web designer for Mr. Singh. "Everyone here is a foreigner in a way."
On a recent afternoon, Mr. Singh watched over Ms. Miao's shoulder as she tooled around with a new home page design. Then he walked to the desk of Sonia Kaur, 24, from New Delhi, picked up resumes of several prospective consultants he planned to interview and stopped at the desk of his brother-in-law Rajiv Lekhi, 30, to talk about plans for the company's Internet service.
His tasks completed, Mr. Singh paused at the door to his office and stared out at the computers and workers scattered across the room. "It's a revolution we're going through," he said, "and we are part of the revolution."
 
A Way to Get the 'Best and Brightest' -- or Just the Cheapest?
IN 1990, Congress established the H-1B visa program with the intent, as John Fraser, a Labor Department administrator, explained last week, of attracting the world's "best and the brightest" to domestic industries that needed temporary access to highly skilled workers. (A provision even allows fashion models of "distinguished merit or ability" to apply.)
A worker with an H-1B visa can stay in the United States for up to six years, although many hope to land with an employer who will sponsor them for a green card, which grants permanent residency.
Since its inception, the H-1B program has continued to draw heated criticism from labor unions and managers who contend that it simply allows companies to hire foreign workers at low wages rather than retrain domestic employees.
"We do believe there's a lot of undercutting of American workers," said the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s department for professional employees, Jack Golodner.
At issue is whether there are enough qualified domestic workers to fill what the Labor Department estimates will be 1.3 million computer industry job openings through 2006. Computer-related H-1B applications received by the department more than doubled from 1995 to 1997, from approximately 80,000 to 177,000.
The number of H-1B visas given out during those years also grew. In 1997, 65,000 such visas were dispensed by Sept. 1, the first time the annual cap set by Congress was reached. When the cap was reached this year in mid-May, high-tech companies stepped up lobbying efforts to raise it.
"The information technology industry already faces a tremendous shortfall of workers," said Harris Miller, president of the Information Technology Association of America, a Washington-based trade group.
But the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and other groups cite a 1996 Labor Department study that found widespread abuse of the H-1B visa program. The study concluded that the program did not necessarily bring in the "best and brightest" from other countries. The department also found that about 19 percent of visa holders were not being paid wages to which they were legally entitled. No companies or individuals were identified.
In 1994, American International Group, a Fortune 500 insurance company with headquarters in the financial district, laid off about 250 domestic computer technicians. Company officials described it at the time as a positive financial move, but some workers said it was done to allow American International to contract out its computer work to a Michigan company, Syntel, which uses mainly Indian workers who earn less than the laid-off technicians. In 1997, Syntel was among the companies that had the highest number of H-1B visas granted by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
"I have never had such a feeling of fear in the gut of my stomach," said a programming analyst, Linda Kilcrease, 51, who lost her job and went on to campaign to revise the H-1B program and keep the 65,000-visa cap.
Late last month, Republican leaders in Congress shelved a compromise bill that would have gradually raised the cap to allow 115,000 workers to enter the United State annually by 2001. The move came after the White House issued a veto threat saying that the bill did not adequately protect domestic workers.
For now, foreigners with an offer from a United States company but no H-1B visa will have to wait until at least October, the start of the next fiscal year, before any more such visas will be granted.   EDWARD WONG

Graphic

 
Photos: Working overseas is "a status symbol," says Marjon Rivera, center, of Manila. Cheiko Ohashi, from Tokyo, hopes to start her own business, a move that Harvi Sachar calls "only one more risk" for a highly skilled immigrant. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times); (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times); (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)(pg. 1); For Chinese, "a big problem is language," says Xu Cheng, a Wall Street consultant since '93. He advises buffer time between an immigrant's arrival and first high-tech job. (Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times); "Everyone here is a foreigner in a way," says Jacqueline Miao, of Malaysia, who is studying at Brooklyn College and working as a Web designer. (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times); When he joined the team developing a new E-mail system for NBC, Yichuan Li "didn't have a clue" when his colleagues cracked jokes or talked about pop singers. (David Corio for The New York Times); In India, Kamal Singh was "taught what you need to run a business from sixth or seventh grade." Today, he owns an Internet service and computer consulting provider. (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times); "It has always been a United Nations" on Wall Street," says Byron Yu, founder of a Manhattan computer consulting firm. "But now it is even more so." (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times); Linda Kilcrease lost her job as a programming analyst with American International Group and went on to campaign to revise the H-1B program. (Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times)(pg. 10); Immigrant workers, says Ravi Swamy, "usually have a responsibility to support parents, sisters and brothers back home." (David Corio for The New York Times)(pg. 11)
 
Chart: "High-Tech Help Wanted"
Drawn by the promise of high pay, foreigners are applying in droves for jobs as computer consultants in the United States.
 
The five areas with the highest median pay for computer consultants.
 
New York City: $80/hour
San Francisco/Silicon Valley: $75/hour
Boston: $70/hour
Chicago: $68/hour
Seattle: $60/hour
 
Applications for visas for computer-related jobs filed under the H-1B program for highly skilled foreign workers, and the percentage of all the applications in that program that are computer-related.
 
1995: 79,900 -- 25.6%
1996: 102,400 -- 41.5%
1997: 177,000 -- 44.4%
 
(Sources: Real Rate Survey (www.realrates.com), U.S. Department of Labor)(pg. 1)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (76%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); RELIGION (71%); WAGES & SALARIES (71%)

Company: COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP  (82%); COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP  (82%);    UNITED NATIONS   (59%);  US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR   (59%);  US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR  (59%);  UNITED NATIONS  (59%)

Organization: UNITED NATIONS   (59%);  US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR   (59%);  US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR  (59%);  UNITED NATIONS  (59%); UNITED NATIONS   (59%);  US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR   (59%);  US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR  (59%);  UNITED NATIONS  (59%)

Ticker: CSC (NYSE)  (82%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES  (82%);  NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES  (82%);  SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN  (82%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (72%)

Geographic: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (92%); NEW YORK, USA (93%); PHILIPPINES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

Load-Date: August 16, 1998


End of Document
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Bill to Bring Technology Workers to U.S. Dies
The New York Times
October 10, 1998, Saturday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section C; ; Section C; Page 2; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 314 words
Byline: Reuters 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9
Body


A bill that would have increased the number of United States visas granted to foreign high-technology workers died in the Senate today, with backers of the bill warning its demise could have dire consequences as the computer industry tries to deal with the year 2000 millennium bug.
Both the House and the Senate had passed earlier versions of the bill, and a compromise with the White House had been worked out last month. But a small number of senators were able to block a vote on the bill late today, killing any chance of its passage this year.
Under current law, 65,000 H-1B visas are granted annually to noncitizen computer programmers and other highly skilled professionals to work in the United States for up to six years. The bill would have nearly doubled that, to 115,000, for the next two years and, to 107,500, in the third year. After that, the level would drop back to 65,000.
The bill's chief Senate sponsor, Spencer Abraham, a Republican from Michigan, said the decision could hurt the high-technology industry and academic institutions.
"This is a severe problem and it is especially severe at this time," said Senator Abraham, noting that the industry is trying to resolve the millennium bug, which may cause some computer systems to fail if internal clocks do not recognize the year 2000.
Tom Harkin, a Democrat from Iowa who opposed the bill, said he did not think there was a shortage of high-technology American workers now, but he was willing to take another look at the issue next year.
"Right now it does not appear that the demand is there that they have anticipated," Senator Harkin said.
Senator Abraham disagreed, saying the United States cannot fill the 130,000 new information jobs a year without importing foreign workers.
High-technology companies had lobbied to increase the cap on foreign workers, but some lawmakers with ties to organized labor opposed it.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (73%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (70%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); YEAR 2000 PROBLEM (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (73%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (73%)

Person: TOM HARKIN (78%)

Geographic: IOWA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: October 10, 1998


End of Document
THE BUDGET DEAL: IMMIGRATION;
Agency Gains in Deal; Haitians Do So, Too
The New York Times
October 16, 1998, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 25; Column 2; National Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 712 words
Byline: By MIRTA OJITO 

By MIRTA OJITO 
Body


In a significant shift of United States policy toward immigrants, Congressional Republicans and the White House agreed yesterday on a budget proposal that could benefit thousands of immigrants and the Federal agency that serves them.
The agreement lets about 49,000 Haitian refugees stay in the United States legally, increases the number of specialized foreign workers allowed in the country and earmarks $171 million for the Immigration and Naturalization Service to reduce its backlog of citizenship applications (About 1.9 million people are waiting to become citizens).
The deal, which would have seemed impossible two years ago with Congress's anti-immigrant mood, was the result of new Senate leadership, bipartisan alliances, heavy lobbying from advocacy groups, a coincidence of agendas among the Congressional Black Caucus and Republican senators, as well as White House pressure.
But negotiations that led to the agreement were not smooth. Practically all immigration issues were hotly contested until the end, including the amount of money earmarked for citizenship efforts.
In addition, the House did not accept a measure to grant Haitians the right to apply for residency status until the conference committees met to produce a compromise earlier this month.
And the wrangling over the visas for specialized high-tech workers drew the threat of a veto from a White House concerned that there were not proper protections for American workers.
"It was tough going all the way," said Maria Echaveste, deputy chief of staff to the President and one of the main advisers to White House negotiators on immigration.
Ms. Echaveste said Congress had "overreached" when it voted for measures in 1996 that restricted immigration and affected the lives of legal residents. The current agreement, she said, would impart some balance to those laws.
None of the measures directly reverses any of the immigration laws of 1996, but they represent the first good news that immigrants and their advocates have received in a long time. Some advocates said the agreement is telling because it reflects that both Democrats and Republicans are eager to please immigrants, hoping to earn their trust and, eventually, their votes.
"It's a rare day indeed," said Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum. "It's a new day when immigrants are viewed not as easy targets, but as a powerful new constituency."
Advocates for immigrants are particularly pleased that Haitian refugees who have been in this country since 1995 can stay permanently. They will receive the same benefits that were granted last year to about 150,000 Nicaraguans and about 5,000 Cubans, who, like Haitians, came to the United States to escape political turmoil.
Black Congressional leaders complained that leaving Haitians out of the bill amounted to racial discrimination, and Florida's Senators, Connie Mack, a Republican, and Bob Graham, a Democrat, introduced the Haitian Refugees Immigration Fairness Act. Most Haitians who will benefit from the bill live in South Florida. Neither Senator was available for comment yesterday, but aides called the agreement a victory.
Negotiators from the White House and Congress also agreed to a 30-month delay to implement a law that, as of today, would have forced border patrol officers to track every person entering and leaving the United States from Mexico and Canada.
The measure would have caused border delays of up to 24 hours that would have hurt businesses and cost millions of dollars in delayed or lost trade, critics said.
Several immigration initiatives were dropped from the final bill. As a result, the immigration service will remain one agency and American farmers will not be allowed to bring in tens of thousand of foreigners to work in the fields.
But the deal struck yesterday does allow the immigration agency to nearly double the number of employment visas available for skilled foreign workers, a measure that was sought by high-tech industries and introduced in Congress by Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan.
There are 65,000 of the so-called H1B visas available for skilled foreign workers; the bill increases the number to 115,000 for the next two years and sets the number at 107,500 in the third year.
   MIRTA OJITO
      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); CITIZENSHIP (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); AGREEMENTS (90%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (90%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); REFUGEES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CAUCUSES (78%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); NEGATIVE POLITICAL NEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); VETO (78%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (76%); EXECUTIVES (74%); POLITICS (74%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (73%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (71%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (70%)

Company: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (83%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (83%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (83%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (83%); IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (83%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (83%)

Industry: GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (90%); BUDGETS (89%); BUDGET PLANNING & MANAGEMENT (78%); BUDGET PROPOSALS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Person: CONNIE MACK (58%)

Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (92%); HAITI (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: October 16, 1998


End of Document
Workers Are Trapped In Limbo By I.N.S.
The New York Times
February 29, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 908 words
Byline: By SARA ROBINSON 

By SARA ROBINSON 
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO, Feb. 27
Body


Like thousands of other professionals, Nick Saw came to this country to apply his skills in the booming high-technology industry, working under a temporary visa. And like many temporary workers, Mr. Saw wants to stay.
But the prospect of establishing a lasting foothold in the United States makes him, in some ways, a captive to his employer, which sponsored his visa application. If he tries to switch companies, or is laid off, he has to start the immigration process all over. Even the company he works for, Hewlett-Packard, cannot promote him if it will change his basic job description.
And the period of limbo for such workers can be long. Mr. Saw, a 30-year-old British citizen, applied for a green card, which gives permanent residency status, when he arrived two years ago; he will probably have to wait several more years.
He plans to stay with his job for now, he says, but he is frustrated about having so little control over his future. "I'd sooner leave the country than put my life on hold all over again," he said.
Legions of foreign professionals at high-tech companies across the country are in the same position. Over the last decade, tens of thousands have been admitted to the United States each year on temporary work visas to address what the technology industry says is a severe shortage of skilled workers.
Now the industry is pushing to expand the largest such visa program, known as H-1B, which allows workers to stay in the United States for six years. Under legislation introduced this month in the Senate, the annual allotment of the six-year visas -- which had already grown to 115,000 in 1998 from 65,000 in 1990 -- would be temporarily increased to 195,000. Those with advanced degrees from American universities will be exempt from the limitations.
But even as the gates have been opened wider, the road to permanent immigrant status has become more difficult. Over the last two years, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has become increasingly unable to cope with its growing workload, and the wait for a green card has stretched to several years.
Since 1990, the law has allotted 140,000 green cards each year to applicants sponsored by employers, but that limit has never been reached. Last year, only 62,000 cards were issued despite a backlog of hundreds of thousands of applications. Ron Gotcher, an immigration lawyer in Los Angeles, said he advised clients applying for green cards to be prepared to wait at least five years.
For workers from India and China, the problem is particularly acute. Although more than half the H-1B visas go to citizens of India or China, the law specifies that only 7 percent of employment-based green cards can go to applicants from any one country. So applicants from India and China often wait several years for an open slot before they can even apply. If their visas expire, the workers must leave the country for at least a year before they can restart the application process.
Some of the workers compare themselves to indentured servants.
"The information technology revolution is occurring on the backs of these workers," said Pradeep Chaphalkar, a green-card holder from India who is a spokesman for the Immigrants Support Network, an organization of workers seeking permanent residency.
When the visa program was introduced in 1990, the stated goal was to bring in workers temporarily to fill jobs for which there were no American workers. But the technology boom in the 1990's created an unceasing demand for skilled workers.
Now the "temporary" designation is largely ignored by employers, who recruit workers with the promise of aid in immigration, and employees, who see work visas as a route to permanent residency.
But a green-card application must specify a job and employer, and those cannot be changed. And in a market in which job hopping is the norm, being tied to one employer can be a hardship.
"For years I am supposed to be doing exactly the same thing for exactly the same company, and that is so unlikely in this area," said Nenad Nedeljkovic, a Serb working in Silicon Valley. "I get a couple of calls every week from recruiters, and every time I tell them that I have to wait."
From the foreign workers to their employers to organized labor, all seem to acknowledge that the system is flawed, but agendas for reforming it diverge widely.
The Senate legislation, endorsed by the American Electronics Association, enjoys strong bipartisan support. In addition to increasing the number of H-1B visas through 2002, it would liberalize the per-country limits on green cards.
Senator Spencer Abraham, the Michigan Republican who heads the the Senate immigration subcommittee and is a sponsor of the bill, said the immigration service had been "very unresponsive" to the problem.
Large high-technology companies say the foreign labor pool is essential. Mary Dee Beall, government affairs manager at Hewlett-Packard, says that if companies cannot hire the workers they need by bringing some in from overseas, they will shift jobs abroad.
Unions, however, are concerned that the system is susceptible to employer fraud and abuse. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. has called for training American workers and enforcing labor laws in lieu of bringing in more workers from abroad.
Assertions that companies exploit the system to pay foreigners less are hard to document. But some workers say they are paid far less than the average for people with their education, skills and experience.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Nick Saw, who works for Hewlett-Packard, is among those seeking permanent residency who must stay at their company, in the same position, because their employers sponsored their applications for green cards. (Peter DaSilva for The New York Times)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); IMMIGRATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); JOB DESCRIPTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATION (76%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); LAWYERS (72%); SHORTAGES (64%)

Company: HEWLETT-PACKARD CO  (57%); IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  HEWLETT-PACKARD CO  (57%);    IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (90%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (59%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (90%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (59%); IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (90%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (59%)

Ticker: HPQ (NYSE)  (57%)

Industry: NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING  (57%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (73%); LAWYERS (72%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (93%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: February 29, 2000


End of Document
Make an Immigration Policy for Today's Needs;
Temporary-Visa Abuse
The New York Times
March 5, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section 4; ; Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk ; Column 4; ; Letter
Length: 112 words
Body


To the Editor:
Your Feb. 29 news article "Workers Are Trapped in Limbo by I.N.S." illustrates the travesty of the H-1B visa program.
The visa is for the "temporary" importation of labor, but almost all of these temporary workers overstay the limits of the visa and try to become residents. Studies have shown that these temporary workers depress wages and limit the employment opportunities of American citizens.
The winners are the companies that profit from this cheap labor.
The H-1B visa circumvents the standard immigration process and harms the citizens of this country.  This "temporary" visa program should be eliminated.
 
ROBERT F. LA PORTA
Dix Hills, N.Y., Feb. 29, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (77%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (73%)

Company: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (90%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (59%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (90%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (59%); IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (90%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 5, 2000


End of Document
I.N.S. Is Looking the Other Way As Illegal Immigrants Fill Jobs
The New York Times
March 9, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk
Section: Section C;; Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1903 words
Byline: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

By LOUIS UCHITELLE
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body


Salvador Silva often used to worry that immigration agents would raid the commercial laundry where he works. If they did, he had a plan. He would jump onto a table, hoist himself into an air-conditioning duct, and hide there until the agents left. He practiced this more than once.
"We lived with the uncertainty of raids," said Mr. Silva, who is 26 and has worked illegally in this country for 10 years, ever since he walked across a bridge from Juarez in Mexico to El Paso and flew to Chicago to join a brother. Only now is he beginning to relax. "For the first time," he said, "I don't fear the raids."
Such raids have all but stopped around the country over the last year. In a booming economy running short of labor, hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants are increasingly tolerated in the nation's workplaces. The Immigration and Naturalization Service has made crossing the border harder than ever, stepping up patrols and prosecuting companies that smuggle in aliens or blatantly recruit them. But once inside the country, illegal immigrants are now largely left alone. Even when these people are discovered, arrests for the purpose of deportation are much less frequent; such arrests dropped to about 8,600 last year from 22,000 just two years earlier, the I.N.S. reports.
The agency now concentrates on picking up aliens who have committed a crime. The rest are in effect allowed to help American employers fill jobs. "It is just the market at work, drawing people to jobs, and the I.N.S. has chosen to concentrate its actions on aliens who are a danger to the community," said Robert L. Bach, the agency's associate commissioner for policy and planning.
The new lenience helps explain why overall wage increases have been less than many economists and policy makers had expected, given an unemployment rate of only 4 percent and a strong demand for people to fill jobs that pay $8 an hour or less, which is 25 percent of all jobs. Immigrants -- legal and illegal -- have fed the pool of people available to take these lower-paying jobs. But Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, told Congress last month that as job growth expands, the pool keeps shrinking. That is one reason the Fed is raising interest rates to slow the economy before wage pressures become inflationary.
Mr. Greenspan and many other economists, though, are looking only at people living in this country, including an estimated six million illegal immigrants, as potential candidates to feed that pool. But the more tolerant I.N.S. policy may be inducing more workers to immigrate, particularly from Mexico, because -- once they manage to get here -- they face less risk in taking a job. That would dilute the labor shortage -- and the wage pressure that worries Mr. Greenspan. In fact, it may already be doing so.
"None of us really knows how big the pool of available workers is," said Jared Bernstein, a labor economist at the Economic Policy Institute, "but the more lenient stance can only increase the number of people available abroad for jobs in the United States."
The commercial laundry industry in Chicago, where Mr. Silva works, clearly benefits from the Immigration Service's live-and-let-work approach. Thirty companies wash and iron the city's hospital and restaurant linens, hotel sheets and towels, and factory uniforms. Half of their 2,800 employees are illegal immigrants, mainly Hispanics, according to Unite, the union that has organized most of them in recent months.
Last fall, Unite negotiated contracts that recognized the illegal status of some workers, and shielded them. One clause requires an employer to bar an I.N.S. raid unless the agents have a search warrant. And a company must notify the union if it gets wind of a coming raid.
"Sometimes I did not want to go to work," Mr. Silva said. "I saw reports on TV of immigration raids and people being led away and I worried that would happen to me. Now the union contract is reassuring, and I no longer see raids on television."
A third clause states that when former employees are rehired with new papers -- even new names -- after their original documents are found to be false, they retain their seniority and resume their old pay level. Union scale goes as high as $8.75 an hour.
"The Immigration Service has never had the resources to arrest every illegal alien, and now there is a large number and a demand from many companies to employ them," said Brian R. Perryman, the agency's director in Chicago. "Once they come into the Chicago metropolitan area, with its 6.5 million people, it is hard to stop the process."
A downturn in the booming economy and any resulting uptick in unemployment could lead the I.N.S. to revive its pursuit of illegal immigrants at work. Even now, some Republican members of Congress are pushing for legislation that would step up efforts to prevent illegal immigrants from working in the United States. Certainly, the more open policy today stands in sharp contrast to the 1980's and even the mid-1990's, when unemployment was higher.
The new attitude here is the opposite of the approach in most European countries, where unemployment rates are higher than in the United States and governments have tightened immigration laws.
But right now the route to work in the United States is fairly smooth. One reason is that employment laws are easy for illegal immigrants to evade. Workers are required to offer proof of eligibility -- a Social Security card and a picture ID. But counterfeits are easily purchased for $60 to $80 in this city's immigrant neighborhoods, a favorite being a rose-colored resident-alien card, which two immigrants showed to this reporter.
The laminated cards displayed photographs that were accurate but fingerprints the workers said were not theirs. "The birth date isn't mine either, or the signature, although the name is right," said Angel Hernandez Lopez, a 25-year-old Mexican. "For $80, they do everything," he said of the counterfeiters.
Employers can be fined for knowingly hiring illegal workers, but they also risk being sued for discrimination if they challenge documents that on the surface seem authentic. What's more, the Social Security Administration checks only once a year for numbers that fail to match legitimate pension accounts, and when it finds a discrepancy, it never assumes it is immigrant fraud as opposed to a mismatch resulting from a divorce, a job switch or a name changed through marriage.
"We know that illegal immigrants are a factor," said Norman Goldstein, a senior financial executive at Social Security, "but I cannot quantify for you how that factor compares with other factors."
When a letter calling attention to a discrepancy does finally go out, it goes to the employer or the employee, or both, but not the Immigration Service, which cannot by law be privy to tax matters. Even when the I.N.S. does get involved, the employee is now usually given time to correct the problem. For illegal workers that means time to change names, get new papers or change jobs.
An illegal immigrant is at little risk these days, Mr. Bach said, "unless the employer turns a worker in, and employers usually do that only to break a union or prevent a strike or that kind of stuff."
Curtailing undocumented workers, then, rests as much with employers as with the I.N.S., and in an economy short of workers, employers are not rushing into action. On the contrary, they want the I.N.S. to go easier as well on highly skilled, college-educated immigrants -- the engineers, chemists, computer experts and college professors who now enter the country on special H-1B visas. A coalition of business groups is lobbying Congress to raise the ceiling on these visas to 195,000 a year from 115,000.
"In a perfect world, immigration at all levels would be entirely market-driven, with appropriate protections of course for native workers," said Sandra J. Boyd, of the National Association of Manufacturers, who leads the coalition.
Short of this goal, the temporary- help agencies that have sprung up in storefronts in Chicago's Hispanic neighborhoods are benefiting from the new leniency. The $5.15-an-hour minimum-wage jobs these agencies offer are usually the first that arriving immigrants manage to land. They have settled by the thousands in old blue-collar neighborhoods like Pilsen, southwest of the Loop. Their growing presence in this city has given Illinois the nation's fifth-largest immigrant population, behind California, New York, Florida and Texas.
Six temp agencies near West 18th Street and Blue Island Avenue, in the heart of Pilsen, become predawn gathering places for immigrants seeking work. More than 30 waited expectantly one day in late February at Ron's Temporary Help Services, some perched in what was once the window display of this former store. An old iron radiator heated the room.
The immigrants, mostly from Mexico, hoped that Gloria de la Torre, the 36-year-old manager -- herself an illegal immigrant until three years ago, she says -- will favor them with one of the jobs that go out by the thousands each day from 100 agencies like Ron's in Hispanic neighborhoods. That is up from 50 in 1985, according to Nik Theodore, research director at the Center for Urban Economic Development at the University of Illinois in Chicago.
During the peak demand for these workers, from April through September, more than 30,000 a day are placed by the temp agencies, Mr. Theodore says, basing his estimate on his field research. The Ron's office that Ms. de la Torre manages sends out 1,000 workers over three shifts in those months, she says. But in late February, the flow is down to 100 a day, and two vans are double- parked outside waiting to take some immigrants to jobs in the suburbs.
The temp agencies deal in a variety of work -- assembling coolers, eyeglass cases and other products; making sandwiches for airline meals; stuffing envelopes; construction; packaging perfumes; painting machinery; staffing warehouses that ship merchandise ordered over the Internet.
Motorola is a regular customer, using workers from the temp agencies to pack computer monitors in shipping cartons, among other tasks. The agencies, not Motorola, have the responsibility for making certain that the people sent to Motorola are legally authorized to work, a Motorola press officer said.
The people Ms. de la Torre sends out all present her with the necessary documents, which she accepts at face value. Paychecks come with stubs that detail deductions for taxes, Social Security and, for those who travel in vans to their jobs, $3.50 a day for transportation.
"I have never been visited by Immigration," Ms. de la Torre said.
But the precarious status of an illegal immigrant makes them easy victims for exploitation, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. says. They are filling the low-wage jobs readily enough, but they lack the bargaining power to get higher on the pay scale, or upgrade their working conditions, the labor organization says. That is a big reason they are in demand, it adds.
Unite's contracts covering laundry workers are an attempt to counter this situation. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. also called for the legalization of those already in the country so they can be more easily represented.
Mr. Bach, the immigration official, said, "Workers are supposed to make gains in tight labor markets, but what you are seeing is employers using illegal immigrants to undercut the expectations of labor."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: "Doing Less"
Arrests for deportations of noncriminal illegal aliens already in the United States have dropped sharply in the last two years.
 
Graphs shows these trends from 1993-99 (Source: Immigration and Naturalization Service)      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); ARRESTS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); ECONOMICS (89%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (88%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (77%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (77%); SMUGGLING (77%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (77%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); INFLATION (73%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); WAGE GROWTH (73%); INTEREST RATES (61%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (61%)

Company: ROBERT L SIGMON  (53%); ROBERT L SIGMON  (53%);    IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (94%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (91%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (94%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (91%); IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (94%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (91%)

Industry: INTEREST RATES (61%)

Person: ALAN GREENSPAN (53%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 9, 2000


End of Document
Clinton Asks Congress to Raise the Limit on Visas for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
May 12, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 2; National Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 718 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR 

By ROBERT PEAR 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 11
Body


Racing to keep up with a booming economy, President Clinton today proposed an increase of more than 85 percent in the number of skilled foreign workers who could be admitted to the United States to fill job openings in high-technology industries.
Mr. Clinton asked Congress to provide 200,000 visas for such workers in each of the next three years. The existing law, adopted in 1998, limits the number of such visas to 107,500 in 2001. After that, under existing law, the ceiling will fall back to 65,000 a year, the level in effect before Congressional action in 1998.
In January 1998, the Clinton administration said it did not support an increase in the number of visas. But the president, under pressure from Congress and the computer industry, agreed to support a modest increase six months later. Since then, technology companies say, the demand for computer programmers, engineers and other skilled workers has outstripped the supply and exceeded official expectations.
Many in Congress favor an even bigger increase than the one Mr. Clinton proposed today. Congress therefore appears likely to approve a substantial increase in the number of visas, known as H-1B visas, for high-technology workers.
Robert Cohen, senior vice president of the Information Technology Association of America, an industry group, welcomed the president's proposal.
"It's very encouraging that the White House sees the need to raise the cap," Mr. Cohen said. "The administration understands better now than in 1998 that information technology gives an incredible push to the overall economy. But the number of visas proposed by the administration is probably not adequate. We would be pleased to see the cap eliminated, so the marketplace could decide how many people are needed to get the job done."
Nations in Europe and Asia are competing for the same pool of high-technology workers. And Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan, said some American companies would "move their operations overseas, taking American jobs with them," if they could not get the workers they needed here.
India provides by far the largest number of skilled foreign workers under the H-1B visa program. Its citizens received 47 percent of such visas issued in the last year. The next largest share went to China, with 9 percent.
Gene Sperling, the president's economic policy adviser, set forth Mr. Clinton's proposal in a letter to Congress.
The best way to increase the supply of skilled workers is to improve the education and training of United States citizens and other people already in the country, Mr. Sperling said.
"However," he said, "at times, U.S. businesses need additional access to the international labor market to maintain and enhance our global competitiveness, particularly in high-growth new technology industries and particularly in tight labor markets."
Mr. Sperling said the previous increase in the number of H-1B visas had proved inadequate because "our economy has grown beyond anyone's most optimistic predictions."
Representative Lamar Smith, the Texas Republican who heads the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, was skeptical, saying, "There is still no objective, credible study that documents a shortage of American high-tech workers."
Michael W. Gildea, a policy analyst in the professional employee division of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said: "We would have preferred no increase in the number of visas. We see no credible evidence of widespread shortages of information technology workers."
Mr. Sperling said technology companies appeared to have difficulty finding workers with the necessary skills. But he added, "The lack of clear data suggests that it's best to offer a temporary solution, and to make that solution contingent on an increase in spending for the education and training of American workers."
Mr. Clinton proposed a sharp increase in the fees charged to employers who use the foreign worker program. He said the fee for an H-1B visa, now $500, should be raised to $2,000 for most employers, with a visa fee of $3,000 for companies that depend heavily on skilled foreign workers.
The president said he would use the fees to help pay for the training of American workers, especially those who are underrepresented in the information technology industry, like women, blacks and Hispanics.            

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); LABOR MARKET (89%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); APPROVALS (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (73%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%)

Company: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA  (55%)

Organization: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA  (55%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA  (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (68%)

Person: BILL CLINTON (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%); ASIA (79%); CHINA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

Load-Date: May 12, 2000


End of Document
Economic Scene;
Work visas are allowing Washington to sidestep immigration reform.
The New York Times
May 25, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Business/Financial Desk 
Section: Section C; ; Section C; Page 2; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1066 words
Byline: By Alan B. Krueger; 

This column appears here every Thursday. Alan B. Krueger is the Bendheim Professor of Economics and Public Affairs at Princeton University and editor of The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Four economic analysts -- Professor Krueger, J. Bradford DeLong, Jeff Madrick and Virginia Postrel -- rotate as contributors.

By Alan B. Krueger;  This column appears here every Thursday. Alan B. Krueger is the Bendheim Professor of Economics and Public Affairs at Princeton University and editor of The Journal of Economic Perspectives. Four economic analysts -- Professor Krueger, J. Bradford DeLong, Jeff Madrick and Virginia Postrel -- rotate as contributors.
Body


THE inscription on the Statue of Liberty is quietly being rewritten: "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free; I'll also take your skilled employees under the temporary visa program, H-1B."
The H-1B visa was established in 1990 to permit foreigners with a college degree or higher to work in the United States for a renewable three-year term for employers who petition on their behalf. In 1998, the program was expanded to allow 115,000 workers, up from 65,000, to enter the United States in fiscal years 1999 and 2000. Demand for H-1B visas by employers is high, particularly among high-technology companies. This year the limit was reached just six months into the year. President Clinton and many members of Congress would like to increase the limit to 200,000 a year the next three years.
The expansion of temporary work visas should be evaluated in the context of overall immigration policy. But immigration reform, replacing Social Security, has become the new third rail of American politics. So instead of tackling the issue head on, Washington has come to rely on temporary work visas as a substitute for addressing the economic and social shortcomings of current policy.
The United States is in the midst of the "Second Great Migration." The first occurred between 1880 and 1924, when 26 million immigrants arrived on our shores. The second began in the late 1970's: more immigrants have come to the United States since 1980 than in the previous 60 years.
Workers admitted under the H-1B program are not immigrants, but experts in the field expect that most of them will end up staying permanently in the United States.
In addition to workers with H-1B visas, hundreds of thousands of other foreigners are admitted to work temporarily in the United States under visa categories covering intracompany transfers, individuals with extraordinary ability, registered nurses and nonprofit religious organizations. A fast-growing category is the Nafta TN visa, which offers an unlimited number of temporary visas for professional workers from Canada and soon Mexico.
In a new book, "Heaven's Door," George Borjas, a Harvard economist, proposes that the United States adopt a Canadian-style point system, in which applicants for visas are assigned points on the basis of characteristics like their ability to speak English, work-force skills, family ties, refugee status and ethnic diversity. Those whose total points exceed a certain threshold would be admitted. Going even further, Professor Borjas favors setting the threshold so that the number of immigrants entering the United States falls from about 900,000 to about 500,000 a year. The total number can be debated. If nothing else, this policy would be transparent.
Who should become an American? The question is profound, involving more than economics alone. But economic considerations obviously play a role.
Theoretically, the economics of immigration is straightforward. If more workers are admitted to the country -- as permanent immigrants or temporary workers -- the earnings of native American workers competing with them for jobs should fall. At the same time, the price of goods and services they produce should decline, and the profits of businesses should rise.
The winners are employers, consumers and the immigrants themselves. The losers are workers in the same job market as immigrants.
Economic research has not been able to estimate with any confidence the wage decline for native workers that results from immigration. Much solid research finds no effect. This suggests to me that any effect is likely to be small.
Professor Borjas's evidence indicates that the skills of legal and illegal immigrants have slipped relative to those of natives since the 1970's. A third of employed male immigrants are high school dropouts.  At the same time, the labor market increasingly demands more high-skilled workers, as suggested by the long-term rise in the number of workers with college degrees and their sharply increased pay compared with that of those with high school degrees.  Therefore, it would be economically beneficial to admit relatively more highly skilled permanent immigrants -- not to mention that skilled immigrants are less likely to take advantage of the safety net.
If immigration reform is off the table, it makes economic sense to increase the number of skilled immigrants by issuing H-1B visas -- through what might be called heaven's backdoor. Yet economic principles also suggest that the playing field between H-1B workers and the rest of the work force should be leveled.
American workers are protected from exploitation on the job by three defenses: exit, voice and regulation. Exit entails the ability to move to a better job if one is available; voice results from representation by labor unions and other organizations; and regulation is a labyrinth of standards enforced by government agencies.
These protections are deficient for H-1B workers.
They cannot easily switch jobs because they must find another employer willing to petition the Immigration and Naturalization Service on their behalf. Even if they manage to do that, they must wait months for a reply. H-1B workers are also unusually beholden to their employers, the ones who can sponsor them for permanent immigrant status.
They lack voice because no organization effectively represents them.
And they have less regulatory protection than other workers because the Labor Department is precluded from investigating their conditions of employment unless a complaint is filed.
Evidence suggests H-1B visa holders suffer as a consequence. Even though 70 percent of them are in well-paid computer-related and engineering fields, a 1996 report by the Labor Department's inspector general found that 19 percent of H-1B workers are paid less than the salary they were promised.
Legislation to increase the number of H-1B visas should provide protection from exploitation. This also would help native workers and improve economic efficiency.
What could be done? Permit H-1B workers to change jobs freely after they are admitted to the country. Authorize the Labor Department to conduct random investigations of their employment conditions. Finally, require the immigration service to process applications for permanent, employment-based immigration more quickly, which would reduce the need for H-1B visas in the first place.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Graph: "Give Me Your College Educated"
The number of skilled temporary foreign workers who enter the United States each year under the H-1B visa program is growing compared with the annual influx of permanent legal immigrant workers.
 
Graph tracks number of new h-1b visas and estimated number of new permanent legal immigrants that are working, age 20 to 64.
 
Note: Immigrant figures for 1989-92 are adjusted for the influx of resident immigrants granted amnesty and for 1997-98 to account for a backlog at the I.N.S. H-1B visas in 1999 exceeded the federal cap because I.N.S. inadvertently issued at least 21,888 extra.
 
(Sources: Immigration and Naturalization Service; Census Bureau)
      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); IMMIGRATION (93%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); ECONOMICS (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); RACE & ETHNICITY (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); NURSES & NURSING (61%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (61%); DIVERSITY & INCLUSION (60%); RELIGION (50%)

Company: HEAVEN'S DOOR CORP  (52%); HEAVEN'S DOOR CORP  (52%);    US CENSUS BUREAU   (59%);  US CENSUS BUREAU  (59%)

Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU   (59%);  US CENSUS BUREAU  (59%); US CENSUS BUREAU   (59%);  US CENSUS BUREAU  (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); NURSES & NURSING (61%)

Person: BILL CLINTON (56%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (98%); CANADA (92%)

Load-Date: May 25, 2000


End of Document
The Venture Capitalist in My Bedroom
The New York Times
May 28, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Magazine Desk 
Section: Section 6; ; Section 6; Page 32; Column 2; Magazine Desk ; Column 2; 
Length: 7341 words
Byline: By Jeff Goodell; 

Jeff Goodell, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone, is the author of "Sunnyvale: The Rise and Fall of a Silicon Valley Family," to be published in July.

By Jeff Goodell;  Jeff Goodell, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone, is the author of "Sunnyvale: The Rise and Fall of a Silicon Valley Family," to be published in July.
Body


Of all the houses on Meadowlark Lane, this one is the shabbiest: it is a dingy mustard color with brown shutters; there is a Toyota Camry parked on what used to be the lawn; the backyard fence is sagging; the window shades are drawn. As I walk up the driveway, I am greeted by a cheap gold "No Soliciting" sign on the front door, as well as a smaller sign, handwritten in Mandarin, that I cannot read but that, I imagine, says, "You are not welcome here."
I ring the bell. When the door cracks open, I see a vertical slice of a woman's face: young, Asian, attractive. I introduce myself as a journalist and explain that I live in New York now, but that my family lived here in Sunnyvale, Calif., in this very house from 1963, when I was 3, until my father's death in 1990, when I was 30. I ask her if we could talk for a few minutes and if I could have a look around inside. She looks me up and down, making a judgment. "Well, if you grew up here, this house must mean very much to you," she says in halting English. And then she swings the door open.
Her name is Sara Liang. She is 27, dressed in shorts and a pink T-shirt. She is wearing Dolce & Gabbana glasses with blue-tinted frames and a bracelet of pink plastic Buddha beads. As we stand in the hallway and talk, I learn that she is from Taipei, Taiwan, and that she came to America in 1993 to attend the University of San Francisco, where she studied international business. Now she works in sales at a small company that imports flat-panel display screens. She is giddy and shy, but willing to show me around. I notice a pile of shoes near the door and begin to remove mine, but she says, "No, no, that's not necessary." She seems slightly embarrassed, as if Asian tradition were something she has recently outgrown.
We move inside, and I have the strange feeling that I am looking at the wreckage of the American dream, circa 1963: the kitchen, which my mother was so proud of and where we gathered every night at 6:30 for our family meal of beef stroganoff or tuna casserole, now looks like the communal kitchen in a freshman dorm. Two fluorescent lights flicker overhead, and the floor is covered with industrial-grade linoleum. A second refrigerator has been shoved up against the wall in the dining area, a torn curtain is falling off its rod above the sliding glass door and the cupboards are empty, save for a large bottle of soy sauce and a few containers of SlimFast. The fireplace my father built in the family room, with its enormous cobblestone hearth, has been painted white and looks as if it hasn't carried a wisp of smoke since the day we moved out.
"How many people live here?" I ask.
"I don't know," Sara says. "Maybe eight, nine. It is impossible to say. People always coming and going."
As Sara and I talk, an Asian man in jogging pants and plastic thongs emerges from what was once my family's living room. A wall has now been erected down the center and another door and window installed, and it has been turned into two bedrooms. Behind him, through a half-open door, I see a small TV on a folding metal chair, a single bed and a computer. "Hello, Eric," Sara says. She continues in Mandarin, explaining who I am and why I am in the house. He glances up at me, then turns around, walks into his bedroom and closes the door.
"Engineers are weird," Sara says.
"Weird in what way?" I ask.
"They have no lives," she says.
I ask if I can meet any of her other roommates.
"No one else is home now. Maybe later."
"What time do the others get home from work?"
"All hours -- usually 9, 10 o'clock," she says. Then she adds, with a giggle, "We all work very hard, because we want to get rich in Silicon Valley."
In a place where every molecule is stretched toward the future, nothing feels quite so freakish as looking backward. In Silicon Valley, the very notion of reflecting upon what has happened, rather than what will be, seems to violate the laws of physics. My own sense of disorientation is underscored by the magnitude of the changes that have swept through this once-sleepy flatland at the foot of the San Francisco Bay over the last 20 or so years. When I was growing up, this region -- roughly the area between Palo Alto and San Jose -- always felt like a lonely place, nothing but fruit trees and aerospace engineers. I thought the future was anywhere but here.
I was not just wrong, but grandly, hilariously wrong. I witnessed the birth of a new world, even if I was too ignorant to recognize it at the time. The valley not only designed and built much of the machinery that powers the new economy but it also freed capitalism from its old restraints of class and corporatism, transforming untold numbers of college dropouts into multimillionaires and sparking a technological revolution that is reshaping our lives in unimaginably vast, complex and subtle ways. So powerful is the valley's allure that the word "silicon" itself, as if it wields alchemistic powers, has been snatched up by business leaders everywhere: Silicon Alley in New York City, Silicon Bog in Ireland, Silicon Forest in Seattle, Silicon Prairie in South Dakota. One Web site has counted 90 Silicon Valley wannabes.
I should be proud of the stature of my hometown, but the truth is that I have mixed feelings. This whirlwind has been great for my retirement fund (even after the recent battering), and I love my computer almost as much as I love my dog. But outrageous prosperity does not come without a cost: most of my friends and family who do not work for high-tech companies have long since fled the area, driven out by skyrocketing real estate prices and snarling traffic. My eyes have burned from the thickening smog, I've tasted the metallic water that flows out of the faucet in my old house and I've seen even my most successful, level-headed friend become consumed by envy because the guy in the cubicle besides him is worth nine million and he is worth only four. I've watched the apricot orchards get bulldozed and the dark, rich alluvial soil -- the finest in the world, ranchers say -- get paved over and forgotten. Twenty years ago, the valley felt like a suburban nowhere, sleepy and homogenous; today, it feels like a giant, nonvirtual eBay, a noisy, chaotic place that is growing at an exponential rate, where everyone is consumed with making the big score.
Still, many of the changes in the valley are worth celebrating. Good restaurants, for example. Palo Alto, Mountain View and San Jose are exploding with interesting, expressive cooking and a newly civilized clientele. "Five years ago, you had to explain to people what a salad fork was and that you might want to wear socks when you go out for dinner," says David Kinch, the chef and co-owner of Restaurant Sent Sovi in Saratoga, one of the top establishments in the region. "Today, my clientele is as sophisticated as the clientele at any restaurant in the world." Downtown San Jose, long a ghost town, now boasts the new Tech Museum, an elegant Fairmont hotel, a refurbished museum of art and, coming soon, a new city hall designed by Richard Meier. The old concrete tilt-up office buildings that blight the industrial landscape are slowly becoming things of the past; companies like 3Com and Novell have built artful new campuses with outdoor patios, water sculptures and cantilevered roof supports. "The area is beginning to achieve a distinctive style and sense of itself," says Erik Sueberkrop, a principal at Studios Architecture, a firm that has designed many of the area's most stylish buildings, including the 3Com campus. "You can feel the fabric of a new society being woven together here."
The biggest change prosperity has wrought, however, is in the faces of the people who live here. For most of the 20th century, the population of Santa Clara County (which includes the bulk of Silicon Valley) was about 80 percent white. Today, thanks largely to a wave that has brought nearly 160,000 immigrants into the area in the last decade, whites are now a minority. The 1.6 million people who live in the county are 49 percent white, 24 percent Hispanic, 23 percent Asian and 4 percent black. The defining character of Silicon Valley today is not the pasty-faced plaid-shirt-wearing aerospace engineer, but a young geek from Taipei or Bangalore with an H-1B visa and a fondness for American pop culture. These new immigrants are escapees from small villages and moribund economies; they are attracted to the valley by its reputation as a digital meritocracy, where nobody cares what color your skin is as long as you can speak the global language of entrepreneurs. Although most of these new immigrants are highly educated and technologically savvy, they have at least one thing in common with the waves of dreamers who came through Ellis Island a hundred years ago -- they believe America is a land of opportunity, a place where they can build better lives. Some want to put down roots and pledge their allegiance to the flag; others are the 21st-century equivalent of 19th-century gold miners who traveled from strike to strike, looking for the next mother lode.
A handful of these new dreamers, I recently learned, have taken up residence in my old house in Sunnyvale. I went home to meet them and to see what the digital revolution has done to the place that gave birth to it.
To thank her for showing me around, I offer to buy Sara dinner. The following night, we head to Cupertino Village, a small shopping center a few blocks from the house. I know the place well; I used to ride my bike here to buy Spider-Man comic books. There was a Rexall drugstore, a Safeway supermarket, a deli that served excellent bratwust, a dry cleaner and a travel agent. The shopping center is across the street from several early Hewlett Packard buildings -- Steve Wozniak worked here in the 1970's while he and a barefoot kid named Steve Jobs were wiring together their first computer in Jobs's garage.
Today, the shopping center has been transformed into a suburban Chinatown. The parking lot is jammed; the signs are all in Mandarin. A Chinese supermarket called Ranch 99 is stocked with 50-pound bags of jasmine rice and salmon heads for $2.99 a pound. In an herbal medicine shop, dried shark fins hang on the walls, and exotic varieties of ginseng are packaged like precious jewels.
Sara is dressed in high heels, blue jeans and a Guess denim jacket -- she is bubbly, happy, a little vain, completely charming. As we walk around the shopping center, she tells me that she ended up in my father's house because of an ad in The World Journal, a Taiwanese newspaper published daily in America; when she went to look at the room, she liked it because at $550 it was relatively inexpensive and because it was convenient to the freeway as well as to her office in Santa Clara. "I only plan to stay a few months, until my parents buy me a house," Sara explains. She pauses in front of a Taiwanese antique store and points to a ceramic Buddha that sits serenely in the window, gold paint peeling off her nose. "This is Chinese antique," she says, with thinly veiled disgust. "This is what my mother likes. The house where I grew up in Taiwan was full of it. That is why I hate it. When I get my own house, it will have none of that in it. I want everything clean and new."
Home decor is very much on Sara's mind, it turns out. Her mother and stepfather, who live in Taiwan (her parents divorced when she was 12; her stepfather is a financier who Sara claims "is not rich but definitely not poor either"), recently decided they want to buy a house in America -- they will use it only a month or two each year when they visit, but mostly it is for Sara. She has been running around with real estate agents for weeks, looking at dozens of houses in the half-million-dollar range. That is about the median price of a house in the valley today, and it gets you, at best, a shaggy but livable three-bedroom tract house in the flatlands.
Although California is half a world away from Taipei, Sara says her parents feel very comfortable here. "There are so many Chinese here now, it is almost like home. You can read Taiwanese newspapers, shop in Taiwanese markets, go to Taiwanese restaurants. But you have American stock market, American political system. It is maybe better than home."
For Sara's parents, owning a house in the valley is also an escape hatch from the rapidly escalating political tensions between Taiwan and mainland China. "No one knows what's going to happen in Taiwan," Sara explains. "Our relationship with the mainland is not good, the stock market is not strong -- there is a lot of uncertainty. If China invades, what happens to my parent's property? It could be confiscated; no one knows."
Sara, of course, wants a house for her own reasons. For the first time in her life, she is thinking about starting a family. She also sees a home as something that will give her life in America some ballast: her H-1B visa, which allows her to work in the United States for six years, will expire in three years, and unless she has been approved for a green card by then (highly unlikely) or has married a U.S. citizen (distinct possibility, since her current boyfriend was recently granted citizenship), she will have to leave the country for a year, then reapply for another visa, which given the competition, is anything but certain. "If I own a house, or if my parents own a house, I feel like it is the first step toward -- how do you say? -- putting down roots."
As for the house she lives in now -- my house -- she hardly gives it a thought. It's just a place to crash, a way station between her last apartment and her new life. She pays her rent to a Taiwanese immigrant who bought the place as an investment. She rarely sees her roommates, and when she does, they don't talk much or share meals. "It's not like 'Friends,"' she jokes. The only person she knows at all, she says, is Tammy, the woman who lives in the other half of my father's old bedroom. Tammy is also from Taiwan and works in sales for a cable modem company.
After dinner, we return to the house and Sara takes me upstairs and knocks on Tammy's bedroom door. Tammy opens it, glances at me, then back at Sara. She is middle-aged, tired-looking. She and Sara converse for a few moments in Mandarin, and Tammy becomes increasingly upset. I wonder if there has been a family tragedy.
After Tammy closes the door, Sara turns to me. "She does not want to talk tonight -- she's not in a very good mood," she explains. "Her AOL stock lost five points today."
It is a sunny spring day, and my sister, Jill, and I are walking along a levee at Shoreline Park, an open-space preserve near the foot of the bay that is a popular jogging and in-line skating spot for high-tech workers. Jill, 31, is the last member of my family who still lives in the valley. She is a project manager at Excite@Home, a top cable modem service and Internet directory that was once -- and may again be -- one of the hottest companies in the area. Despite the company's sagging stock price, she loves her job and the friends she has made there, as well as the glitzy new campus in Redwood City, where she can step outside her cubicle onto the third-floor breezeway and get a magnificent view of San Francisco Bay and the southern portion of the valley. 
I tell her about the people living in our old house, and how the rooms have been subdivided.
"How bizarre," she says.
"Bizarre how?"
She looks over at the new Microsoft campus that has risen nearby. It is gray and black and stealthy-looking -- the architectural equivalent of Darth Vader's mask.
"I just think Dad would be spinning in his grave right now if he knew about this."
She may be right. My father was an Old World man. As a landscape contractor, he worked with plants and trees, not bits and bytes. But he loved Sunnyvale -- the balmy weather, the rich soil, the feelings of hope and optimism that were embodied in the beautifully curving sidewalks and sparkly new kitchen appliances.
Our house was nothing special. It had hollow wooden doors and cheap aluminum-framed picture windows, but my father adored it anyway. He always had some project going on -- landscaping the backyard, converting the garage into a family room, building brick planters around the front of the house. His pi<heart>ce de resistance was the fireplace in our family room. He laid every brick and cobblestone himself, working nights and weekends for months. But when it was done, it was magnificent, with a two-foot-high hearth and a firebox big enough to roast an ox. Over the years, our house became the wonder of the neighborhood, a brick-and-mortar monument to my father's deep feeling for his family and for the world he lived in.
Then the revolution began, and everything changed. It felt less like a revolution, exactly, than the slow buildup of electrical charge you feel as a thunderstorm approaches. My friend's father, who worked for a data storage company, arrived home one night in a new Buick. Other neighbors took vacations to Tahiti, added second stories to their homes, sent their kids to camp on the East Coast. New tilt-up buildings rose around us. My girlfriend in high school, a chemistry whiz who had already set her sights on a career in engineering, received a summer internship at Varian, then one of the valley's largest electronics firms, that paid more than I earned in an entire year of part-time work for my father.
In the late 1970's, my father's landscaping business fell on hard times, and he was forced out of the company. Landscaping was on the wrong side of the economic bell curve, and my father had difficulty finding work after that. At about the same time, my mother decided she wanted a divorce. Although she had no college degree and had not held a job in 20 years, she was hired by a new company with a dopey rainbow-colored logo: Apple Computer. She ended up working there for the next eight years as a designer, plotting the intricate layouts of printed circuit boards. Unlike my father, she caught the rising wave of prosperity in the valley, and with stock options and a steadily escalating salary, she did very well for herself. She eventually remarried and began a new life.
My father tried to start over, to date new women, to begin again, but it didn't work. He seemed shellshocked and unable to understand how things had gone wrong so quickly. He refused to sell our house, even when it became a financial burden for him, even when my sister and my brother and I were long gone, and he was living there alone. The house was the last thing he had to hold on to in a world turned upside down. Eventually he couldn't hold on any longer. He died of lung cancer in 1990 at the age of 53.
My brother and sister and I sold the house a few months later to a Taiwanese engineer and his pregnant wife for $289,000. (My parents paid $19,950 for it in 1963.) As far as I knew, they were the first nonwhite family to move onto Meadowlark Lane. I was happy to pass the house on to them, thinking that they were about to start a family of their own and that they would find as much hope and happiness in it as we had. Whatever they found, it didn't last long. In 1993, they sold it to a Hong Kong businessman named Zhengfei Ren, who used it primarily as a flophouse for himself and his employees when they visited the area. Last June, Ren sold the house to its current owner, a software engineer and real estate speculator named Nelson Chao, for $450,000.
Chao, who immigrated to the bay area from Taiwan 26 years ago, bought the house for one reason. "I think it is excellent investment, even better than the stock market," he says. And like any good investor, he set out to maximize his profit, cramming in as many tenants as he could get away with. The house was no longer a family home, a repository of hopes and dreams; it was now a wooden structure whose sole purpose was to keep rain off its occupants heads and to generate cash flow.
There are two Franks living in the house now. The first Frank I meet, who declines to give his last name, lives in the rear half of what was once our living room. He is 30, tall, thin and wary. We talk for a half-hour or so, during which he manages to tell me very little about his life except that he was born in Beijing, came to America to study computer science at the University of Southern California and now works as a software engineer for Nortel Networks. Like almost everyone else in the house, he is here on an H-1B visa; I get the strong impression that he is afraid that if he says one wrong word, he'll be thrown out of the country. That is not true, of course, but life on a temporary visa is full of anxiety and fear.
The H-1B visa, which was created in 1990 largely in answer to the high-tech industry's complaints about a shortage of skilled workers in the United States, is the topic of heated debate right now. Many high-tech executives are clamoring for the federal government to raise the ceiling on the number of workers allowed into the country each year, arguing that the booming economy is dependent upon attracting the best and brightest minds from around the world. Responding to these demands, the Senate recently introduced a bill to increase the annual allotment of six-year visas, which had already grown to 115,000 in 1998 from 65,000 in 1990, to 195,000. Labor leaders are vehemently opposed to this increase, arguing that the H-1B is little more than indentured slavery and that while foreign workers are indeed important to the new economy, the whole program needs to be substantially reformed.
The crux of the problem is that because green-card applications are sponsored by employers -- a company basically has to say, "We need this person permanently" -- visa holders are locked into an unbalanced relationship with the corporations that hire them. During the application process, which averages three years in San Jose and often takes much longer, an applicant cannot be promoted or change his or her basic job description. And if an applicant switches companies or is laid off, the whole application process begins all over again.
For workers from China and India, the H-1B is a particular problem. Although more than half the H-1B's go to citizens of those countries, the law specifies that only 7 percent of employment-based green cards can go to applicants from any one country. So Indian and Chinese applicants often wait several years for an open slot before they can even apply, and by then it is usually too late to get a green card processed before their visas expire. Many immigrant workers believe that although the high-tech industry claims it wants the green-card application process reformed, in fact the corporations are quite happy with the system the way it is because it gives them a fresh crop of young minds to exploit every six years. "The information revolution is occurring on the backs of these workers," says Pradeep Chaphalkar, a green-card holder from India who is a spokesperson for the Immigrants Support Network, an organization of workers seeking permanent residency.
When I ask Frank if he feels exploited, he pauses and looks out at the backyard, where the trunk of the mulberry sapling my father and I planted 35 years ago is now as thick as my waist. "I am very grateful to be in this country," he says, then politely excuses himself before I can ask him any more questions.
The second Frank, I soon learn, lives in my old bedroom. "He is never home, he works very hard," Sara says, then adds with a touch of awe, "He's a venture capitalist."
I meet him a few nights later, when a well-dressed young Asian man blows in through the front door. He is in a hurry and seems to be talking to himself -- then I realize that he is wearing an earpiece connected to a cell phone in his shirt pocket. He is doing business as he walks.
Sara waves him over. Frank Lin says goodbye to the person on the phone, pulls the wire out of his ear and shakes my hand. He is 25, immediately likable, though a little slick. Unlike the others in the house, his English is impeccable, his manner casual and hip -- he is what's known in the Chinese immigrant community as a "banana": yellow on the outside, white on the inside. He was born in Taiwan and came to L.A. with his family when he was 10. They were not struggling immigrants. "My father ran a large car dealership in Taiwan, and he got into the same business in L.A. and did pretty well," Frank says, standing in the sparsely furnished living room, where copies of Business 2.0 and Red Herring are stacked neatly on the coffee table. He graduated from Harvard with a degree in applied mathematics and was immediately hired by Salomon Smith Barney. He worked in the technology division, putting together mergers and acquisitions for Fortune 500 companies like Hewlett Packard. He eventually tired of the grueling hours and rigid corporate structure; when he got an offer from Panasonic's venture-capital group in Silicon Valley, he jumped at it. "It was pretty clear to me that there are a lot more opportunities here in the valley than there are back East," Frank explains. He invites me to visit him at work, and a few days later I take him up on it.
The Panasonic Digital Concepts Center (P.D.C.C.), which is only a few blocks from my old house, is an example of the latest trend in venture-capital investing in Silicon Valley -- a start-up incubator. It is a little like a day care center for entrepreneurs: Panasonic provides not only start-up capital to its clients but also office space and in-house expertise on how to get a business up and running quickly. The setup gives entrepreneurs space to work, an increasingly rare commodity in the valley, while allowing Panasonic to keep a watchful eye on its offspring. Panasonic's incubator is not the richest -- P.D.C.C. has a modest $50 million fund, which it has used to invest in about a dozen companies so far -- but it may have the sleekest offices: a thin-panel TV playing "The Matrix" in the lobby, glass-wall offices, a well-stocked kitchen where geeks working on the various start-ups congregate and swap stock tips.
Frank's first meeting the morning of my visit is with Joe Corrigan, the C.E.O. of Rocket8, an online auction network targeted at teenagers. Corrigan is here at the P.D.C.C. to pitch the coming global dominance of his company. Depending on how things go over the next hour or so, Corrigan could walk out with a promise of several million for his start-up. Or not.
The meeting is held around a long mahogany table in one of the conference rooms. Besides Frank at the table are Cate Cavanaugh and Jim Robbins, the company's principals. Corrigan, 25, is a polished, well-spoken guy, his shirt collar open, his sleeves rolled up, suggestive of a man who is getting down to business. He rattles off numbers, flashes charts and talks about "data mining" and "scalability." Frank scratches notes on a yellow legal pad and asks a few pointed questions. Cavanaugh and Robbins do the heavy lifting, grilling Corrigan on his business plan: "How are you going to separate yourself from the hundreds of other sites that are trying to attract the Gen-Y crowd?"; "I don't really see the nuts and bolts of your revenue stream here -- is this 100 percent advertising driven?"; "What's going to prevent this from becoming a dumping ground for second-rate products?" Corrigan has an answer for everything, but it is clear that no one in the room is bowled over by his pitch.
Afterward, Frank lingers in the hall and talks with me about the flaws and the strengths in Rocket8's business model. "Maybe we'll take a look at them again in a year or so, after they've built up some momentum," he says. This is V.C.-speak for "Thanks, but no thanks."
Still, after this meeting I understand why Sara is so respectful of him. While she is stuck on the phone 10 hours a day, selling computer monitors and worrying about her H-1B visa, Frank works in the valley's inner sanctum -- the place where the money is distributed. Whereas Sara's best hope in the valley is to marry well, Frank has his get-rich-quick credentials in order: a degree from an Ivy League college, an understanding of how money moves, a singular and ruthless devotion to work that is uncluttered by love or lust. He is one of the foot soldiers in what the Silicon Valley social critic Paulina Borsook, author of "Cyberselfish," calls "the invasion of the M.B.A.'s" -- the huge flood of well-educated, soft-shoed money shufflers who are a sure sign of what a global powerhouse the valley has become, as well a tombstone for the wild, freewheeling days of barefoot entrepreneurs and change-the-world technohippies. Like the elegant restaurants and sophisticated architecture, the invasion of the M.B.A.'s is a sign that the valley has been civilized.
To Frank, however, the move from Wall Street to Silicon Valley feels plenty adventurous. Most established V.C.'s get a piece of equity in companies they invest in, and if you hit it big, you can get very rich; Frank, who is near the bottom of the V.C. totem pole, works for straight salary. He won't say how much, except that it is about half of what he was making on Wall Street. Worse, he is living in a place he clearly believes is beneath him. Like Sara, he ended up in my old house by answering an ad in The World Journal. He thinks of it as temporary quarters until he finds a place of his own. But in the few months since he moved in, the landlord has jammed several other tenants into the house, and now Frank has to wait in line for the bathroom every morning and do his laundry in the washing machine in the backyard.
"I'm paying my dues," Frank says one night, looking around my old living room with disdain.
One night, Sara invites me upstairs to look at some pictures with her. The room is in such chaos that it is hardly recognizable as the room where I watched my father waste away: a double bed on a metal frame against the wall, clothes and junk piled out on the balcony, a folding metal table in the corner that is stacked high with various cosmetics and ointments, a desktop computer with brightly colored fish swimming across the screen and on the nightstand beside the bed, a big plastic pink and white cat-shaped Hello Kitty alarm clock and a dogeared copy of "Soros on Soros," a book-length interview with the global financier George Soros, translated into Mandarin.
She shows me pictures of herself when she was 21, 22, 23, wearing a red silk dress, on vacation with her ex-boyfriend (now a Microsoft paper millionaire), frolicking on the beach. "See, I was a good-looking woman once!" she jokes.
For Sara, being a single woman in the valley is not fun. She broke up with the Microsoft guy about a year ago, and now she is going out with a software engineer who works at an investment bank in San Francisco, but she is not sure where that relationship is going. In the valley, where men outnumber women by roughly 3 to 1, you would think that someone like Sara -- attractive, fun-loving, funny -- would have her pick of the litter. Sara assures me it is not true. "What is that joke I heard?" she says, tapping her fingers on the photo album. "Something about how there are thousands of men in Silicon Valley, but they are all the same man. All engineers. All working very hard. All when they don't work, they have to study, because they are all afraid of becoming obsolete. That is the big fear of everyone here -- if you don't work hard enough, you become obsolete."
As it turns out, Sara has a lot of theories about men in Silicon Valley. She believes that the same character traits that this economy rewards -- a monomaniacal devotion to work, technological savvy, a brash arrogance that you, too, can reorder the world -- are precisely the qualities that make most men in the valley such bad bets for husbands. "It is very difficult to have an argument with a Silicon Valley man," Sara explains. "They are not used to compromising, or not getting their way, or listening." She tells me about an engineer she dated who used to yell at her if she got up from her table at a restaurant and pushed her chair back at an angle. "Engineers like order," she says. "They do not like messy people like me."
Part of Sara's worry about men comes from her mother in Taiwan, who fears that she will turn into an old maid. Her parents don't like a lot of what America has done to Sara -- they think she dresses too casually now, doesn't wear enough makeup, speaks her mind too much. At the same time, by American standards she is very conservative. She won't go to bars or clubs, doesn't date anyone who isn't Taiwanese, never does drugs and rarely drinks alcohol. "I am not American; I am not Taiwanese," she says. "I'm in between, and that is a hard place to be."
At 8:30 on a Friday night, Frank Lin picks me up at my hotel in his dusty, gum-wrapper-strewn Honda Accord. He had intended to go to his usual Friday networking party for Asian-Americans at a bar in Palo Alto, but at the last minute he changed his mind -- even Frank, dedicated networker that he is, gets tired of passing business cards around. So, instead, we head up the Bayshore Freeway to dinner with a few of his friends at a sushi restaurant in Milbrae. Bayshore is the Main Street of Silicon Valley, a shaggy, bumpy, traffic-choked four-lane highway that is festooned with billboards for dot-coms desperate to capture a nanosecond of the fractured attention span of the valley's movers and shakers.
It has been a tense day in the valley -- the Nasdaq fell 189 points, one of the first tremors before mid-April's full-scale panic. Already, the mood is shifting. Gone is the simple idea that anyone who has a good idea and is willing to work hard can hit it big. A quiet panic is beginning to rise, like the panic that spreads on a listing ship when its passengers realize there aren't enough lifeboats to go around.
Frank, however, shows no signs of slowing down. He snatches up his ever-buzzing cell phone ("Frank Lin," he answers with studied abruptness), and it is clear that he is still a little jazzed from a busy day -- four pitches, two of which he says were interesting enough to pursue further. Plus, P.D.C.C. is set to announce a $5 million investment in a company that creates in-store media displays, which is the incubator's largest deal yet. I ask if the day's drop in the markets spooked him.
"Nah," he says with surprising bluster. "If you're gonna be in this game, you gotta have a stomach for risk."
At the sushi restaurant, we meet Frank's friends in a small private room. They are all Chinese and Taiwanese-Americans, and like Frank, they have all been in the United States long enough to become naturalized citizens, they all speak fluent English and of course they all work in high tech.
The talk is about stocks -- what you should sell, what you should hold, the difference between options and futures, the dangers of shorting and going long. Frank claims to be a long-term investor, not interested in the day-to-day gyrations, but in the valley, that is like standing in the rain without an umbrella and trying not to get wet. One of Frank's friends, Victor Yang, a tall, stylish 25-year-old who sells computer hardware -- L.C.D. screens, motherboards and other components -- for Quanta, a giant Taiwanese manufacturer, admits that these wild market swings are spooky: "If this thing crashes, where are all these jobs going to go? What are people going to do? Everyone is stretched so thin around here. I think it could be real chaos." Like many other salaried workers I've spoken to, Victor admits he is tired of meeting people who have gotten rich simply because they have been in the right place at the right time, and says he won't mind the social justice that a crash would bring to the valley. "I think a crash would be a kind of leveler," he says. "It might equal things out a bit." Of course, Victor's credibility as a have-not is undermined slightly when we leave the restaurant and I notice he is driving a shiny Porsche 911.
We head down to Nola's, a popular bar in downtown Palo Alto. The place is jammed, music blasting, funky Caribbean art all over the walls. Between beers, Frank talks about his future plans: stay at P.D.C.C. for a year or two, learn how the game is played, then start his own company. What that company might be, he has no idea. "I think it's important to take your time, think it through. I don't care what the market is doing -- there will always be plenty of money around for good ideas."
Frank's relentless optimism is countered by Victor's continuing tales of woe in the hardware business. He spends two or three weeks of every month in the air, he explains, jumping from city to city in the U.S. to visit customers, then flying over to Taiwan at least once every two months to visit the home office. "My life is a series of airports, hotels and rent-a-cars," Victor says. "It can be brutal. Hardware is a commodity now, like toilet paper, and competition is intense." Sipping on his beer, he tells a story about a guy he recently met on a flight from New York to San Jose: "The guy asked me what I do for a living, and I went on my usual spiel about chips and motherboards and how tough life is in the hardware business. He nodded, then looked at me and said: 'What about the trees, what about the air? Do you ever think about that?' I just stared at him. I had no idea what to say. I just thought: 'You're right, buddy. We've totally lost perspective."'
Whenever I am in the valley, I spend a lot of time driving around, checking out new buildings and old haunts, trying to absorb all the changes that have swept through in the last couple of decades. It is not easy. The valley lies between two major earthquake faults, the Hayward and the San Andreas. The ground is, quite literally, always moving. Subtle sociological shifts that take generations to occur in other regions seem to happen here overnight. Barber shops morph into copy centers; malls are torn down and rebuilt; new office buildings rise like towers of Lego blocks; roads are widened, then clogged, then widened, then clogged again. Some of this motion feels appropriate; some of it feels tragic; some seems unwittingly symbolic. The office building where Steve Jobs and his band of merry pirates built the first Macintosh, for example, has been leveled and replaced by sleek new offices for Ernst & Young, one of the world's largest accounting and consulting firms. Even more telling, the bungalow where the Nobel Prize-winning scientist William Shockley designed the first transistor chip in the late 1940's -- a Silicon Valley landmark if ever there was one -- now sells ergonomic furniture, designed to relieve the stress of high-tech life.
There are signs that the brutality of life here is beginning to take its toll. Austin, Tex., not Silicon Valley, was the fastest growing high-tech center in the United States in 1999; in fact, last year, for the first time in five years, the tide of new immigrants into the valley was offset by an even stronger flow of people moving out. And no wonder. The quality of life in the area has seriously deteriorated over the last decade. Cities are having a hard time hiring cops; traffic is a nightmare; schools are struggling to recruit teachers -- if you don't work in high tech, why live here?
Still, Silicon Valley remains the capital of the new world, and as long as it doesn't all vanish in a major earthquake, it will probably retain its prominence for some time. The central paradox of the valley is that although it invented the technology that has made geography increasingly irrelevant, if you work in high tech, this is still the place to be. Part of it is the easy access to vast amounts of capital, which is crucial to anyone dreaming of a start-up; part of it is simply keeping up with the buzz. "The more dependent we become on technology, the more we understand that it's in face-to-face human contact that all the subtle energies are exchanged," says Paul Saffo, founder of the Institute for the Future in Menlo Park. "In the valley, you pick up information about what's new and what's hot almost by osmosis."
So far, Silicon Valley has been able to avoid the ethnic and racial tensions that plague other regions that have absorbed large numbers of immigrants. But easy harmony during boom times is no great accomplishment; it remains to be seen what happens as the boom fades. The valley's true human fault line, however, is not race but class: it is evolving rapidly into a two-tier culture of the technologically savvy global elite and the people who service them. In San Francisco, where many artists and small businesses have been displaced by skyrocketing rents, there is already a backlash brewing. The invasion of the dot-commer was an issue in last November's mayoral race, and warehouse walls in the red-hot South of Market district are scrawled with graffiti like "evicted.com" and "greed.net."
But whether these voices of protest are a sign of a rising social movement or just the whispers of the vanquished remains to be seen. One of the self-perpetuating virtues of a fast-changing culture like the valley is that there are fewer and fewer people around who remember what was lost. The past is not only uninteresting; it has been obliterated. The price of progress is memory.
Sara calls me on my cell phone and says excitedly: "I found a house! We're closing on it today!"
A few hours later, we drive to a neighborhood in west San Jose, a couple of miles away from my old house. It is a modest area, maybe one click down the socioeconomic scale from my neighborhood in Sunnyvale. But the house she is buying is neat and pretty, the nicest one on the street, with a big rose hedge and a lemon tree in the front yard. It is hard to see it clearly because it is pouring rain, but that doesn't dampen Sara's enthusiasm. She stares at it through the beating windshield wipers and for moment all her worries -- her boyfriend, her visa, her future -- seem to vanish. She is excited, happy, bouncing in her seat. "I was born to be an American," she crows.
When we return to my old house, it looks shaggier than ever. The gutters are clogged, and sheets of water are pouring off the roof onto the exterior walls, dripping over the door stoop, seeping through cracks in the shingles. I smell mold, decay, decline. Even the water in the aquifer 210 feet beneath the house is in bad shape, polluted by toxic chemicals -- TCA, TCE, Freon -- that leached into the ground from an old chip-manufacturing plant nearby. My family home is now perched on the edge of a Superfund site.
Still, life continues on Meadowlark Lane. Sara and I talk in the living room for a while; tonight, for the first time since I've been back to visit, the house is bustling. Eric, the cranky engineer I met on my first visit, heats a bowl of soup in the microwave; the other Frank, the one who works at Nortel, sits with his door a crack open, which, given the closed-up nature of life in the house, is a gesture of friendliness. The hum of activity feels not unlike it did when I was growing up there, and for a moment I wonder if maybe my sister is wrong -- my father is not spinning in his grave. Maybe he is looking up at these new settlers who have landed in his beloved home and smiling, grateful that it is being lived in by people who, in their own way, are as optimistic and hopeful as he once was.
As I'm preparing to leave, Frank Lin walks in, looking haggard. We talk for a few minutes about the new deals he has been working on and he seems, as usual, excited about them. He tells me that he will be moving out in a few weeks -- his brother is buying a town house and Frank is going to rent one of the bedrooms. "I can't wait to get out of here," he says, glancing around the lonely kitchen. A wave of revulsion passes over his face. "This place is just such a dump," he says. "There's not much you can do but tear it down." Then he heads into my old bedroom for some much needed sleep.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: (Gail Albert Halaban); The House on Meadowlark Lane: It was really nothing special when he was growing up in it, the author says, though over the years it became a brick-and-mortar monument to his father's deep feelings of family and place. Then came a new world that called itself Silicon Valley, and "family" and "place" didn't mean as much. Now it is a boarding house for young people hoping to prosper enough to move on, and one of them is doing just that above.; The Dreamers: Frank Lin, top left, a venture capitalist, in the author's old bedroom. Bin Yu, top right, is a Java programmer. Sara Liang, above, sells flat-panel display screens and now has her own house. Mason Tse, lower left, practices law. The author and his father, center, in 1967, when residents of Sunnyvale dreamed of other things. (Gail Albert Halaban/Saba, for The New York Times. center: from the author.); Table Talk: Jin Hsueh, who works for a disk-drive manufacturer, with Mason Tse in the kitchen at Meadowlark Lane. (Gail Albert Halaban/Saba, for The New York Times)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: STUDENT HOUSING (78%); COOKING & ENTERTAINING (75%); VENTURE CAPITAL (73%); WRITERS (73%)

Industry: VENTURE CAPITAL (73%); WRITERS (73%); MONITORS & DISPLAYS (67%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); TAIPEI, TAIWAN (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (71%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (76%); UNITED STATES (86%); TAIWAN (54%)

Load-Date: May 28, 2000


End of Document
The Nation: The Immigration Debate;
Full Employment Opens the Door
The New York Times
June 18, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk 
Section: Section 4; ; Section 4; Page 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 913 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA 

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
Body


JUST a few years ago, lawmakers were in full cry about the supposed dangers of immigration -- from crime to welfare cheats to lost jobs.
Yet now Congress is poised to pass a bill that would grant visas to tens of thousands more temporary high-tech workers from abroad. And an unlikely coalition of business and immigrants rights groups is pushing to fling the door open wider: to unskilled workers who could fill shortages in hotels and on farms, and even to roll back an array of restrictive measures passed with great fanfare in 1996.
Clearly, the national conversation about immigrants and immigration has changed dramatically. Representative Howard L. Berman, a Democrat from California, described the political momentum generated by the temporary workers bill this way: "There's a train going through. Can I get on it?"
Sometime later this summer, Congress is expected to pass H1B, which would nearly double, to 200,000, the number of such visas issued every year for the next three years. The measure has bipartisan support, including the blessings of both presumptive Presidential candidates .
If it passes, H1B will be the largest guest worker measure since the 1942 bracero program, which imported millions of Mexicans farmworkers into virtual servitude, until it was dismantled in 1964.
A broad new service industry coalition, representing everything from hospitals to hotels, is seeking its own temporary workers from abroad. And agribusiness, which has unsuccessfully lobbied for temporary field workers in the past, has renewed its efforts.
Meanwhile, traditional immigrants rights groups are urging lawmakers to lift the 1996 measures that bar immigrants from some government benefits, tighten political asylum rules and require the automatic deportation of non-citizens who had been convicted of certain felony crimes.
A coalition calling itself "Fix 96," is urging lawmakers to repeal the mandatory deportation law and restore social security benefits and food stamps to immigrants who arrived after 1996; benefits to pre-1996 immigrants have already been restored.
Another coalition of business and civil rights groups is calling on Congress to grant legal status to some 300,000 immigrants who fled political violence in El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti and Honduras but were denied refugee status in this country. The same group wants Congress to raise the cap on family reunification visas, while religious leaders and a left-right coalition led by Henry Cisneros and Jack Kemp have called for amnesty for others who have lived here illegally for many years.
In what Rick Swartz, a leading immigration lobbyist, calls the "H1B- plus" strategy, activists are trying to bundle both the family reunification and amnesty proposals with the high-tech worker bill, turning it into a kind of omnibus immigration measure.
"The economy is very strong right now and who knows what it's going to look like a year from now," Mr. Swarz said. "A strong economy enables you to do more. Secondly, an election year in which the politics of immigration may be more positive than negative. Third, you have both major presidential candidates being pro-immigrant at least in their rhetoric."
Of course, good times have usually meant open doors, and these are, economically, the best times ever. Still, none of the other immigration bills enjoy anything like the consensus surrounding H1B. The farm lobby's guest worker bill, which the House immigration subcommittee debated Thursday, is likely to face strong opposition from labor and Latino groups, who don't accept the industry's claims of a labor shortage. They want a provision to legalize the immigration status of farm workers, a majority of whom are undocumented Hispanic immigrants, while the industry bill would allow some farm workers to gain permanent residency.
John Young, executive director of the New England Apple Council who heads the immigration committee of the National Council of Agricultural Employers, remains optimistic. "I think the opportunity is very good for passage, better than it has been in the past few years," he said.
ASERVICE industry umbrella group called the Essential Worker Coalition also cites labor shortages in tourism and other trades, and has just begun what it likes to call an H1B program tailored for groundskeepers, housekeepers and other low-skilled workers, many of them seasonal.
"The high-tech industry has done a very good job in making their case," argued John Gay, a lobbyist for the American Hotel and Motel association and a spokesman for the coalition. "We need to do the same making our case."
Many service industry workers are illegal immigrants from Central America and Haiti, and Mr. Gay's group has thrown its support behind the National Council of La Raza, a leading Latino rights group, which proposes amnesty for undocumented immigrants who have lived and worked here since 1986.
One area in which there has been little movement has been the restoration of government benefits that were cut in 1996. A number of bills have been introduced to repeal the mandatory deportation law, but none have made it out of the immigration subcommittees. Efforts to restore the due process rights of asylum-seekers have had a similar fate.
To Mr. Swartz, the reason is clear. "It's harder to get the business community to support a bill on the legal rights of people getting deported," he pointed out, "than to get a legalization program for Central Americans who are working in their restaurants."

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FARM LABOR (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (90%); AMNESTY (89%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); FULL EMPLOYMENT (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LABOR REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LOBBYING (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); WELFARE BENEFITS (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE POLITICAL NEWS (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); WELFARE FRAUD (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); FELONIES (73%); FOOD STAMPS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); POLITICAL VIOLENCE (72%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (69%); NEWS BRIEFS (58%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS VOCATIONS (50%); RELIGION (50%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FARM LABOR (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING & HUNTING (78%); HOTELS & MOTELS (76%); AGRICULTURE (75%)

Person: HOWARD L BERMAN (58%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%); GUATEMALA (79%); HAITI (79%); HONDURAS (79%)

Load-Date: June 18, 2000


End of Document
Bush Campaigns on Issues of a 'Different' Republican
The New York Times
June 27, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 969 words
Byline: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE 

By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE 
Body


Gov. George W. Bush continued yesterday to present himself as a "different kind of Republican," describing an immigrant-friendly approach to the bureaucratic Immigration and Naturalization Service and making a broad appeal to black voters in an address in Manhattan.
Mr. Bush lauded racial harmony in a dinner speech before the Congress of Racial Equality at the Hilton Hotel in Midtown. He said he wanted to finance mentoring programs for children whose parents were in prison and to rally "the vast armies of compassion." Among those on the dais were Wayne LaPierre, executive vice president of the National Rifle Association; Bob Grant, the conservative radio talk-show host; Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; and descendants of Thomas Jefferson and his wife, Martha, and others thought to be descended from Jefferson and his slave Sally Hemings.
Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's spokeswoman, said Mr. Bush was dedicating himself this week to making a broad appeal across party lines to groups that traditionally lean Democratic. Today he plans to discuss welfare-to-work programs in Michigan, and the next day he plans to speak in Ohio about removing barriers to those with disabilities.
On immigration, the Texas governor said yesterday that he would propose legislation to split the Immigration and Naturalization Service into two agencies, one to deal with law enforcement and the other to provide services to immigrants.
For years, officials across the political spectrum have supported reconstructing the unwieldy immigration service, and two bills are moving through the Republican-controlled Congress to do so.
Addressing the League of United Latin American Citizens yesterday at a conference in Washington, Mr. Bush spoke in brief generalities, saying that as president he would "reform the I.N.S." and that he wanted a "more humane" approach to immigration.
His aides said later that while Mr. Bush would propose his own legislation, he favored the approach of Senator Spencer Abraham, Republican of Michigan, and Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts. Their bill is viewed by pro-immigration groups as more helpful to immigrants than the House bill proposed by Representatives Lamar Smith of Texas and Harold Rogers of Kentucky, both Republicans.
The chief difference in the bills is that the Senate's, in splitting the agency, would put one person in charge to supervise both the law enforcement and service functions to make sure that they took consistent approaches.
Pro-immigrant groups worry that if the agency is split, the law enforcement branch would consume most of the money and the services for immigrants would get short shrift. The enforcement side gets most of the agency's money now, but backers of the Senate bill hope that would change.
Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said the governor was not endorsing any particular legislation but added, "There are no differences between the governor's bill and Senator Abraham's bill."
Although Mr. Bush's language was vague and his view seems to differ little from that of the Clinton administration, the point was to distinguish himself from the stricter Republican immigration politics of yore.
"It's outreach," Mr. Fleischer said. "It's the governor following through on his promise that the Republican Party has to be the party of inclusion, for single moms, for new citizens coming to America. It's different from a lot of the sights and sounds that people have been hearing from the Republican Party in recent years."
The Bush campaign has been working to change the reputation the party gained in 1994 when some prominent Republicans, including Pete Wilson, then the governor of California, backed a California ballot proposition that would deny medical and education services to children of illegal immigrants. Mr. Bush did not comment directly on the proposition, which voters overwhelmingly endorsed, saying he did not want to tell another state what to do, but he said he would educate all children.
The governor also said yesterday that he would grant tourist visas to immigrants who were waiting for their visas if their spouse or child had already received permanent residency status. Now, such family members are ineligible to visit, on the theory that they would try to stay in the United States illegally.
Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum, a Washington advocacy group for immigrants, said in an interview that Mr. Bush's proposal to split the immigration service was "not exactly a profile in courage," since almost everyone supported it.
Mr. Sharry said it was more interesting that Mr. Bush had not mentioned other issues of importance to Latino voters and especially immigrants, like the H-1B visa bill, which would increase the number of visas for high-tech workers from abroad. Mr. Bush supports increasing the number of visas, but Republicans -- and Democrats, particularly those from organized labor -- are divided over whether this is a good idea.
"He didn't speak to the tough issues, though he's trying to present himself as a new kind of Republican," Mr. Sharry said.
Vice President Al Gore is to address the League of United Latin American Citizens on Friday. Douglas Hattaway, a Gore spokesman, said Mr. Gore wanted to streamline the immigration agency.
"Bush would start from square 1," Mr. Hattaway said, "and we don't think that's necessary."
Commenting more broadly on Mr. Bush's approach, Mr. Hattaway said: "Bush is clearly trying to make himself out to be a different kind of Republican by appearing friendly to immigrants. But under his leadership in Texas, Hispanics are not doing as well as other residents."
Hispanics in Texas, he continued, were disproportionately poor, in part because Texas has a minimum wage of $3.35 per hour, compared with the federal minimum of $5.15 per hour.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Gov. George W. Bush meeting yesterday in Washington with the League of United Latin American Citizens. (Susana Raab for The New York Times)
      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); GOVERNORS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); CONSERVATISM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); RACIAL JUSTICE (77%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (76%); MENTORS & ROLE MODELS (76%); EXECUTIVES (75%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (73%); WELFARE BENEFITS (67%); VOTERS & VOTING (57%); PARENTAL INCARCERATION (56%); NEWS BRIEFS (50%)

Company: CONGRESS OF RACIAL EQUALITY (CORE); IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS  (59%);  IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS  (59%);  NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA  (57%)

Organization: LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS  (59%);  NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA  (57%); CONGRESS OF RACIAL EQUALITY (CORE); IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS  (59%);  IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  LEAGUE OF UNITED LATIN AMERICAN CITIZENS  (59%);  NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA  (57%)

Industry: CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (73%); HOTELS & MOTELS (71%)

Person: WAYNE LAPIERRE (77%); HAROLD ROGERS (58%); LAMAR SMITH (58%); RUDY GIULIANI (58%); TED KENNEDY (58%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (92%); TEXAS, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: June 27, 2000


End of Document
Immigration Injustices
The New York Times
July 5, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk ; Column 1; ; Editorial
Length: 470 words
Body


With unemployment rates at a 30-year low and strong growth in the high-tech sector, many technology companies are hard pressed to find enough programmers and other skilled workers to meet their needs. One way industry has dealt with the labor shortage has been to hire skilled foreign workers who are allowed to come to this country under special, temporary H-1B visas. But now demand for skilled workers is outstripping the number of such workers allowed in each year by statute. Congress needs to raise the visa cap temporarily to ease the shortages. It should also correct some severe injustices in the immigration laws that have hurt immigrants who have been in this country for more than a decade.
Under current law, H-1B visas, which permit foreign workers to stay in the United States for upto six years, are capped at 115,000 for fiscal year 2000 and will decline to 65,000 in 2002. There is bipartisan support in Congress to increase that cap for a limited time. One reasonable proposal, sponsored by Representatives David Dreier, Republican of California, and Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, would increase the cap to 200,000 visas per year through 2003. Their bill would set aside a number of the visas for nonprofit research institutions and would require that 60,000 visas be reserved for people with advanced degrees. The proposal would also increase the visa application fee to $1,000 from $500 and direct the money toward job training and education programs.
The Clinton administration supports a temporary increase in the visa cap, but with higher fees than the Dreier-Lofgren plan. It also wants Congress to correct some other immigration problems.
In 1997, Congress granted permanent residency to Nicaraguan and Cuban refugees who fled oppression by their leftist regimes in the 1980's. But it granted only lesser forms of relief to Guatemalans and Salvadorans who fled right-wing regimes, and it neglected Haitians and Hondurans. Congress should dismantle these distinctions and allow Central American refugees to apply for permanent residency on an equal basis.
Congress should also cure a legal mess left over from the 1986 immigration overhaul. At that time Congress granted amnesty to illegal aliens who had been in the country before 1982. But some 300,000 people were improperly denied the opportunity to apply for amnesty by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Years of litigation followed, with the courts ruling in favor of the immigrants. Then in 1996, Congress stripped the courts of jurisdiction over these cases, leaving these immigrants, a great number of whom had been granted work authorization, in legal limbo. A sensible bill now pending in Congress would allow these individuals and other similarly situated people who have been here since the mid-1980's to stay permanently.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (90%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); REFUGEES (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WORKFORCE DEMAND (78%); EMPLOYEE TRAINING & ASSISTANCE (77%); LABOR SHORTAGES (77%); AMNESTY (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); MIGRATION ISSUES (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (72%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (71%); BIPARTISANSHIP (70%); PENDING LEGISLATION (69%); LITIGATION (64%)

Company: HONDURANS CONGRESS  (95%)

Organization: HONDURANS CONGRESS  (95%); HONDURANS CONGRESS  (95%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%)

Person: DAVID DREIER (58%); ZOE LOFGREN (58%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); GUATEMALA (79%); HONDURAS (79%); NICARAGUA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (53%)

Load-Date: July 5, 2000


End of Document
Today in Politics: Donald Trump's Immigration Plan Casts Rivals as the Rope in a Tug of War
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
August 18, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1605 words
Byline: THE NEW YORK TIMES
Highlight: Republicans were hoping to leave their immigration woes behind, but six months before the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Trump has made that impossible. 
Body


 Good Tuesday morning. Cameras and microphones flocked to Donald J. Trump on Monday as he fulfilled his civic responsibilities and reported for jury duty in Manhattan. But it is his strict immigration proposals that continue to gain widespread attention and expose tension in the party over which crucial voting bloc is best to alienate and upset: Mr. Trump's already angry supporters or Hispanics. 
Republicans were hoping to leave their immigration woes behind, but six months before the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Trump has made that impossible.
By articulating his policy of rounding up immigrants and building a big wall, Mr. Trump has forced the party to talk about immigration in the terms of its most ardent activists. So much for Republicans wooing Hispanic voters with a more moderate tone.
"Chasing extremists on immigration to win the primary will end the Republican Party's ability to win the general election in 2016, and it will destroy the party," said Kica Matos, a spokeswoman for the Fair Immigration Reform Movement. "If you alienate the fastest-growing voting block in the country you cannot win today, and you cannot survive tomorrow."
Conservatives walk a tightrope in both directions, running the risk of upsetting their base by breaking too far from Mr. Trump, who leads in the polls. But a Gallup survey this month found that just 31 percent of Republicans favor deporting all illegal immigrants - as Mr. Trump wants to do.
The tension in the party was evident on Monday when Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey said that Mr. Trump's plan to build a wall "didn't make any sense" and when Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin echoed Mr. Trump's support for ending birthright citizenship, suggesting to Iowans that he had inspired much of Mr. Trump's overall plan.
On Monday evening, Lorella Praeli, the America Latino outreach director for Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign, released a statement linking Mr. Walker to Mr. Trump, and both of them to the rest of the party.
"It is disturbing that Republican presidential candidates continue to embrace extreme anti-immigrant positions as core pieces of their immigration platform," Ms. Praeli said.
As Mrs. Clinton heads to Nevada on Tuesday to meet with members of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., she will most likely be eager to resume the debate.
 - Alan Rappeport 
  Stay tuned throughout the day: Follow us on Twitter   @NYTpolitics   and on              Facebook   for              First Draft updates  .  
 What We're Watching Today 
 Jeb Bush will attend a national security forum in South Carolina hosted by Americans for Peace, Prosperity and Security. Mr. Bush, who            has been lagging in the polls despite his presumed front-runner status when he entered the race, regained some national attention with recent speeches            linking the rise of the Islamic State to the policies of President Obama and Mrs. Clinton's tenure as secretary of state.
The Des Moines Register's Soapbox continues as Senator Marco Rubio of Florida and Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio take their turn with the bipartisan,            and sometimes vocal, crowd at the Iowa State Fair.
And Mrs. Clinton's appearance before labor leaders in Nevada is the latest round in the Democratic fight for the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s endorsement, which the group has hinted it will take its time announcing - a seeming effort for leverage to influence the eventual Democratic nominee's policy positions.
 Walker to Release Plan on Repealing and Replacing Health Care Law 
 Mr. Walker, who is seeking to re-enter the national conversation after slipping poll numbers and a lackluster outing in the first Republican debate, will tackle a subject on Tuesday that many of his rivals have so far ducked: a detailed replacement for Mr. Obama's health care plan.
In a speech in Minnesota, Mr. Walker plans to take aim at the Republican-controlled Congress for failing to "put a bill on President Obama's desk to repeal Obamacare,'' according to a preview of his remarks.
Still, many who follow Republican proposals for replacing the Affordable Care Act will find the details of Mr. Walker's Patient Freedom Plan familiar. It eliminates the individual mandate to buy health insurance and gives individuals tax credits to buy coverage, up to $3,000 for someone over 50. It allows plans to be sold across state lines. It promises tort reform.
Mr. Walker would revamp two of the Affordable Care Act's most popular features: Instead of requiring insurance companies to allow people up to 26 years old to stay on their parents' plans, states would decide the matter; and instead of a prohibition on insurers discriminating against people with pre-existing conditions, Mr. Walker would give federal aid to states for high-risk pools.
He would pay for his own plan by lowering the cost of Medicaid, largely by turning it into a block grant to states, and by ending the tax deduction for costly employer-provided plans.
An issue Mr. Walker does not address: How many of the estimated 16.5 million people who gained coverage under the law would lose it under repeal, and how many would be covered under the Walker proposals?
 - Trip Gabriel 
 Bulletins: Context for Trump; Backing for Kasich; Megadonor for Cruz 
Though Mr. Trump's immigration plan stretched the boundaries of previous conservative platforms, some of his proposals are based on assertions that have been broadly debunked.
 Mr. Kasich is seen as a moderate in the Republicans' rambunctious field of candidates, but the governor of one of the country's most conservative states, Robert Bentley of Alabama, gave him his endorsement on Monday, providing a potential boon to Mr. Kasich's perceived bona fides.
And Senator Ted Cruz of Texas's team has confirmed the identity of a previously mysterious megadonor: Ben Nash, the chief executive of PCS Wireless, who donated $250,000 to the Stand for Principle PAC tied to Mr. Cruz.
 Senate Republicans Reach Outside Senate to Twist Arms on Iran 
With August past its midpoint, Senate Republicans are stepping up the pressure on Democrats in advance of the September debate over the Iran nuclear agreement. And not just on the Democrats currently serving in the Senate.
"Will These Democrats Side With President Obama or the American People?" asked the headline of a news statement issued on Monday by the National Republican Senatorial Committee.
In addition to three House members seeking Senate seats in Florida and Illinois, the release singles out other potential Democratic Senate challengers, including Ted Strickland in Ohio and Catherine Cortez Masto in Nevada, and accuses them of being evasive on the Iran deal. The Republicans also pointedly note that Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the presumed leader of the next crop of Senate Democrats, has come out against the deal.
The Democratic Senate contenders say they are still studying the deal, and they seem in no hurry to go public with their views despite Republican attempts to smoke out even the Democrats who won't have to vote on the deal. But the push by Republicans is evidence that they see their virtually united opposition to the Iran agreement as a political winner and that they intend to make the issue central to the 2016 Senate campaign season.
 - Carl Hulse 
 Our Other Favorites From The Times  
Following the declared hopes of congressional Republicans, officials in some Republican states are moving to cut public funding for Planned Parenthood or to investigate it in response to videos claiming that it profits from fetal tissue sales.
 Mrs. Clinton, who is having some difficulty overcoming the perception that she is unapproachable on the campaign trail, is also            widening her embrace of donations from "super PACs": Her focus on campaign finance overhaul has snagged on the financial gap between her campaign and those of Republicans raising vast sums through the outside groups.
In an interviewwith The New York Times magazine, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont discussed the Black Lives Matter movement, Mr. Trump's ascent, and his "elevator pitch for Socialism."
And on Room for Debate, a Times Editorial Department blog, college students discuss the issues that matter most to them this elections season, including climate change, jobs and, of course, student debt.
The text message has suddenly become a go-to tactic for candidates when they need to cut through the noise online and reach supporters quickly and directly.
 What We're Reading Elsewhere  
 Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, The Associated Press writes, has pledged to contribute $450,000 to finance a proposed switch in the state from a primary to a caucus system, a move that would "allow Paul to run for president and re-election to his U.S. Senate seat simultaneously without violating a state law banning candidates from appearing on the ballot twice."
Writing for CNN, Martin O'Malley, the former Maryland governor, offered a plan to address the cholera epidemic in Haiti, arguing that the United Nations should acknowledge its role in the outbreak - it has been tied to peacekeeping troops - and that "the United States must assume a greater leadership role in our own hemisphere."
And Mr. Cruz has "dispatched" a campaign operative to Guam, The Guardian reports, to try and secure the territory's nine delegates.
Reports of possible presidential candidacies by Al Gore and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. are just reflective of the desire among reporters for a candidate who can "hypnotize the press,"Politico says.
 Mr. Trump's immigration plan is getting some praise on the left for seeking to expand the H-1B visa program to help skilled foreign workers stay in the United States, Breitbart.com reports.
Like this? Get First Draft delivered to your inbox.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CAUCUSES (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (89%); POLLS & SURVEYS (88%); ELECTIONS (79%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (79%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (79%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); VOTERS & VOTING (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW (73%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%); RELIGION (50%); Kasich, John R (%); Presidential Election of 2016 (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Walker, Scott K (%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (51%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (51%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (51%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); SCOTT WALKER (89%); CHRIS CHRISTIE (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JEB BUSH (79%); JOHN KASICH (74%); BARACK OBAMA (59%); Kasich, John R; Trump, Donald J; Walker, Scott K

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); IOWA, USA (93%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: August 18, 2015


End of Document
ECONOMIC VIEW;
Home-Grown Innovation, Home-Grown Workers
The New York Times
September 3, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Money and Business/Financial Desk
Section: Section 3;; Section 3; Page 4; Column 6; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Column 6;
Length: 764 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR

By STEVE LOHR
Body


THE chronic problem of the nation's high-technology labor force? Simple: There isn't enough of it.
The shortage of technology workers explains one of Washington's annual rituals. Silicon Valley executives warn Congress that unless private industry is allowed to hire more skilled foreign workers, growth in the new economy will sputter for lack of able minds. Organized labor complains, but to little effect. The industry typically prevails, reasonably, because the problem is a real one -- and the visa quotas for skilled immigrants are raised once more.
Nothing is more American than immigration. Yet the persistent shortage of home-grown technology workers to fill these high-skill, high-wage jobs does suggest that something is amiss in the labor market. Why isn't the supply of graduates from the nation's universities adjusting faster to meet the demand? What policy steps can help solve the problem?
Those questions are the focus of a recent paper by Paul M. Romer, an economist at the Stanford Business School, prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research. Mr. Romer is a pioneering thinker behind a set of ideas called new growth theory.
Put simply, new growth theory emphasizes the economic role of innovation. And innovation, according to Mr. Romer, is the X-factor in an economy, the elixir of sustained growth. So the goal of policy, he says, should be to foster innovation.
The right kinds of institutions are essential, he wrote in his paper, but "unfortunately, in the last 20 years, innovation policy in the United States has almost entirely ignored the structure of our institutions of higher learning."
In an interview, he explained that any policy analysis has to "get deeply into the details of how those institutions work."
In the university system, he sees a marketplace sorely in need of new and different incentives if it is ever to help erase the shortage of skilled workers in technology fields. He said he believes that there is a role for government to play in overhauling those incentives.
Too often, according to Mr. Romer, government programs intended to encourage scientific research have simply handed money or tax breaks to universities and companies -- which mainly increases the demand for scientists and engineers without doing anything for the supply.
"The crucial input," he said, "is to have more well-trained people who are engaged in innovative activities."
He would spend the money differently. At the undergraduate level, he recommends paying schools a bounty for increasing the number of graduates who receive science or engineering degrees -- $10,000 a head. This would reward liberal-arts schools, whose student populations tend to run heavy with English, history and social science majors, with an incentive to expand science and engineering programs.
At the graduate level, Mr. Romer sees different dimensions of the problem and suggests a different kind of supply-side subsidy. Increasingly, he said, research grants go to star professors, who then support graduate students as their research assistants. This system, he says, delivers some real benefits in basic research, but it nurtures an academic research culture instead of one that responds well to the needs of commerce.
THE Romer solution is to liberate graduate science and engineering students from dependence on money trickling down from professors; instead, he would have the government underwrite three-year fellowships with $20,000 annual stipends for nearly 17,000 students a year to pursue advanced degrees.
The two programs would combine to subsidize the right thing -- turning out more qualified people -- while giving more power to individuals and innovative institutions to decide how resources are used, Mr. Romer argues, adding that this approach sidesteps political problems. "It avoids the issues of pork-barrel science, giving money to politically favored constituents, and it also avoids the pitfall of having the government try to pick technology winners and losers," he said.
The price tag? For 100,000 additional undergraduate degrees, $1 billion a year, and another $1 billion for the graduate fellowships.
Justifying the spending, he said, would be the "social return" -- improved prospects for higher growth over the next 20 to 50 years, as more people engage in innovative activity.
In his paper, Mr. Romer cited a comparable policy that proved a winner: creation of a new academic discipline, computer science, in the 1960's. "Even now," he wrote, "with the passage of 40 years, our sense of the magnitude of the payoff from this investment is still growing."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart:
New visas for immigrants with special skills, known as H-1B visas, each year.
 
Chart shows new visas for immigrants with special skills, known as H-1B visas, each year since 1992.
(Source: Immigration and Naturalization Service)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (90%); LABOR FORCE (90%); LABOR SHORTAGES (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); ECONOMICS (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (88%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); NEW ECONOMY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (78%); SCIENCE FUNDING (78%); SHORTAGES (78%); ECONOMIC NEWS (76%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (71%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (67%); HISTORY (66%); TAX BREAKS (61%)

Company: NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH   (55%);  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH  (55%)

Organization: NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH   (55%);  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH  (55%); NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH   (55%);  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH  (55%)

Industry: ENGINEERING (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: September 3, 2000


End of Document
Trump's Immigration Plan Returns to Familiar Strategy
The New York Times
August 18, 2015 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17; FIRST DRAFT
Length: 662 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


With the immigration plan he revealed over the weekend, Donald J. Trump returned once again to the strategy that has worked so well for him in his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination: mixing a little policy with a lot of fiery bombast.
In the blueprint and comments he made on the news programs, Mr. Trump went further than his Republican rivals to compile the ideal roster of measures for those who want a lot fewer immigrants in general. He said all illegal immigrants should be deported, including young people who came to this country as children and have received protections though executive action by President Obama. He implied he would deport American citizens if their parents were here illegally. 
  ''We have to keep the families together, but they have to go,'' Mr. Trump said.
  Some of his proposals are based on assertions that have been broadly debunked. He portrayed undocumented Mexican immigrants as uneducated criminals who have been living off ''hundreds of billions'' of American taxpayer dollars for their health care and education. But scholarly research has shown that undocumented immigrants are much more reluctant to use public health care than Americans. And billions of dollars of Social Security taxes they have paid for benefits they cannot collect have shored up the dwindling funds of that system.
  Mr. Trump accused Mexico of exporting its crime and poverty to the United States. But while a bloody drug war has raged in Mexico in the last five years, notably little violence has spilled over into the United States, with several border cities being among the safest in the nation. Mr. Trump would build a wall across the length of the southwest border, a proposal Border Patrol officials have long rejected as immensely costly and inefficient.
  But Mr. Trump's blueprint is a problem for his Republican rivals who have tried to take fewer hard-line positions on immigration in an effort to attract Latino voters, like former Gov. Jeb Bush and Senator Marco Rubio, both of Florida. The plan crystallizes a hostile approach to Mexico and Mexican immigrants that is likely to stick in the minds of many Latino voters as reflective of the overall Republican view of immigration.
  To force Mexico to pay for the border wall, Mr. Trump says he would ''impound all remittance payments derived from illegal wages.'' A curb on remittances would attack longstanding lifelines between Mexican and other Latino immigrant communities in the United States and families back home -- often older parents or young children -- who rely on regular payments from workers here. Mr. Trump also favors raising fees on visas and border-crossing documents for Mexicans, making it even harder and more expensive for them to come legally.
  About 35 million people in this country were born in Mexico or claim Mexican ancestry, according to census figures, and Mexican-Americans are the fastest-growing group of new voters. About half of Mexican immigrants are undocumented, so their communities follow the immigration debate closely.
  Mr. Trump also called for an end to birthright citizenship, a proposal other Republicans have avoided because it is hard to achieve and risks alienating not only Latinos but also African-Americans. It involves changing the Constitution's 14th Amendment, which allowed freed African slaves to become citizens after the Civil War.
  Yet among Mr. Trump's populist proposals are some that could attract support from Americans in the beleaguered middle class. He went further than his rivals calling for changes to the temporary work visas known as H-1B, to raise the wages paid to immigrants and tighten requirements for employers to search first for Americans to fill jobs.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/08/17/donald-trumps-immigration-plan-would-have-far-ranging-effects/

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mexican-Americans protested a visit by Donald J. Trump in Birch Run, Mich., last Tuesday. He would deport all illegal migrants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REBECCA COOK/REUTERS)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (89%); FAMILY (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (89%); DEPORTATION (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (78%); SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); VOTERS & VOTING (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (75%); TAX LAW (73%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (72%); WAGES & SALARIES (70%); PUBLIC HEALTH (69%); CENSUS (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); JEB BUSH (78%); BARACK OBAMA (57%); MARCO RUBIO (57%)

Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: August 18, 2015


End of Document
LESSONS;
How to Create a Shortage In a Skilled-Labor Market
The New York Times
September 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk; 
Section: Section B; ; Section B; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page; Column 1; ; Education Page
Length: 828 words
Byline: By Richard Rothstein; 

E-mail: rrothstein@nytimes.com  

By Richard Rothstein;  E-mail: rrothstein@nytimes.com  
Body


TO alleviate apparent shortages of computer programmers, President Clinton and Congress have agreed to raise a quota on H-1B's, the temporary visas for skilled foreigners. The annual limit will go to 200,000 next year, up from 65,000 only three years ago.
The imported workers, most of whom come from India, are said to be needed because American schools do not graduate enough young people with science and math skills. Microsoft's chairman, William H. Gates, and Intel's chairman, Andrew S. Grove, told Congress in June that more visas were only a stopgap until education improved.
But the crisis is a mirage. High-tech companies portray a shortage, yet it is our memories that are short: only yesterday there was a glut of science and math graduates.
The computer industry took advantage of that glut by reducing wages. This discouraged youths from entering the field, creating the temporary shortages of today. Now, taking advantage of a public preconception that school failures have created the problem, industry finds a ready audience for its demands to import workers.
This newspaper covered the earlier surplus extensively. In 1992, it reported that 1 in 5 college graduates had a job not requiring a college degree. A 1995 article headlined "Supply Exceeds Demand for Ph.D.'s in Many Science Fields" cited nationwide unemployment of engineers, mathematicians and scientists. "Overproduction of Ph.D. degrees," it noted, "seems to be highest in computer science."
Michael S. Teitelbaum, a demographer who served as vice chairman of the Commission on Immigration Reform, said in 1996 that there was "an employer's market" for technology workers, partly because of post-cold-war downsizing in aerospace.
In fields with real labor scarcity, wages rise. Yet despite accounts of dot-com entrepreneurs' becoming millionaires, trends in computer technology pay do not confirm a need to import legions of programmers.
Salary offers to new college graduates in computer science averaged $39,000 in 1986 and had declined by 1994 to $33,000 (in constant dollars).  The trend reversed only in the late 1990's.
The West Coast median salary for experienced software engineers was $71,100 in 1999, up only 10 percent (in constant dollars) from 1990. This pay growth of about 1 percent a year suggests no labor shortage.
Norman Matloff, a computer science professor at the University of California, contends that high-tech companies create artificial shortages by refusing to hire experienced programmers. Many with technology degrees no longer work in the field. By age 50, fewer than half are still in the industry. Luring them back requires higher pay.
Industry spokesmen say older programmers with outdated skills would take too long to retrain. But Dr. Matloff counters by saying that when they urge more H-1B visas, lobbyists demonstrate a shortage by pointing to vacancies lasting many months. Companies could train older programmers in less time than it takes to process visas for cheaper foreign workers.
Dr. Matloff says that in addition to the pay issue, the industry rejects older workers because they will not work the long hours typical at Silicon Valley companies with youthful "singles" styles. Imported labor, he argues, is only a way to avoid offering better conditions to experienced programmers. H-1B workers, in contrast, cannot demand higher pay: visas are revoked if workers leave their sponsoring companies.
As for young computer workers, the labor market has recently tightened, with rising wages, because college students saw earlier wage declines and stopped majoring in math and science. In 1996, American colleges awarded 25,000 bachelor's degrees in computer science, down from 42,000 in 1985.
The reason is not that students suddenly lacked preparation. On the contrary, high school course-taking in math and science, including advanced placement, had climbed. Further, math scores have risen; last year 24 percent of seniors who took the SAT scored over 600 in math. But only 6 percent planned to major in computer science, and many of these cannot get into college programs.
The reason: colleges themselves have not yet adjusted to new demand. In some places, computer science courses are so oversubscribed that students must get on waiting lists as high school juniors.
With a time lag between student choice of majors and later job quests, high schools and colleges cannot address short-term supply and demand shifts for particular professions. Such shortages can be erased only by raising wages to attract those with needed skills who are now working in other fields -- or by importing low-paid workers.
For the longer term, rising wages can guide counselors to encourage well-prepared students to major in computer science and engineering, and colleges will adjust to rising demand. But more H-1B immigrants can have a perverse effect, as their lower pay signals young people to avoid this field in the future, keeping the domestic supply artificially low.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (David Suter)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LABOR MARKET (90%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (89%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (89%); IMPORT TRADE (89%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); TRENDS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); EMPLOYEE RETRAINING (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); LOBBYING (78%); MATHEMATICS (78%); TECHNOLOGY TRENDS (78%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (77%); ENGINEERING (76%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (73%); WAGE GROWTH (73%); COLD WAR (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (66%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (50%)

Company: INTEL CORP  (84%);  MICROSOFT CORP  (57%); INTEL CORP  (84%);  MICROSOFT CORP  (57%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ)  (84%);  MSFT (NASDAQ)  (57%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING  (84%);  NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS  (57%);  SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE  (57%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); ENGINEERING (76%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (66%)

Person: BILL GATES (79%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: September 6, 2000


End of Document
Special Visas Help Copycats Take U.S. Jobs
The New York Times
September 30, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1984 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


WAYNE, N.J. -- When Congress designed temporary work visa programs, the idea was to bring in foreigners with specialized, hard-to-find skills who would help American companies grow, creating jobs to expand the economy. Now, though, some companies are bringing in workers on those visas to help move jobs out of the country.
For four weeks this spring, a young woman from India on a temporary visa sat elbow to elbow with an American accountant in a snug cubicle at the headquarters of Toys ''R'' Us here. The woman, an employee of a giant outsourcing company in India hired by Toys ''R'' Us, studied and recorded the accountant's every keystroke, taking screen shots of her computer and detailed notes on how she issued payments for toys sold in the company's megastores. 
  ''She just pulled up a chair in front of my computer,'' said the accountant, 49, who had worked for the company for than 15 years. ''She shadowed me everywhere, even to the ladies' room.''
  By late June, eight workers from the outsourcing company, Tata Consultancy Services, or TCS, had produced intricate manuals for the jobs of 67 people, mainly in accounting. They then returned to India to train TCS workers to take over and perform those jobs there. The Toys ''R'' Us employees in New Jersey, many of whom had been at the company more than a decade, were laid off.
  A temporary visa program known as H-1B allows American employers to hire foreign professionals with college degrees and ''highly specialized knowledge,'' mainly in science and technology, to meet their needs for particular skills. Employers, according to the federal guidelines, must sign a declaration that the foreign workers ''will not adversely affect the working conditions'' of Americans or lower their wages.
  In recent years, however, global outsourcing and consulting firms have obtained thousands of temporary visas to bring in foreign workers who have taken over jobs that had been held by American workers. The Labor Department has opened an investigation of possible visa violations by contractors at  the Walt Disney Company and at Southern California Edison, where immigrants replaced Americans in jobs they were doing in this country. Four former workers at Disney have filed discrimination complaints against the company. The companies say they have complied with all applicable laws.
  But the Toys ''R'' Us layoffs -- and others underway now at the New York Life Insurance Company and other businesses -- go further. They are examples of how global outsourcing companies are using temporary visas to bring in foreign workers who do not appear to have exceptional skills -- according to interviews with a dozen current or former employees of Toys ''R'' Us and New York Life -- to help ship out jobs, mainly to India.
  These former employees described their experience training foreigners to do their work so it could be moved to India. They would speak only on the condition that their names not be published, saying they feared losing severance payments or hurting their chances of finding new jobs.
  In most cases when American workers lost jobs, the positions have been in technology, with employers arguing there are shortages of Americans with the most advanced skills. But in recent years, many jobs that American workers lost have been in accounting and back-office administration -- although there is no shortage of Americans qualified to do that kind of work.
  The core purpose of the temporary work visas is to help American companies compete in the global economy. ''If employers are able to hire the key people, they can keep jobs in the U.S. and create new jobs here,'' said Lynn Shotwell, executive director of the Council for Global Immigration, which lobbies Congress for more visas for highly skilled foreign workers.
  Outsourcing firms, and the companies hiring them, say they are careful not to violate any laws. But some experts argue the intent of the visas is being thwarted.
  ''At the very least, those are violations of the spirit of the law,'' said Christine Brigagliano, a lawyer in San Francisco with extensive experience advising American companies on obtaining visas. ''Those contractors are signing on the bottom line, saying we will not undercut the wages and working conditions of Americans. But, in fact, they are.''
  The companies see it differently.
  Kathleen Waugh, a spokeswoman for Toys ''R'' Us, said the staff reduction there was part of ''designing a streamlined, more efficient global organization to make it fit for growth.'' She said the contractors were required to comply with ''any and all immigration laws.'' The outsourcing, she noted, ''resulted in significant cost savings.''
  William Werfelman, a vice president and spokesman at New York Life, said the outsourcing was part of a transformation of its technology systems that would soon result in more jobs in the United States. ''Our decisions are centered on keeping the company competitive, keeping it in the United States, keeping it growing,'' he said.
  The federal government does not track how often American workers are displaced by workers with temporary visas, but this year, employees at a variety of companies report losing jobs to foreign workers. For example, at Cengage Learning, an educational publisher, about 30 accountants in Ohio and Kentucky were laid off on Sept. 11, after they spent five months training Indian workers from Cognizant, another outsourcing giant. The temporary workers and the jobs went back to India.
  A Cengage spokeswoman, Susan M. Aspey, said the company needed to install higher-grade accounting systems. ''To do this quickly and efficiently,'' she said, Cengage sought support from Cognizant. Employees who were laid off were given ''fair severance packages commensurate with their years of service,'' she said.
  Temporary H-1B visas are limited to 85,000 each year. In the last five years, federal records show, most of the companies that received the largest share of H-1B visas have been global outsourcing firms, including TCS; Infosys, another large Indian company; Cognizant, which is based in the United States; and Accenture, a consulting operation incorporated in Ireland.
  Those companies also use another temporary visa, the L-1B, which has no annual cap and allows businesses to internally transfer their employees who have ''advanced knowledge'' from branches in other countries to offices in the United States. A spokesman for TCS, Benjamin Trounson, said it maintained ''rigorous internal controls to ensure we are fully compliant with all regulatory requirements.''
  At the Toys ''R'' Us headquarters on a leafy campus by a reservoir here in New Jersey, someone dressed as Geoffrey the Giraffe, the retailer's mascot, often wanders around greeting employees to bolster company spirit. But the mood was hardly playful on the morning of March 3, when a company vice president summoned nearly 70 employees to a conference room and told them their positions would be transferred by the end of June to workers from TCS.
  ''We were asked to cooperate and show them respect and train them to do our individual job functions,'' said another former accountant, 36, who had worked for the toy seller for almost 12 years. But, she recalled, ''If you didn't cooperate, you would be asked to leave.''
  A few days later, TCS workers arrived to begin the training called ''knowledge transfer.'' Most had flown in days before from India and were staying at a La Quinta Inn nearby.
  The 36-year-old accountant said the young Indian assigned to shadow her appeared to have no extraordinary knowledge of accounting. His expertise was in observing and mapping what she did.
  ''He was watching me like a hawk,'' she said, remembering long hours at close quarters at her desk under the fluorescent lights of the accounting floor. ''It took him a while to learn what I did.''
  She had a hard time maintaining her composure. ''I felt like, 'Why am I sitting here showing this man how to do my job when they are taking it away from me and sending it to India?' ''
  Ms. Waugh, the spokeswoman, noted that Toys ''R'' Us employed about 33,000 people in the United States. She said the company offered workers ''a severance package, including benefits and career transition services.''
  The layoffs at New York Life were set in motion in 2014 when the company announced a $1 billion plan for an ambitious upgrade of its financial and data technology systems.
  Since New York Life is not a technology company, said Mr. Werfelman, the spokesman, it turned to outside contractors for the upgrade. The company plans to cut about 300 positions, including up to one-fifth of its 1,400 technology workers, as well as some financial accountants. With 9,000 staff employees and 12,000 agents nationwide, New York Life is the largest mutual life insurer in the United States.
  ''We know there will be pain along the way,'' Mr. Werfelman said. But he said that with new innovative technology, the company could rapidly expand despite the job cuts. He said it planned to hire 1,000 employees and 3,500 agents this year alone.
  Accountants at New York Life were among the first scheduled for layoffs that started in May, under a contract with Accenture. The company's accountants found out only by accident -- when Accenture managers in India mistakenly sent out a group email with a full outsourcing plan -- that the Indian workers they had been training for several weeks would be taking their jobs back to India.
  One accountant said a worker from India made an exact digital ''recording'' during the day as he performed his job. At the close of business, the recording was transmitted to India, where workers practiced mimicking his tasks.
  ''It's all just repeating exactly what we have been doing,'' he said.
  As a condition of his severance, he was asked to stay on for nine months to complete the training. The accountant, who at 26 was confident he would find a job elsewhere, preferred to resign.
  An Accenture spokesman, James E. McAvoy, said it was assisting New York Life to build new global, 24-hour systems. He said H-1B workers were a small part of the Accenture employees involved; most were United States citizens or residents.
  In July, about 100 New York Life technology workers were informed their jobs would be taken over by TCS, to be moved to India. At the insurer's verdant campus in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y., and at offices in New York City, New Jersey and Georgia, tech employees began receiving individual layoff notices last week.
  ''After 30 years, it is very, very disappointing being told you are going to lose your job to a foreign country,'' said one technology team member who is 49, and started with New York Life when he was 18.
  Many tech workers facing layoffs are older, with years at the insurer. They were galled by executives' statements that they were less qualified to learn the new systems than the foreign workers replacing them. ''There are a lot of new technologies coming in all the time,'' said an applications engineer in New York, who is 58 with 18 years at the company. ''There is no reason at all we can't do training for that.''
  Some workers were not as dismayed, saying the company was offering generous severance packages.
  But a hard irony for many of the New York Life employees losing jobs to immigrants is that they are immigrants themselves. They came to the United States a generation ago from the Philippines, Eastern European countries, and even India and raised families in this country. They followed the immigration rules -- some coming as refugees, others with work visas and computer degrees from their home countries. Most became American citizens.
  One technology manager, an immigrant from Europe, recalled that when he was hired at the insurer. ''There was an open position that had to be filled,'' he said. ''Nobody lost their job because I got my job.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/30/us/temporary-visas-meant-to-import-talent-help-ship-jobs-abroad.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Tata Consulting Services in India in 2011. Toys ''R'' Us used its workers to replace Americans. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KAINAZ AMARIA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A3)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (89%); LAYOFFS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); IMMIGRATION (78%); JOB CREATION (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); WOMEN (76%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (75%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (64%)

Company:  WALT DISNEY CO (81%);  NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO (80%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (55%);  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (52%)

Ticker: DIS (NYSE) (81%); TCS (NSE) (55%)

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (81%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (81%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (81%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (81%); SIC6311 LIFE INSURANCE (80%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (55%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (55%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (55%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (55%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (55%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (55%); NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (52%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (52%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); CONSULTING SERVICES (71%); RETAILERS (68%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: September 30, 2015


End of Document
THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO;
Bush Is Pointing to the Cloud in the Silver Lining
The New York Times
September 27, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1014 words
Byline: By JAMES DAO 

By JAMES DAO 
Dateline: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 26
Body


For decades, political scientists have considered the economy the single best predictor of the electorate's mood. Good times favor incumbents, bad times insurgents. And so for Gov. George W. Bush, one challenge has loomed high above the others in his quest for the White House: how to defeat a sitting vice president during these roaring good times.
For a while, it seemed as if Mr. Bush might defy history, as he stayed ahead of Vice President Al Gore in polls even as the economy hummed along. But his lead in those polls has vanished. And the issue that once seemed to play so well for him, character, has diminished in importance, the polls show.
It is largely for that reason, many political analysts say, that the Texas governor has adopted a new slogan this week: "education recession." Ostensibly, it refers to what he calls a "crisis" in the nation's public schools. But at its heart, the slogan is also meant to raise alarms about the health of the nation's economy in the not-too-distant future.
And in raising those red flags, the analysts say, Mr. Bush has turned his signature issue, education, into a weapon for slashing at the central arguments for electing Mr. Gore: peace and prosperity.
"Gore's advantage on the economy is critical for Bush to try to overcome," said Evans Witt, president of the Princeton Survey Research, a polling firm. "If you say we're in a recession long enough, it certainly has an economic connotation, even if you are using it to discuss education."
Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, acknowledged as much, saying, "The point of this is that while the economy is strong, there are problems in society."
During a tour of the West Coast this week, Mr. Bush said he saw warning signs in America. Then he ticked them off: Gasoline prices spiraling out of control. Farmers struggling to survive. The nation in danger of losing its technological edge. And illiterate youths on the cusp of criminality.
"In some places, there is a recession in America," Mr. Bush said today at a high school in Northern California. "In some school districts there is a recession, and this country needs to do something about it early, before it's too late."
He went on to say, "If American students don't lead the world in math and science, the next generation of Americans may not lead the world."
Raising concerns about the economy represents something of a tactical shift for Mr. Bush, who has spent much of the campaign attacking Mr. Gore's character and credibility. But several recent polls indicate that voters now see little difference between the candidates in terms of their morality and honesty.
"It's much harder for Bush because he can't hammer at character anymore," said Mr. Witt.
But some analysts said Mr. Bush would have trouble tapping into voters' anxieties about the economy, because there is so little there to tap. According to a Fox News poll taken last week, 60 percent of voters said they thought the country was headed in the right direction, one of the highest readings since January 1998.
And a Gallup Poll conducted in June showed that only 22 percent of Americans said that the most important issues in the race were economic, as compared with 69 percent who felt that way in the fall of 1992.
"I don't think it makes much sense," said James Campbell, a professor of political science at the State University of New York at Buffalo who has studied the effects of the economy on presidential elections. "There are no obvious clouds on the horizon."
Still, Frank Newport, editor in chief of the Gallup Poll, said he could see the logic to Mr. Bush's strategy because voters care deeply about economic issues even in good times.
"It's not top of mind this year," Mr. Newport said. "But when we mention the economy, people say: 'Oh yes, that will be very important. How the candidates handle the economy is important."
Some analysts also said that raising concerns about the economy could strike a chord with working-class voters, typically families who earn less than $40,000 a year and live from pay check to pay check. Polls show those people tend to be swing voters whose allegiances could easily change if they felt the economy were turning sour.
Aides to Mr. Bush said their internal polls had shown that the slogan "education recession" had played well among independent voters and women.
Mr. Witt noted that many such swing voters live in the industrial Midwest, where the presidential race is most closely contested, including Missouri, Michigan and Ohio, as well as in Pennsylvania. And they are a group that might find Mr. Bush's plan for across-the-board income tax cuts appealing, he asserted.
"Bush has hit pretty heavily on the idea that Gore's tax cut may leave people out," Mr. Witt said. "That's a point that I think might resonate with some people in this group." Because they are on the edge."
Several analysts also said they thought it was clever of Mr. Bush to tie two major issues together in a way that could undermine Mr. Gore's support. "It has a subliminal quality to it," said Stephen Hess, a presidential scholar at the Brookings Institution, a research organization in Washington.
 
In His Own Words
 
GEORGE W. BUSH
Remarks last night on "Larry King Live" on CNN:
 
"I'm going to win California. I am. . . . I was up in Silicon Valley. I've got a huge base of support in Silicon Valley for a lot of reasons. One, I support H-1B visas, free trade, tort reform. I've got a good chance amongst the Hispanic voters here in California.
My reputation as an inclusive governor preceded me here in this campaign. People, you know, the Republicans have been associated, rightly or wrongly, with being anti-immigrant in the state of California. We've turned that around. I've got a great record when it comes to public schools and education is a very important issue in the state of California.
My job is going to be to find those Republicans that were strong Republicans up until 1992 that Perot peeled off from us and get them back in the party. And I think I can do so by being a positive, optimistic, forward-looking candidate."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Gov. George W. Bush spent most of yesterday talking about education. He was greeted by students at Sequoia High School in Redwood City, Calif., after holding a town meeting there. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: POLITICAL SCIENCE (91%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); POLITICS (90%); POLLS & SURVEYS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); RECESSION (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); GOVERNORS (78%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (78%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (73%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (73%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (68%); GASOLINE PRICES (50%); OIL & GAS PRICES (50%)

Industry: EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); ADVERTISING SLOGANS (77%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (74%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (73%); MARKET RESEARCH FIRMS (64%); GASOLINE PRICES (50%); OIL & GAS PRICES (50%)

Person: AL GORE (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: September 27, 2000


End of Document
Miscalculation by Officials Upends Skilled Immigrants
The New York Times
October 2, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 1015 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


In early September, the State Department gave exciting news to tens of thousands of highly skilled legal immigrants in the United States who had been stuck for years in visa backlogs, waiting for green cards. On Oct. 1, they would take a big step forward along the path to their documents, a department bulletin said.
Then, just as suddenly and with no explanation, the department reversed course Sept. 25, sending most of the immigrants -- including many people from India and China with advanced degrees and professional careers in the United States -- back to where they had been in slow-moving visa lines, dashing their hopes and disrupting their lives. 
  The problem was that immigration officials realized belatedly that they did not have enough green card visas, which are limited by yearly quotas, for all the immigrants they had allowed to apply for them, Obama administration officials said.
  ''It was a devastating blow for the workers and their families with skills we are trying to retain in the United States,'' said Lynden Melmed, a lawyer at Berry, Appleman & Leiden in Washington, who was formerly general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security agency that administers immigration with the State Department. Immigrants who were affected filed a federal lawsuit in Seattle, accusing the administration of ''arbitrary and capricious action'' that cost them millions of dollars.
  The bait-and-switch was also a new setback for President Obama's efforts to make fixes to immigration through executive actions he announced last November. His actions to protect immigrants in the country illegally have been held up by federal courts. New guidelines to speed up green card applications for highly skilled workers were another part of his programs.
  The turnabout resulted, officials said, from communication failures between the State Department and Homeland Security. After the State Department published its monthly visa bulletin on Sept. 9 under the new guidelines allowing many thousands of immigrants to apply early for green cards, officials did further hurried calculations and saw that under annual limits, not enough visas were immediately available.
  ''This revision seriously undermines the stability and predictability of our immigration system,'' Representatives Zoe Lofgren and Michael Honda, both California Democrats, said in a statement.
  Officials at the Homeland Security and State Departments and the White House said they could not comment on the matter because it was under litigation.
  Many immigrants caught in the boomerang are on temporary H-1B visas. That program has been under fire from Americans who say foreign workers with the visas displaced them from jobs. But immigrants seeking green cards have been working for some time in specialized fields like science, medicine and technology. They have passed a hurdle requiring their employers to show the Labor Department that no Americans were available for their jobs.
  ''We have been here years, we have kids here, we bought houses,'' said Vikram Desai, 33, an electrical engineer from India who has worked on temporary visas for 13 years.
  ''We consider ourselves future Americans, not temporary workers,'' said Mr. Desai, a leader of Immigration Voice, a legal immigrants' organization.
  But they have been mired in green card backlogs. With a cap of 140,000 employment-based green cards each year, the number of applicants has long exceeded the limit. No country can have more than 7 percent of the visas, so immigrants from India and China must wait for a decade or more.
  On Sept. 9, the State Department notified them they would be able to advance early to the next step: filing a formal application. They scrambled to have medical tests and hired lawyers and document translators, paying thousands of dollars in fees. Many postponed travel; some changed plans to marry or move.
  ''People made life-altering decisions,'' said Aman Kapoor, the founder of Immigration Voice, a national nonprofit group. Only a fraction of at least 50,000 immigrants who expected to move forward will now be able to do so.
  They are keenly disappointed because they will not receive new benefits that would have come after their applications were filed, while they waited for their green cards. In that period, immigrants can obtain work permits that allow them to change jobs and employers, freeing them from H-1B constraints tying them to the same employer. In some states, their children can attend college at discounted resident rates. They can travel out of the United States more easily.
  Sadhak Sengupta, a medical research scientist from India, said that when he heard the first State Department announcement, ''my heart was overjoyed.'' Now Dr. Sengupta may have to close down his research at the Roger Williams Medical Center in Providence, R.I., where he is part of a team developing a treatment for brain cancer using immunology.
  Dr. Sengupta, also a professor at Boston University School of Medicine, came to the United States in 2002. Working on H-1B visas, he began the green card process in 2010. His team's research advances have attracted patients from around the world to the medical center, Dr. Sengupta said. He had plans to start his own biomedical company.
  But this year, the federal government unexpectedly failed to renew his H-1B visa. With no green card application, he is scrambling to avoid leaving the United States in December.
  ''I am so disappointed, I don't have words to describe,'' Dr. Sengupta said. ''Instead of hiring workers here, shall I bundle up my research for a cure for brain tumors and take it back to India? Is that what America wants?''
  Lawyers said the episode had shaken immigrants' confidence in the system. ''It's no wonder people have so little faith in the government,'' said Gregory Chen, director of advocacy for the American Immigration Lawyers Association, ''when they can't even count their visas.''
  Immigrants sent thousands of bouquets to Homeland Security headquarters in Washington on Thursday as a mild-mannered protest of their treatment.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/02/us/incorrect-count-on-visas-disrupts-lives-of-highly-skilled-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sadhak Sengupta, from India, researches immunological brain cancer treatments in Boston. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHIHO FUKADA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LITIGATION (87%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (69%)

Company:  BERRY APPLEMAN & LEIDEN LLP (55%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (55%)

Industry: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (55%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (78%); ZOE LOFGREN (58%); MICHAEL M HONDA (52%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: October 2, 2015


End of Document
Congress Approves a Big Increase In Visas for Specialized Workers
The New York Times
October 4, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk ; Column 5; 
Length: 1096 words
Byline: By LIZETTE ALVAREZ 

By LIZETTE ALVAREZ 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3
Body


Congress today passed a bill to increase significantly the number of visas for educated foreigners who temporarily fill specialized American jobs, largely in the high-technology industry. Rapid approval by President Clinton appears virtually certain.
The bill advanced first today in the Senate, on a vote of 96 to 1 that followed weeks of partisan feuding by lawmakers and months of aggressive lobbying by high-tech companies, which say they need many thousands more computer programmers and software engineers.
Tonight, just hours after it had passed the Senate, the measure was cleared as well by the House, where Republicans set aside their differences on the issue.
That the legislation was passed by the House on a voice vote and was opposed by only one senator -- Ernest F. Hollings, a South Carolina Democrat who is a longtime job protectionist -- underscored the technology industry's formidable influence on Capitol Hill. It was just two years ago that the industry first won an increase in the number of these visas for specialized workers, called H-1B visas.
Under the bill, the Immigration and Naturalization Service would be able to issue 195,000 H-1B visas a year, for each of the next three years, to foreign-born workers with college degrees and special skills, up from the existing limit of 115,000. Each visa is good for six years, although it must be renewed after the first three.
"The one thing on which I think almost everyone is in agreement is that we face a serious worker shortage with respect to high-tech employment and skilled labor in America today," said Senator Spencer Abraham, a Michigan Republican who co-sponsored the legislation. "The short-term problem is how to fill the key positions immediately so that we don't lose opportunities to foreign competitors. The long-term problem is to determine what we can do to make certain that in the future we have sufficient trained Americans to fill those jobs."
The legislation includes several provisions intended to allay the concerns of organized labor, which has routinely opposed H-1B visas, arguing that they displace American workers and depress pay. Under one provision, for example, an employer that sponsors a foreigner who obtains such a visa must pay that worker the job's prevailing salary.
The measure also continues a program to train American workers for high-tech jobs and teach children information technology skills. The program is financed by a $500 fee paid by the sponsoring employer for each visa application, a sum that might be increased to $1,000 in coming weeks under separate legislation.
But the bill's immediate goal is to help high-tech companies recruit employees.
"There are 300,000 jobs that have yet to be filled," said Representative David Dreier, a California Republican who had sponsored a bill similar to the one passed today. "The industry very much wants to make sure that we remain competitive globally. We either import workers or export jobs and industries."
President Clinton has said he supports increasing the number of H-1B visas, and in May proposed raising the annual limit to 200,000. And Congressional Democrats roundly endorsed the legislation today, although in the Senate they had held it up for several weeks as they tried, unsuccessfully, to attach other immigration provisions.
"I thought we would work together to restore some of America's lost luster on immigration issues, and this did not happen," said Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, who has sought to legalize the immigration status of some Haitians, Central Americans and others who have lived in the United States a long time illegally.
Each of the two major political parties has tirelessly courted high-tech companies in recent years, hoping to sway the wealthy industry its way. For its part, the industry has found benefit in playing the political game, and begun hiring well-connected lobbyists and stepping up its campaign contributions. According to an analysis by the Center for Responsive Politics here, the computer industry has made political contributions of more than $22 million since the beginning of 1999, nearly three times the contributions it made in 1995-96, during the last presidential election cycle.
While the bill that Congress passed today was intended to beef up the high-tech labor pool, other foreign workers who receive the special visas include architects, engineers, university professors and even distinguished fashion models.
The United States is not the only country that has tried such an approach. Germany adopted a similar measure earlier this year, allowing up to 20,000 computer specialists from non-European countries to apply for visas to bolster the German information technology industry.
But the American program is far larger: in 1998, Congress increased the annual limit on the special visas to 115,000 from 65,000.
Still, that number has been quickly exhausted each year. In 2000, the immigration service, having reached the limit, stopped taking applications in March, fully six months before the end of the fiscal year.
Nearly 50 percent of the visas go to workers from India, which churns out large numbers of high-technology specialists. The second-highest number go to people born in China. In most cases, the workers are already in the United States, pursuing advanced degrees at American universities.
"The companies frequently use these people for computer programming jobs and creating new software that can be used in a global environment," said Harris Miller, president of the Information Technology Association of America, an industry group. "When they develop these products, they have to be adapted not just for the U.S. marketplace, but for Asia, Europe and Africa." The foreign workers "know the language, the skills, the marketing that needs to be done to customize that product."
The bill, Mr. Miller said, was "a political compromise," inasmuch as the industry would like to lift the limit on H-1B visas altogether.
"Is 195,000 going to be enough?" Mr. Miller said. "I don't know. But 115,000 wasn't nearly enough. The new economy is simply growing much faster than anybody ever projected."
Lately the program has come under criticism, with even some supporters admitting mix-ups that leave foreign workers disappointed that the H-1B visas do not lead to indefinite stays in the United States.
"The H-1B program is a temporary-workers program," Mr. Miller said. "The employers make that very clear up front. Sometimes there is a disconnect. Sometimes workers think it's an automatic step toward permanent immigrant status."
      

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); APPROVALS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (79%); US CONGRESS (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); AGREEMENTS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); PARTISANSHIP (74%); ENGINEERING (73%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); LABOR UNIONS (72%); PREVAILING WAGES (72%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (71%)

Company: AMERICA TODAY  (53%);  THE LONG-TERM CREDIT BANK OF JAPAN LTD  (53%); AMERICA TODAY  (53%);  THE LONG-TERM CREDIT BANK OF JAPAN LTD  (53%);    IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (55%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (55%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (55%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (55%); IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE   (55%);  IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (76%); ENGINEERING (73%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (71%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (71%)

Person: DAVID DREIER (59%); BILL CLINTON (58%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: October 4, 2000


End of Document
On Sampling of Fiscal Topics, Credit Is Taken and Blame Assigned
The New York Times
October 29, 2015 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19; IN FACT
Length: 977 words
Byline: By STEVE EDER
Body


It is difficult to accurately assign credit for the budget surpluses of the 1990s or blame for the financial crisis of the last decade, but that did not stop candidates at Wednesday night's Republican presidential debate from trying.
Here is a look at how the candidates fared with the facts on these and other fiscal topics: 
  BLAME FOR LEHMAN In the debate's first terse exchange, Donald J. Trump blamed Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio for the financial crisis, citing his work for Lehman Brothers, which collapsed in 2008 and sent the economy into a downward spiral.
  While Mr. Kasich did work for the now-bankrupt Lehman Brothers, the truth is that he was hardly steering the doomed ship in New York. 
  Mr. Trump claimed that Mr. Kasich was on the board, which is not true. Mr. Kasich worked out of a two-man office in Columbus, Ohio, on deals with other bankers. He has said that he shared no blame for the bank's troubles, precipitated by risky mortgage investments.
  ''I was a banker,'' he told The New York Times recently. ''I wasn't offering home loans to anybody.'' STEVE EDER
  SOCIAL SECURITY Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey maintains that the government lied to the American people, telling them that their Social Security payments were in a surplus, even as it pilfered the money and left them a ''pile of i.o.u.s.''
  That is true -- kind of.
  Social Security taxes have generated far more money every year than was spent on benefits. Instead of putting that surplus into a bank account, the government has spent it on other programs, like the military.
  The only time in recent years that hasn't happened was at the very end of the Clinton administration, when the surplus was so large that receipts did not have to be tapped and Vice President Al Gore promised to put it in a ''lockbox.''
  But that i.o.u. pile is not a bunch of scrap paper. It is in federal Treasury notes. And by law, the government must cash them for benefits when they are due. Yes, the cashing of those bonds will cause the deficit to grow, but the i.o.u. pile is good money. JONATHAN WEISMAN
  MEDICARE FIX Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky was right that most Americans pay far less in taxes into the Medicare program than they collect in benefits. 
  According to estimates that researchers at the Urban Institute made in 2013, a single man earning the median income who turns 65 this year will pay in about $70,000 and collect about $197,000 worth of lifetime benefits.
  But his assertion that gradually raising the age of eligibility for the program is ''the only way you fix Medicare'' exaggerates the effects of such a policy.
  Most money spent in the program is spent on older Americans, not those new to the program. 
  Recent estimates from the Congressional Budget Office suggest that raising the eligibility age from 65 to 67 would save only $19 billion over 10 years, a tiny fraction of the program's budget of about $500 billion this year alone. MARGOT SANGER-KATZ
  WOMEN AT WORK Carly Fiorina, the onetime Hewlett-Packard executive, said as part of a discussion of gender differences in compensation that ''92 percent of the jobs lost during Barack Obama's first term belonged to women.''
  This assertion is flawed. When President Obama's first term began, 66.9 million women were employed, according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. When his first term ended, that number had risen slightly, to 67.1 million.
  Overall employment among both women and men rose during Mr. Obama's first term, though very slightly. 
  That said, the jobless rate among both groups was higher at the end of his first term than at the start, with the rate among women rising to 7.8 percent in January 2013 from 7 percent four years earlier, reflecting a growing population. NEIL IRWIN
  BALANCED BUDGET Mr. Kasich said he was the chief architect of the balanced budget in the 1990s. 
  While it is true that Mr. Kasich, then a congressman, was the chairman of the House Budget Committee, most economists say the surpluses of that time were because of a combination of three factors: The ''read my lips'' tax increases and spending cuts of President George Bush in 1991; President Bill Clinton's budget of 1993, which most likely cost Democrats control of Congress; and the gold rush economy of the dot-com bubble.
  Newt Gingrich, Mr. Kasich and Mr. Clinton reached their balanced budget agreement in 1997, but little of it had kicked in when the government's red ink disappeared and surpluses swelled. JONATHAN WEISMAN
  VISA CHANGES Responding to a question about H-1B visas for highly skilled foreign workers, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida said he would require firms to advertise a job for 180 days domestically before it could be filled by a foreign worker with such a visa. And he would require proof that they would pay foreign workers more, so wages for Americans would not be undercut.
  But neither of those proposals are in a bill to increase H-1B visas that Mr. Rubio sponsored this year with other senators.
  That bill, introduced in January, does not add any new protections from the existing H-1B program, which does not have a requirement to recruit American workers first and has led to many Americans being displaced by foreign workers who have such visas. JULIA PRESTON
  JUST SPEAKING Facing questions about his ties to a supplement maker that has been under regulatory scrutiny, Ben Carson quickly distanced himself. But was he, indeed, a pitchman for the company?
  The evidence shows that, at the least, he was paid to give speeches at events hosted by the company, Mannatech Inc., telling how its supplements helped him after a 2002 cancer diagnosis.
  Mr. Carson, though, suggested that Mannatech, on its own, had taken it a step further by posting videos of him on its website.
  Still, Mr. Carson stood by the products, saying he did find them helpful. STEVE EDER

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Ben Carson prepared for an interview after Wednesday night's presidential debate in Boulder, Colo., where much of the focus was on financial issues. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY IMAGES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ECONOMIC CRISIS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); SOCIAL SECURITY (90%); MEDICARE (89%); PUBLIC FINANCE (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); TAXES & TAXATION (73%); MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS (72%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (71%); TAX LAW (68%); TREASURY SECURITIES (60%)

Company:  LEHMAN BROTHERS HOLDINGS INC (74%)

Industry: NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (74%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (74%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); BUDGETS (90%); MEDICARE (89%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); MORTGAGE INVESTMENTS (72%); TREASURY SECURITIES (60%)

Person: CHRIS CHRISTIE (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOHN KASICH (79%); AL GORE (57%); RAND PAUL (57%)

Geographic: COLUMBUS, OH, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2015


End of Document
Foreigners on the Job
The New York Times
October 8, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Editorial Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Column 6;; Letter
Length: 146 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re "Congress Approves a Big Increase in Visas for Foreign Workers" (front page, Oct. 4):
Harris Miller, the president of a software industry group, wonders whether 195,000 new H-1B visas for high-tech workers will be enough to satisfy the demands of the industry. But he already knows the answer: there will never be enough visas, because companies will never tire of replacing American citizens and permanent residents with lower paid foreign workers.
The myth of a "programmer shortage" in this economy needs to be debunked. There are thousands of programmers who are looking for work but can't get interviews because employers assert that the applicants lack whatever new skill the employers are looking for. This is shortsighted, because any competent programmer can easily learn a new computer language if given a few weeks.
 
KEITH CRAW
Oakland, N.J., Oct. 4, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (88%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); APPROVALS (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); EMPLOYEE RETRAINING (73%)

Industry: COMPUTER SOFTWARE (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (90%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: October 8, 2000


End of Document
Transcript: Republican Presidential Debate
The New York Times
October 29, 2015 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 21530 words
Body


Following is a transcript of the main Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.
QUINTANILLA: Good evening, I'm Carl Quintanilla, with my colleagues Becky Quick and John Harwood. We'll be joined tonight by some of CNBC's top experts on the markets and personal finance. 
  QUINTANILLA: Let's get through the rules of the road. Candidates get 30 seconds to answer the opening question, 60 seconds to answer a formal question, 30 seconds for follow-ups and rebuttals, all at the discretion of the moderators.
  We want you to weigh in from home. You'll see your tweets at the bottom of the screen. Use the hashtag, #cNBCgopdebate. You can also go to cNBC.com/vote to tell us where you stand throughout the night.
  So let's introduce the candidates for tonight's Republican presidential debate. On the stage from left to right, Governor John Kasich.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Governor Mike Huckabee.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Governor Jeb Bush.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Senator Marco Rubio.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Mr. Donald Trump.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Dr. Ben Carson.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Mrs. Carly Fiorina.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Senator Ted Cruz.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Governor Chris Christie.
  (APPLAUSE) And Senator Rand Paul.
  (APPLAUSE)
  A lot to get to tonight. So let's get started. This first is an open question.
  This series of debates is essentially a job interview with the American people. And in any job interview, you know this: you get asked, ''what's your biggest weakness?'' So in 30 seconds, without telling us that you try too hard or that you're a perfectionist...
  (LAUGHTER)
  ...what is your biggest weakness and what are you doing to address it? We'll go left to right. Governor Kasich, 30 seconds.
  KASICH: Good question, but I want to tell you, my great concern is that we are on the verge, perhaps, of picking someone who cannot do this job.
  I've watched to see people say that we should dismantle Medicare and Medicaid and leave the senior citizens out -- out in the -- in the cold. I've heard them talk about deporting 10 or 11 -- people here from this country out of this country, splitting families. I've heard about tax schemes that don't add up, that put our kids in -- in a deeper hole than they are today.
  We need somebody who can lead. We need somebody who can balance budgets, cut taxes...
  QUINTANILLA: Governor?
  KASICH: You know, frankly, I did it in Washington, in Ohio, and I will do it again in Washington, if I'm president, to get this country moving again.
  KASICH: country moving again.
  QUINTANILLA: Governor Huckabee.
  HUCKABEE: Well, John, I don't really have any weaknesses that I can think of.
  (LAUGHTER)
  But my wife is down here in the front, and I'm sure, if you'd like to talk to her later, she can give you more than you'll ever be able to take care of.
  If I have a weakness, it's that I try to live by the rules. I try to live by the rules, no matter what they are, and I was brought up that way as a kid. Play by the rules.
  And I'll tell you what a weakness is of this country: there are a lot of people who are sick and tired because Washington does not play by the same rules that the American people have to play by.
  QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Governor. Governor Bush.
  BUSH: You know, I am by my nature impatient. And this is not an endeavor that rewards that. You gotta be patient. You gotta be -- stick with it, and all that.
  But also, I can't fake anger. I believe this is still the most extraordinary country on the face of the Earth. And it troubles me that people are rewarded for tearing down our country. It's never been that way in American politics before.
  BUSH: I can't do it. I just don't believe that this country's days are going to be deeply -- you know, going down. I think we're on the verge of the greatest time, and I want to fix the things to let people rise up.
  QUINTANILLA: Senator Rubio.
  RUBIO: Thank you for that question. I would begin by saying that I'm not sure it's a weakness, but I do believe that I share a sense of optimism for America's future that, today, is eroding from too many of our people.
  I think there's a sense in this country today that somehow our best days are behind us. And that doesn't have to be true.
  Our greatest days lie ahead if we are willing to do what it takes now. If we're willing to do what it takes now, the 21st century is going to be the new American century, greater than any other era we've had in the history of this great nation.
  QUINTANILLA: Mr. Trump?
  TRUMP: I think maybe my greatest weakness is that I trust people too much. I'm too trusting. And when they let me down, if they let me down, I never forgive. I find it very, very hard to forgive people that deceived me. So I don't know if you would call that a weakness, but my wife said ''let up.''
  (LAUGHTER)
  QUINTANILLA: Dr. Carson?
  CARSON: Probably in terms of the applying for the job of president, a weakness would be not really seeing myself in that position until hundreds of thousands of people began to tell me that I needed to do it. I do, however, believe in Reagan's 11th commandment, and will not be engaging in awful things about my compatriots here.
  And recognizing that it's so important, this election, because we're talking about America for the people versus America for the government.
  QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina?
  FIORINA: Well, gee, after the last debate, I was told that I didn't smile enough. (LAUGHTER)
  QUINTANILLA: Fixed it.
  FIORINA: But I also think that these are very serious times; 75 percent of the American people think the federal government is corrupt. I agree with them. And this big powerful, corrupt bureaucracy works now only for the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected. Meantime, wages have stagnated for 40 years. We have more Americans out of work or just Americans who quit looking for work for 40 years.
  Ours was intended to be a citizen government. This is about more than replacing a D with an R. We need a leader who will help us take our government back.
  QUINTANILLA: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: I'm too agreeable, easy going.
  (LAUGHTER)
  You know, I think my biggest weakness is exactly the opposite. I'm a fighter. I am passionate about what I believe. I've been passionate my whole life about the Constitution. And, you know, for six-and-a-half years, we've had a gigantic party. If you want someone to grab a beer with, I may not be that guy. But if you want someone to drive you home, I will get the job done and I will get you home.
  QUINTANILLA: Governor Christie?
  CHRISTIE: I don't see a lot of weakness on this stage, quite frankly. Where I see the weakness is in those three people that are left on the Democratic stage. You know, I see a socialist, an isolationist and a pessimist. And for the sake of me, I can't figure out which one is which.
  (LAUGHTER)
  But I will -- but I will tell you this, the socialist says they're going to pay for everything and give you everything for free, except they don't say they're going to raise it through taxes to 90 percent to do it. The isolationist is the one who wants to continue to follow a foreign policy that has fewer democracies today than when Barack Obama came into office around the world.
  But I know who the pessimist is. It's Hillary Clinton. And you put me on that stage against her next September, she won't get within 10 miles of the White House. Take it to the bank.
  QUINTANILLA: Senator Paul?
  PAUL: You know, I left my medical practice and ran for office because I was concerned about an $18 trillion debt. We borrow a million dollars a minute. Now, on the floor of the Congress, the Washington establishment from both parties puts forward a bill that will explode the deficit. It allows President Obama to borrow unlimited amounts of money.
  I will stand firm. I will spend every ounce of energy to stop it. I will begin tomorrow to filibuster it. And I ask everyone in America to call Congress tomorrow and say enough is enough; no more debt.
  QUINTANILLA: Thanks to all the candidates.
  John?
  HARWOOD: Mr. Trump, you've done very well in this campaign so far by promising to build a wall and make another country pay for it.
  TRUMP: Right.
  HARWOOD: Send 11 million people out of the country. Cut taxes $10 trillion without increasing the deficit.
  TRUMP: Right.
  HARWOOD: And make Americans better off because your greatness would replace the stupidity and incompetence of others.
  TRUMP: That's right.
  HARWOOD: Let's be honest.
  (LAUGHTER)
  Is this a comic book version of a presidential campaign?
  TRUMP: No, not a comic book, and it's not a very nicely asked question the way you say that.
  Larry Kudlow is an example, who I have a lot of respect for, who loves my tax plan. We're reducing taxes to 15 percent. We're bringing corporate taxes down, bringing money back in, corporate inversions. We have $2.5 trillion outside of the United States which we want to bring back in.
  As far as the wall is concerned, we're going to build a wall. We're going to create a border. We're going to let people in, but they're going to come in legally. They're going to come in legally. And it's something that can be done, and I get questioned about that. They built the great wall of China. That's 13,000 miles. Here, we actually need 1,000 because we have natural barriers. So we need 1,000.
  TRUMP: We can do a wall. We're going to have a big, fat beautiful door right in the middle of the wall. We're going to have people come in, but they're coming in legally. And Mexico's going to pay for the wall because Mexico -- I love the Mexican people; I respect the Mexican leaders -- but the leaders are much sharper, smarter and more cunning than our leaders.
  And just to finish, people say, how will you get Mexico to pay? A politician other than the people in the states -- I don't want to -- a politician cannot get them to pay. I can. We lose, we have a trade imbalance...
  Excuse me, John.
  ... of $50 billion...
  HARWOOD: We're at the 60 seconds.
  TRUMP: ... believe me the world is peanuts by comparison.
  HARWOOD: We're at 60 seconds, but I gotta ask you, you talked about your tax plan. You say that it would not increase the deficit because you cut taxes $10 trillion in the economy would take off like...
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: Hold on, hold on. The economy would take off like a rocket ship.
  TRUMP: Right. Dynamically.
  HARWOOD: I talked to economic advisers who have served presidents of both parties. They said that you have as chance of cutting taxes that much without increasing the deficit as you would of flying away from that podium by flapping your arms.
  TRUMP: Then you have to get rid of Larry Kudlow, who sits on your panel, who's a great guy, who came out the other day and said, I love Trump's tax plan.
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: The Tax Foundation says -- has looked at all of our plans and -- and his creates, even with the dynamic effect, $8 trillion dollar deficit... QUICK: Gentlemen -- we'll -- we'll get back to this -- just a minute -- just a minute we're gonna continue this.
  I wanna talk taxes...
  QUINTANILLA: Hold it. We'll cut it back to you in just a minute. Becky's moving on.
  QUICK: Dr. Carson, let's talk about taxes.
  You have a flat tax plan of 10 percent flat taxes, and -- I've looked at it -- and this is something that is very appealing to a lot of voters, but I've had a really tough time trying to make the math work on this.
  If you were to took a 10 percent tax, with the numbers right now in total personal income, you're gonna come in with bring in $1.5 trillion. That is less than half of what we bring in right now. And by the way, it's gonna leave us in a $2 trillion hole.
  So what analysis got you to the point where you think this will work?
  CARSON: Well, first of all, I didn't say that the rate would be 10 percent. I used the tithing analogy.
  QUICK: I -- I understand that, but if you -- if you look at the numbers you probably have to get to 28.
  CARSON: The rate -- the rate -- the rate is gonna be much closer to 15 percent.
  QUICK: 15 percent still leaves you with a $1.1 trillion hole.
  CARSON: You also have to get rid of all the deductions and all the loopholes. You also have to some strategically cutting in several places.
  Remember, we have 645 federal agencies and sub-agencies. Anybody who tells me that we need every penny and every one of those is in a fantasy world.
  So, also, we can stimulate the economy. That's gonna be the real growth engine. Stimulating the economy -- because it's tethered down right now with so many regulations...
  QUICK: You'd have to cut -- you'd have to cut government about 40 percent to make it work with a $1.1 trillion hole.
  CARSON: That's not true.
  QUICK: That is true, I looked at the numbers.
  CARSON: When -- when we put all the facts down, you'll be able to see that it's not true, it works out very well.
  QUICK: Dr. Carson, thank you.
  KASICH: Listen, I want to just comment.
  HARWOOD: Governor Kasich, hold it, I'm coming to you right now. The...
  KASICH: Well I want to comment on this. This is the fantasy...
  HARWOOD: Well, I'm asking you about this.
  KASICH: This is the fantasy that I talked about in the beginning.
  HARWOOD: I'm about to ask you about this.
  That is, you had some very strong words to say yesterday about what's happening in your party and what you're hearing from the two gentlemen we've just heard from. Would you repeat it?
  KASICH: I'm the only person on this stage that actually was involved in the chief architect of balancing the Federal Budget.
  You can't do it with empty promised. You know, these plans would put us trillions and trillions of dollars in debt.
  I actually have a plan. I'm the only one on this stage that has a plan that would create jobs, cut taxes, balance the budget and can get it done because I'm realistic. You just don't make promises like this.
  Why don't we just give a chicken in every pot, while we're, you know, coming up -- coming up with these fantasy tax schemes. We'll just clean it up. Where are you gonna clean it up?
  You have to deal with entitlements, you have to be in a position to control discretionary spending. You gotta be creative and imaginative.
  Now, let me just be clear, John. I went into Ohio where we had an $8 billion hole and now we have a $2 billion surplus. We're up 347,000 jobs.
  When I was in Washington, I fought to get the budget balanced. I was the architect. It was the first time we did it since man walked on the moon. We cut taxes and we had a $5 trillion projected surplus when I left.
  That's was hard work. Fiscal discipline, know what you're doing. Creativity.
  This stuff is fantasy. Just like getting rid of Medicare and Medicaid. Come on, that's just not -- you scare senior citizens with that. It's not responsible.
  HARWOOD: Well, let's just get more pointed about it. You said yesterday that you were hearing proposals that were just crazy from your colleagues.
  Who were you talking about?
  KASICH: Well, I mean right here. To talk about we're just gonna have a 10 percent tithe and that's how we're gonna fund the government? And we're going to just fix everything with waste, fraud, and abuse? Or that we're just going to be great? Or we're going to ship 10 million Americans -- or 10 million people out of this country, leaving their children here in this country and dividing families?
  Folks, we've got to wake up. We cannot elect somebody that doesn't know how to do the job. You have got to pick somebody who has experience, somebody that has the know-how, the discipline.
  And I spent my entire lifetime balancing federal budgets, growing jobs, the same in Ohio. And I will go back to Washington with my plan.
  QUINTANILLA: Governor -- Governor. thank you, Governor.
  KASICH: And I will have done it within 100 days, and it will pass. And we will be strong again. Thank you.
  QUINTANILLA: Mr. Trump, 30 seconds.
  TRUMP: First of all, John got lucky with a thing called fracking, OK? He hit oil. He got lucky with fracking. Believe me, that is why Ohio is doing well. Number -- and that is important for you to know.
  Number two, this was the man that was a managing general partner at Lehman Brothers when it went down the tubes and almost took every one of us with it, including Ben and myself, because I was there and I watched what happened.
  And Lehman Brothers started it all. He was on the board. And he was a managing general partner.
  And just thirdly, he was so nice. He was such a nice guy. And he said, oh, I'm never going to attack. But then his poll numbers tanked. He has got -- that is why he is on the end.
  (LAUGHTER) And he got nasty. And he got nasty. So you know what? You can have him.
  (CROSSTALK)
  KASICH: Let me just -- let me respond. First of all, Ohio does have an energy industry, but we're diversified. We're one of the fastest growing states in the country. We came back from the dead. And you know what? It works very, very well.
  And secondly, when you talk about me being on the board of Lehman Brothers, I wasn't on the board of Lehman Brothers. I was a banker and I was proud of it. And I traveled the country and learned how people made jobs.
  We ought to have politicians who not only have government experience but know how the CEOs and the job creators work. My state is doing great across the board. And guess what, in 2011, I got a deal...
  QUICK: Governor...
  KASICH: ... an agreement with the...
  (CROSSTALK)
  KASICH: ... that he tried to take credit for four years later. It's a joke.
  QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Governor.
  QUICK: Dr. Carson, let me get 30 seconds with Dr. Carson...
  (CROSSTALK)
  CARSON: Since I was attacked too.
  QUICK: Thank you.
  CARSON: Let me just say, if you're talking about an $18 trillion economy, you're talking about a 15 percent tax on your gross domestic product. You're talking about $2.7 trillion. We have a budget closer to $3.5 trillion.
  But if you also apply that same 15 percent to several other things, including corporate taxes, and including the capital gains taxes, you make that amount up pretty quickly. So that is not by any stretch a pie in the sky.
  CRUZ: Becky, if you want a 10 percent flat tax where the numbers add up, I rolled out my tax plan today, you can find it on line at tedcruz.org. It is a simple flat tax where for individuals, a family of four pays nothing on the first $36,000.
  After that you pay 10 percent as a flat tax going up. The billionaire and the working man, no hedge fund manager pays less than his secretary.
  On top of that, there is a business flat tax of 16 percent. Now that applies universally to giant corporations that with lobbyists right now are not paying taxes, and as small business.
  And you wanted to know the numbers, the Tax Foundation, which has scored every one of our plans, shows that this plan will allow the economy to generate 4.9 million jobs, to raise wages over 12 percent, and to generate 14 percent growth.
  And it costs, with dynamic scoring, less than a trillion dollars. Those are the hard numbers. And every single income decile sees a double-digit increase in after-tax income.
  QUICK: Senator -- Senator, thank you.
  CRUZ: Growth is the answer. And as Reagan demonstrated, if we cut taxes, we can bring back growth.
  QUICK: Gentlemen, I'm sorry, we need to...
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: We're going to try to move on.
  (CROSSTALK)
  FIORINA: Let me just say on taxes, how long have we been talking about tax reform in Washington, D.C.? We have been talking about it for decades. We now have a 73,000-page tax code.
  There have been more than 4,000 changes to the tax plan since 2001 alone. There are loads of great ideas, great conservative ideas from wonderful think tanks about how to reform the tax code.
  The problem is we never get it done. We have talked about tax reform in every single election for decades. It never happens. And the politicians always say it is so complicated, nobody but a politician can figure it out.
  The truth is this, the big problem, we need a leader in Washington who understands how to get something done, not to talk about it, not to propose it, to get it done.
  QUINTANILLA: You want to bring 70,000 pages to three?
  FIORINA: That's right, three pages.
  QUINTANILLA: Is that using really small type?
  FIORINA: You know why three?
  QUINTANILLA: Is that using really small type?
  FIORINA: No. You know why three? Because only if it's about three pages are you leveling the playing field between the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected who can hire the armies of lawyers and accountants and, yes, lobbyists to help them navigate their way through 73,000 pages.
  Three pages is about the maximum that a single business owner or a farmer or just a couple can understand without hiring somebody. Almost 60 percent of American people now need to hire an expert to understand their taxes.
  So yes, you're going to hear a lot of talk about tax reform --
  QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina --
  FIORINA: -- the issue is who is going to get it done.
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: We're going to --
  QUICK: We're going to move on.
  QUINTANILLA: We will come around the bend, i promise. This one is for Senator Rubio. You've been a young man in a hurry ever since you won your first election in your 20s. You've had a big accomplishment in the Senate, an immigration bill providing a path to citizenship the conservatives in your party hate, and even you don't support anymore. Now, you're skipping more votes than any senator to run for president. Why not slow down, get a few more things done first or least finish what you start?
  RUBIO: That's an interesting question. That's exactly what the Republican establishment says too. Why don't you wait in line? Wait for what? This country is running out of time. We can't afford to have another four years like the last eight years.
  Watching this broadcast tonight are millions of people that are living paycheck to paycheck. They're working as hard as they ever have, everything costs more, and they haven't had a raise in decades.
  You have small businesses in America that are struggling. For the first time in 35 years, we have more businesses closing than starting. We have a world that's out of control and has grown dangerous and a president that is weakening our military and making our foreign policy unstable and unreliable in the eyes of our allies. And our adversaries continue to grow stronger.
  We have a -- they say there's no bipartisanship in Washington? We have a $19 trillion bipartisan debt and it continues to grow as we borrow money from countries that do not like us to pay for government we cannot afford.
  The time to act is now. The time to turn the page is now. If we -- if we don't act now, we are going to be the first generation in American history that leaves our children worse off than ourselves.
  QUINTANILLA: So when the Sun-Sentinel says Rubio should resign, not rip us off, when they say Floridians sent you to Washington to do a job, when they say you act like you hate your job, do you?
  RUBIO: Let me say, I read that editorial today with a great amusement. It's actually evidence of the bias that exists in the American media today.
  QUINTANILLA: Well, do you hate your job?
  RUBIO: Let me -- let me answer your question on the Sun-Sentinel editorial today. Back in 2004, one of my predecessors to the Senate by the name of Bob Graham, a Democrat, ran for president missing over 30 percent of his votes. I don't recall them calling for his resignation --
  QUINTANILLA: Is that the standard?
  RUBIO: Later that year, in 2004, John Kerry ran for president missing close to 60 to 70 percent of his votes. I don't recall the Sun -- in fact, the Sun-Sentinel endorsed him. In 2008, Barack Obama missed 60 or 70 percent of his votes, and the same newspaper endorsed him again. So this is another example of the double standard that exists in this country between the mainstream media and the conservative movement.
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUINTANILLA: Senator, thank you. John.
  BUSH: Could I -- could I bring something up here, because I'm a constituent of the senator and I helped him and I expected that he would do constituent service, which means that he shows up to work. He got endorsed by the Sun-Sentinel because he was the most talented guy in the field. He's a gifted politician.
  But Marco, when you signed up for this, this was a six-year term, and you should be showing up to work. I mean, literally, the Senate -- what is it, like a French work week? You get, like, three days where you have to show up? You can campaign, or just resign and let someone else take the job. There are a lot of people living paycheck to paycheck in Florida as well, they're looking for a senator that will fight for them each and every day.
  RUBIO: I get to respond, right?
  QUICK: Thirty seconds.
  RUBIO: Well, it's interesting. Over the last few weeks, I've listened to Jeb as he walked around the country and said that you're modeling your campaign after John McCain, that you're going to launch a furious comeback the way he did, by fighting hard in New Hampshire and places like that, carrying your own bag at the airport. You know how many votes John McCain missed when he was carrying out that furious comeback that you're now modeling after?
  BUSH: He wasn't my senator.
  RUBIO: No Jeb, I don't remember -- well, let me tell you. I don't remember you ever complaining about John McCain's vote record. The only reason why you're doing it now is because we're running for the same position, and someone has convinced you that attacking me is going to help you.
  BUSH: Well, I've been --
  RUBIO: Here's the bottom line.
  (APPLAUSE)
  I'm not -- my campaign is going to be about the future of America, it's not going to be about attacking anyone else on this stage. I will continue to have tremendous admiration and respect for Governor Bush. I'm not running against Governor Bush, I'm not running against anyone on this stage. I'm running for president because there is no way we can elect Hillary Clinton to continue the policies of Barack Obama.
  QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Senator.
  TRUMP: I think you're --
  (APPLAUSE)
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: Hold on. I think there's a -- I've got question for --
  (CROSSTALK)
  KASICH: John Harwood, there's a bigger issue here.
  HARWOOD: Hold on, Governor. I've got a question for Governor Bush.
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: No, we're moving to Governor Bush. Governor, the fact that you're at the fifth lectern tonight shows how far your stock has fallen in this race, despite the big investment your donors have made.
  HARWOOD: You noted recently, after slashing your payroll, that you had better things to do than sit around and be demonized by other people. I wanted to ask you --
  BUSH: No, no. What I said was I don't believe that I would be president of the United States and have the same dysfunction that exists in Washington, D.C. now.
  HARWOOD: OK.
  BUSH: Don't vote for me if you want to keep the gridlock in Washington, D.C.
  HARWOOD: Got it.
  BUSH: But if you want someone who has a proven, effective leadership, that was a governor of a state, that transformed the culture there, elect me so I can fight for the American people and change the culture in Washington, D.C.
  HARWOOD: But it's a -- OK. It's a -- it's a question about why you're having difficulty. I want to ask you in this context.
  Ben Bernanke, who was appointed Fed chairman by your brother, recently wrote a book in which he said he no longer considers himself a Republican because the Republican Party has given in to know- nothingism. Is that why you're having a difficult time in this race?
  BUSH: (inaudible), the great majority of Republicans and Americans believe in a hopeful future. They don't believe in building walls and a pessimistic view of the future.
  They're concerned that Washington is so dysfunctional it is holding them back. There are lids on people's aspirations. Think about it: six and a half million people working part-time. Workforce participation rates lower than they were in 1977.
  Six million more people living in poverty than the day that Barack Obama got elected president, and the left just wants more of the same. We have to offer a compelling alternative that is based on hope and optimism and grounded in serious policy, which I've laid out.
  And you can go get it at jeb2016.com.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: We're gonna get down the line. Becky's got a question.
  QUICK: We'll get to everyone.
  Ms. Fiorina, I -- I'd like to ask you a question. You are running for president of the United States because of your record running Hewlett-Packard. But the stock market is usually a fair indicator of the performance of a CEO, and the market was not kind to you.
  Someone who invested a dollar in your company the day you took office had lost half of the dollar by the day you left. Obviously, you've talked in the past about what a difficult time it was for technology companies, but anybody who was following the market knows that your stock was a much worse performer, if you looked at your competitors, if you looked at the overall market.
  I just wonder, in terms of all of that -- you know, we look back, your board fired you. I just wondered why you think we should hire you now.
  FIORINA: You know, the NASDAQ dropped 80 percent -- 80 percent -- and it took 15 years for the NASDAQ to recover. I was recruited to H.P. to save a company.
  It was a company that had grown into a bloated, inept bureaucracy that cost too much and delivered too little to customers and shareholders. It had missed, before I had arrived, expectations for nine quarters in a row.
  As an outsider, I tackled H.P.'s entrenched problems head-on. I cut the bureaucracy down to size, re-introduced accountability, focused on service, on innovation, on leading in every market, in every product segment.
  And yes, it was a very difficult time. However, we saved 80,000 jobs and we went on to grow to 160,000 jobs, and scores of technology companies literally went out of business -- like Gateway -- taking all their jobs with them.
  The truth is I had to make some tough calls in some tough times. I think, actually, people are looking for that in Washington now. And yes, I was fired over a disagreement in the boardroom. There are politics in the boardroom as well.
  And yet the man who led my firing, Tom Perkins, an icon of Silicon Valley, has come out publicly and said, ''you know what? We were wrong. She was right. She was a great CEO. She'd be a great president of the United States because the leadership she brought to H.P. is exactly the leadership we need in Washington, D.C.
  QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina, it's interesting that you bring up Mr. Perkins, because...
  (APPLAUSE) ...he said a lot of very questionable things. Last year, in an interview, he said that he thinks wealthy people should get more votes than poor people.
  I think his quote was that, ''if you pay zero dollars in taxes, you should get zero votes. If you pay a million dollars, you should get a million votes.'' Is this the type of person you want defending you?
  FIORINA: Well, this is one of the reasons why Tom Perkins and I had disagreements in the boardroom, Becky.
  (LAUGHTER)
  Nevertheless, one of the things that I think people don't always understand is how accountable a CEO actually is.
  So you know, I had to report results every 90 days in excruciating detail. I had to answer every single question about every single result and every single projection in public until there were no more questions.
  And if I misrepresented those results or those projections in any way, I was held criminally liable. Imagine -- imagine -- if a politician were held to that standard of account.
  I will run on my record all day long.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And I believe people need a leader who is prepared to make tough calls in tough times and stand up...
  QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina.
  FIORINA: ...and be held accountable.
  QUICK: Thank you, we're out of time. Thank you, Mrs. Fiorina.
  Carl.
  QUINTANILLA: Senator Cruz. Congressional Republicans, Democrats and the White House are about to strike a compromise that would raise the debt limit, prevent a government shutdown and calm financial markets that fear of -- another Washington-created crisis is on the way.
  Does your opposition to it show that you're not the kind of problem-solver American voters want?
  CRUZ: You know, let me say something at the outset. The questions that have been asked so far in this debate illustrate why the American people don't trust the media.
  (APPLAUSE) This is not a cage match. And, you look at the questions -- ''Donald Trump, are you a comic-book villain?'' ''Ben Carson, can you do math?'' ''John Kasich, will you insult two people over here?'' ''Marco Rubio, why don't you resign?'' ''Jeb Bush, why have your numbers fallen?''
  How about talking about the substantive issues the people care about?
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUINTANILLA: (inaudible) do we get credit (inaudible)?
  CRUZ: And Carl -- Carl, I'm not finished yet.
  CRUZ: The contrast with the Democratic debate, where every fawning question from the media was, ''Which of you is more handsome and why?''
  (LAUGHTER)
  And let me be clear.
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: So, this is a question about (inaudible), which you have 30 seconds left to answer, should you choose to do so.
  CRUZ: Let me be clear. The men and women on this stage have more ideas, more experience, more common sense than every participant in the Democratic debate. That debate reflected a debate between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks.
  (LAUGHTER)
  And nobody watching at home believed that any of the moderators had any intention of voting in a Republican primary. The questions that are being asked shouldn't be trying to get people to tear into each other. It should be what are your substantive positions...
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: OK. (inaudible) I asked you about the debt limit and I got no answer.
  (CROSSTALK)
  CRUZ: You want me to answer that question? I'm happy to answer the question...
  (CROSSTALK)
  CRUZ: Let me tell you how that question...
  (CROSSTALK)
  CRUZ: Let me tell you how that question...
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: Senator Paul, I've got a question for you on the same subject.
  CRUZ: ... so you don't actually want to hear the answer, John?
  HARWOOD: Senator Paul?
  CRUZ: You don't want to hear the answer. You just want to...
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: You used your time on something else.
  Senator Paul?
  CRUZ: You're not interested in an answer.
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: Senator Paul, the budget deal crafted by Speaker Boehner and passed by the House today makes cuts in entitlement programs, Medicare and Social Security disability, which are the very programs conservatives say need cutting to shrink government and solve our country's long-term budget deficit. Do you oppose that budget deal because it doesn't cut those programs enough?
  PAUL: No, I oppose it because you're taking money from the entitlement and then spending it immediately on other items. That's what they're doing. They're taking money from Social Security and they're going to spend it on the military and they're going to spend it on domestic spending.
  Here's the thing. When you look at raising the debt limit, it should be leverage to try to reform government. In 2011, the sequester was passed as a reform to slow down the rate of government. Instead, the Washington establishment raised both. We raised the military spending, took from entitlements, and raised domestic spending and the deficit will explode under this. This is the unholy alliance that people need to know about between right and left. Right and left are spending us into oblivion. We should use the debt ceiling, as precisely to Don, to force upon them budgetary reforms.
  HARWOOD: Senator, if what you just said is true, why did Speaker Boehner craft this deal and why did Paul Ryan, who has a strong reputation for fiscal discipline, vote for it?
  PAUL: Well, that's a real question. Is there going to be any change in the House with new leadership? I frankly don't think there will be much change because I think what's going to happen is you're going to get more of the same. People in Washington think they were sent there to be adults and govern and do all this. Well, you know what I'm worried about? Not keeping the government open. I'm worried about bankrupting the American people.
  We're borrowing a million dollars a minute. That is important. And that's what we have to contrast. Keeping the government open and continuing to borrow a million dollars a minute.
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator (inaudible).
  QUICK: Governor Christie, I'd like to (inaudible) a question next. Actually, I have a question for you (inaudible).
  In your tell it like it is campaign, you've said a lot of tough things. You've said that we need to raise the retirement age for Social Security. You think that we need to cut benefits for people who make over $80,000 and eliminate them entirely for seniors who are making over $200,000.
  Governor Huckabee, who is here on the stage, has said that you and others who think this way are trying to rob seniors of the benefits that they've earned. It raises the question: When it is acceptable to break a social compact?
  RITCHIE: Well, I wish you would have asked that question years ago when they broke it. I mean, let me be honest with the people who are watching at home. The government has lied to you and they have stolen from you. They told you that your Social Security money is in a trust fund. All that's in that trust fund is a pile of IOUs for money they spent on something else a long time ago.
  And they've stolen from you because now they know they cannot pay these benefits and Social Security is going to be insolvent in seven to eight years. We're sitting up here talking about all these other things; 71 percent of federal spending today is on entitlements, and debt service. And, that's with zero percent interest rates.
  Now, I'm the only person that's put out a detailed plan on how to deal with entitlements. And we'll save a trillion dollars over the next 10 years. And, here's the difference between me and Hillary Clinton. What Hillary Clinton's going to say, and has said before is, she wants to raise Social Security taxes.
  Now, let me ask you a question everybody, and, this is for the guy, you know, who owns a landscaping business out there. If somebody's already stolen money from you, are you going to give them more? Or, are you going to deal with the problem by saying, I'm going to give people who've done well in this country less benefit on the backend. We need to get realistic about this. We're not -- the American people -- forget about anything else, they've already been lied to and stolen from. And...
  QUICK: ...Governor...
  CHRISTIE: ...I'm going to go to Washington to stop it...
  QUICK: ...Thank you.
  QUINTANILLA: We promised we would get to everyone this block. Governor Huckabee, I'm going to give you 60 seconds on this.
  HUCKABEE: Well, I would really appreciate that. First of all, yes, we've stolen. Yes, we've lied to the American people about Social Security, and Medicare.
  But, you know what we're not telling them? It's their money. This isn't the governments money. This is not entitlement, it's not welfare. This is money that people have confiscated out of their paychecks. Everytime they got a paycheck, the government reached in and took something out of it before they ever saw it. Now, we're going to blame the people.
  Today congress decided to take another $150 billion dollars away from Social Security so they can borrow more money. That makes no sense to everybody. And, they're always going to say, ''Well, we're going to fix this one day.''
  No their not. It's like a 400 pound man saying, ''I'm going to go on a diet, but I'm eating a sack of Krispy Kremes before I do.''
  And, people are sick of believing that the government is never going to really address this. But, let me tell you who not to blame. Let's quit blaming the people on Social Security. Let's quit making it a problem for them. It's like them getting mugged, and then us saying, well, we're going to mug you some more. You ought to just be able to get over it, get used to it...
  QUINTANILLA: ...Governor...
  HUCKABEE: ...No, sir...
  QUINTANILLA: ...Thank you, Governor...
  HUCKABEE: ...we need to honor our promises...
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: ...Senator Cruz...
  HUCKABEE: ...before I go. This is the only time I've had a chance, let me finish.
  QUINTANILLA: OK, alright.
  HUCKABEE: ...This is a matter not of math, this is a matter of morality. If this country that does not keep its promise to seniors then what promise can this country hope to be trusted to keep? And, the fact is, none of them.
  (CROSSTALK)
  MALE: And, by the way, Carl...
  (APPLAUSE)
  HUCKABEE: And, the only way -- no...
  (CROSSTALK)
  CHRISTIE: ...The only way we're going to be morale, the only way we're going to keep our promise to seniors is start by following the first rule we should all follow, which is to look at them, treat them like adults, and tell them the truth.
  It isn't there anymore, Mike. They stole it. It got stolen from them. It's not theirs anymore. The government stole it, and spent it a long time ago... HUCKABEE: ...Chris...
  CHRISTIE: So, let's stop fooling around about this, let's tell people the truth. For once, let's do that, and stop trying to give them some kind of fantasy that's never going to come true.
  QUINTANILLA: Senator Cruz...
  HUCKABEE: ...Chris...
  QUINTANILLA: ...Before we go to break, we're clearly not having that beer you mentioned, but I'll give you 30 more seconds...
  CRUZ: ...Then I'll buy you a tequila...
  QUINTANILLA: OK.
  CRUZ: ...Or, even some famous Colorado brownies.
  QUINTANILLA: I'll give you 30 seconds to respond...
  (CHEERING)
  QUINTANILLA: (INAUDIBLE)
  HUCKABEE: Since he brought me up, do I not get to respond?
  QUINTANILLA: Respond on the debt limit, or an answer to the governor, which ever you choose.
  CRUZ: Well, sure. This deal in Washington is an example of why Washington's broken. Republican leadership joined with every single Democrat, add $80 trillion to our debt to do nothing to fix the problems.
  And, let me now on Social Security because we were getting into a good substantive exchange, and I want to say I think both Chris, and Mike are right. Governor Huckabee's exactly right, we need to honor the promises made to our seniors, but for younger workers -- look. I'm 44 years old.
  It is hard to find someone in my generation that thinks Social Security will be there for us. We can save and preserve and strengthen Social Security by making no changes for seniors, but for younger workers gradually increasing the retirement age, changing the rate of growth so that it matches inflation, and critically allowing younger workers to keep a portion of our tax payments in a personal account that we own, we control them, we can pass on to our kids.
  QUINTANILLA: 30 seconds, Governor Huckabee.
  HUCKABEE: John, listen, let's keep in mind that for one-third of the 60 million Americans on Social Security it represents 90 percent of their income. And, when I hear people talking about means testing, let's just remember what that means. If we means test Social Security, it means that the government decides whether or not I deserve it. If a person lives in a seven room house, does the government get to say you don't need seven rooms, we're going to take two of them away?
  HUCKABEE: Folks, the government has no business stealing even more from the people who have paid this in. I just want to remind you, people paid their money. They expect to have it. And, if this government doesn't pay it, than tell me what's different between the government and Bernie Madolf, who sits in prison today for doing less than what the government has done to the people on social security and Medicare in this country.
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUINTANILLA: Governor, thank you. We will take a break. The Republican Presidential debate, live from Boulder, Colorado, coming back after a break on CNBC.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  QUICK: Welcome back to the presidential debate for the Republicans. We are live in Boulder, Colorado, right here on CNBC.
  Folks, we'll get right back into this.
  Mr. Trump, let's talk a little bit about bankruptcies. Your Atlantic City casinos filed for bankruptcy four times. In fact, Fitch, the ratings agency, even said that they were serial filers for all of this. You said that you did great with Atlantic City, and you did. But some of the individuals -- the bondholders, some of the contractors who worked for you, didn't fare so well.
  Bankruptcy is a broken promise. Why should the voters believe the promises that you're telling them right now?
  TRUMP: Well, first of all, like many other very big businessmen, I could name them here, but I'm not going to do that for a lot of obvious reasons, but the biggest, and almost all of them, they've all used the chapter laws, the bankruptcy laws to their own benefit.
  Before this, I was a very successful person as a developer and as a businessman. Atlantic City has gone bad. I mean, Chris will know about that. I'm not blaming Chris, by the way, but he will know about that. Caesar's -- excuse me -- Caesar's, the Rolls-Royce, as you know, is in bankruptcy. Almost every hotel in Atlantic City has either been in bankruptcy or will be in bankruptcy -- the biggest.
  But also the biggest people (ph) -- now I've used that to my advantage as a business man, for my family, for myself. I never filed for bankruptcy. But many, many people did. What happened with Atlantic City is very, very disgraceful.
  Now hundreds of companies I've opened. I've used it three times, maybe four times. Came out great. But I guess I'm supposed to come out great. That is what I could do for the country. We owe $19 trillion, boy am I good at solving debt problems. Nobody can solve it like me.
  But I will tell you this, Atlantic City, you're using that, hundreds of companies that I have opened have thrived. I built a net worth of way over $10 billion, and I have done it four times out of hundreds. And I'm glad I did it.
  I used the laws of the country to my benefit, I'm sorry.
  QUICK: Mr. Trump, thank you.
  TRUMP: Thank you.
  CRAMER: Dr. Carson, in recent weeks, a number of pharmaceutical companies has been accused of profiteering, for dramatically raising the prices of life-saving drugs. You have spent a lifetime in medicine.
  Have these companies gone too far? Should the government be involved in controlling some of these price increases?
  CARSON: Well, there is no question that some people go overboard when it comes to trying to make profits, and they don't take into consideration the American people. What we have to start thinking about, as leaders, particularly in government, is what can we do for the average American? And you think about the reasons that we're having such difficulty right now with our job market.
  Well, the average small manufacturer, whatever they're manufacturing, drugs or anything, if they have less than 50 employees, the average cost in terms of regulations is $34,000 per employee. Makes it a whole lot easier for them to want to go somewhere else.
  So what we're going to have to start doing instead of, you know, picking on this group or this group, is we're going to have to have a major reduction in the regulatory influence that is going on.
  The government is not supposed to be in every part of our lives, and that is what is causing the problem.
  CRAMER: Thank you, Dr. Carson.
  Governor Christie, there has been a lot of political rhetoric that some bank executives should have gone to jail for the 2008 financial crisis.
  But General Motors paid more than $1 billion in fines and settlements for its ignition switch defect. One hundred and twenty- four people died as a result of these faulty switches. No one went to jail.
  As a former prosecutor, do you believe the people responsible for the switch and the cover-up belong behind bars?
  CHRISTIE: You bet they do. And if I were the prosecutor, that is exactly where they would be. The fact is that this Justice Department under this president has been a political Justice Department.
  It has been a Justice Department that decided that they want to pick who the winners and losers are. They like General Motors, so they give them a pass. They don't like somebody else like David Petraeus, they prosecute them and send a decorated general on to disgrace. It's a political Justice Department.
  And, Jim, you know full well that in the seven years I was U.S. attorney we went after pharmaceutical companies. We went after companies that were ripping off shareholders. We went after companies that were doing things that were against the law.
  And to expand on Mr. Carson's -- or Dr. Carson's question, let's face it, we have laws already. We don't need newer (ph) laws. We don't need Hillary Clinton's price controls for -- again, does anybody out there think that giving Washington, D.C., the opportunity to run the pharmaceutical industry is a good idea, given how well they have done running the government?
  So what we do, though, is, if there is somebody who is price- gouging, we have laws for prosecutors to take that on. Let's let a Justice Department -- and I will make an attorney general who will enforce the law and make justice more than just a word. It will be a way of life.
  CRAMER: Thank you, Governor Christie.
  HARWOOD: Jim, thanks.
  Governor Bush, in a debate like this four years ago, every Republican running for president pledged to oppose a budget deal containing any tax increase even if it had spending cuts ten times as large.
  A few months later, you told Congress, put me in, coach, you said you would take that deal. Still feel that way?
  BUSH: Well, the deal was done. Barack Obama got his massive tax increase, and there was no spending cuts. You just see the recent deal announced today or yesterday, more spending, more tax increasing, more regulation. And now we have to accept 2 percent, the new normal for economic growth.
  And the net result is the middle class has $2,300 less in their pockets than the day that Barack Obama got elected president. And now they see Hillary Clinton proposing a third term of economic policy for our country.
  We need to reverse that. And my record was one of cutting taxes each and every year. You don't have to guess about it, because I actually have a record. $19 billion of tax cuts, 1.3 million jobs created. We were one of two states to go to AAA bond rating, and our government spending was far less than the spending in people's income.
  HARWOOD: But to -- to the point that you made to Congress, if you were president and you were offered a bipartisan deal that had one dollar...
  BUSH: You find me...
  HARWOOD: ...one dollar of tax increases per ten dollars of spending cuts, would you take it?
  BUSH: You find me a Democrat -- you find me a Democrat that will cut spending ten dollars? Heck, find me a Republican in Congress that would cut spending ten dollars. I'll talk to them.
  HARWOOD: So you don't want the coach to put you in any more?
  BUSH: Look, the -- the deal is already done. The biggest tax increase happened under the watch of Barack Obama, and spending's gone up. You find a Democrat that's for cutting taxes -- cutting spending ten dollars, I'll give them a warm kiss.
  (LAUGHTER)
  HARWOOD: Thank you, governor.
  Carl?
  QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina, in 2010, while running for Senate in Tech Ridge (ph), California, you called an Internet sales tax a bad idea. Traditional brick and mortar stores obviously disagree. Now that the Internet shopping playing field has matured, what would be a fair plan to even that playing field?
  FIORINA: You know, I want to go back for a moment to what we were just talking about. Crony capitalism is alive and well, and has been so in Washington, D.C. for decades.
  What's crony capitalism? Crony capitalism is what happens when government gets so big and so powerful that only the big and the powerful can handle it.
  So why are the pharmaceutical companies consolidating? Why are there five even bigger Wall Street banks now, instead of the ten we used to have on Wall Street? Because when government gets big and powerful, the big feel like they need to get even bigger to deal with all that power, and meanwhile, the small and the powerless -- in this case, 1,590 community banks -- go out of business.
  You see, folks, this is how socialism starts. Government causes a problem, and then government steps in to solve the problem. This is why, fundamentally, we have to take our government back.
  The student loan problem has been created by government. Government trying to level the playing field between Internet and brick-and-mortar creates a problem. The FCC jumping in now and saying, ''we're going to put 400 pages of regulation over the Internet,'' is going to create massive problems.
  But guess who pushed for that regulation? The big Internet companies. This is what's going on. Big and powerful use big and powerful government to their advantage.
  It's why you see Walgreens buying Rite Aid. It's why you see the pharmaceuticals getting together. It's you see the health insurance companies getting together. It's why you see the banks consolidating.
  And meanwhile, small businesses are getting crushed. Community- based businesses and farms are getting crushed. Community banks are going out of business. Big government favors the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected, and crushes the small and the powerless.
  QUINTANILLA: Mrs. Fiorina.
  FIORINA: It is why we have to simplify. It is why we have to reduce the size and power of government.
  QUINTANILLA: OK.
  FIORINA: It's the only way to level the playing field between big and powerful and small and powerless.
  QUINTANILLA: Thank you very much.
  (APPLAUSE) QUICK: Senator Rubio, you yourself have said that you've had issues. You have a lack of bookkeeping skills. You accidentally inter-mingled campaign money with your personal money. You faced (ph) foreclosure on a second home that you bought. And just last year, you liquidated a $68,000 retirement fund. That's something that cost you thousands of dollars in taxes and penalties.
  In terms of all of that, it raises the question whether you have the maturity and wisdom to lead this $17 trillion economy. What do you say?
  RUBIO: Well, you just -- you just listed a litany of discredited attacks from Democrats and my political opponents, and I'm not gonna waste 60 seconds detailing them all. But I'm going to tell you the truth.
  Here's the truth. I didn't inherit any money. My dad was a bartender, my mother was a maid. They worked hard to provide us the chance at a better life.
  They didn't save enough money for us to go to school. I had to work my way through school. I had to borrow money to go to school. I tried (ph), early in my marriage, explaining to my wife why someone named Sallie Mae was taking $1,000 out of our bank account every month.
  (LAUGHTER)
  I know what it's like to owe that money, and we've worked hard. We've worked hard our whole life to provide a better family -- a better life for our family.
  We own a home four blocks away from the place that I grew up in. My four children have been able to receive a good Christian education, and I've been able to save for them to go to college so they never have to have the loans that I did.
  But I'm not worried about my finances, I'm worried about the finances of everyday Americans who today are struggling in an economy that is not producing good paying jobs while everything else costs more. And that's what this economy needs to -- that's what this debate needs to be about.
  This debate needs to be about the men and women across this country that are struggling on a daily basis to provide for their families the better future that we've always said this country is all about.
  QUICK: Senator, I understand all of that. I had a lot of student loans when I got out, too. But you've had a windfall that a lot of Americans haven't. You made over a million dollars on a book deal, and some of these problems came after that.
  RUBIO: And I used it to pay off my loans. And it's available on paperback, if you're interested in buying my book.
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUICK: But you -- but you liquidated that retirement account after the fact, and that cost you about $24,000 out of that in taxes and feed. That -- that was after you'd already come into that windfall. That's why I raised the question.
  RUBIO: Yeah, again, as I said, we're raising a family in the 21st century and it's one of the reasons why my tax plan is a pro- family tax plan.
  It increases the per child tax credit, because I didn't read about this in a book. I know for a fact how difficult it is to raise children, how expensive it's become for working families. And I make a lot more than the average American. Imagine how hard it is for these people out there that are making 40, 50, $60,000 a year, and they're trying to provide for their families at a time when this economy is not growing.
  We can't afford another four years of that. Which is what we're gonna get if we elect a big government liberal like Hillary Clinton to the White House.
  Thank you, senator.
  HARWOOD: Governor John Kasich, you've called for abolishing the Export Import Bank, which provides subsidies to help American companies compete with overseas competitors. You call that corporate welfare.
  One of the largest newspapers in your state wrote an editorial, said they found that strange, writing, that if that's corporate welfare, what does Kasich call the millions of dollars in financial incentives doled out to attract or retain jobs by his development effort -- jobs Ohio.
  If subsidies are good enough for Ohio companies, why aren't they good enough for companies trying to compete overseas?
  KASICH: Well, first of all, when we talk about the Import Export Bank, it's time to clean up corporate welfare. If we're gonna reform welfare for poor people, we ought to reform it for rich people, as well. Secondly, in our state, we went from a loss of 350,000 jobs to, now, a gain of 347,000 jobs to the positive. Our wages are growing faster than the national average, and I've cut taxes more than any sitting governor in this state -- $5 billion, including no taxes on small business and killing the death tax.
  I want to go back to what we were talking about earlier, this budget deal in Washington.
  This is the same old stuff since I left.
  You spend the money today and then you hope you're going to save money tomorrow.
  I don't know if people understand, but I spent a lifetime with my colleagues getting us to a federal balanced budget. We actually did it. And I have a road map and a plan right now to get us to balance.
  Reforming entitlements, cutting taxes. You see, because if you really want to get to a balanced budget, you need to reduce your expenses and you need to grow your economy. So what I will tell you about our incentives -- our incentives are tight, and at the end of the day we make sure that we gain more from the creation of jobs than what we lose.
  And you know what? Ohio, one of the best growing places in the country -- I not only did it in Washington, I did it in Ohio, and I'll go back to Washington, and there will be no more silly deals...
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  KASICH: ... If I become President because we'll have a Constitutional Amendment to require a federally balanced budget so they will do their job.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor. Thank you.
  QUICK: Yes, thank you John.
  Senator Cruz, working women in this country still earn just 77 percent of what men earn. And I know that you've said you've been very sympathetic to our cause. But you've also you said that the Democrats' moves to try and change this are the political show votes.
  I just wonder what you would do as President to try and help in this cause?
  CRUZ: Well, we've gotta turn the economy around for people who are struggling.
  The Democrats' answer to everything is more government control over wages, and more empowering trial lawyers to file lawsuits.
  You know, you look at women working. I'll tell you, in my family there are a lot of single moms in my family. My sister was a single mom, both of my aunts who were a single moms. My mom who's here today, was a single mom when my father left us when I was 3 years old.
  Now, thank God, my father was invited to a Bible study and became born again and he came back to my mom and me and we were raised together. But I -- the struggle of single moms is extraordinary. And you know, when you see Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders and all the Democrats talking about wanting to address the plight of working women, not a one of them mentioned the fact that under Barack Obama, 3.7 million women have entered poverty.
  Not a one of them mentioned the fact that under Barack Obama and the big government economy, the median wage for women has dropped $733. The the truth of the matter is, big government benefits the wealthy, it benefits the lobbyists, it benefits the giant corporations. And the people who are getting hammered are small businesses, it's single moms, it's Hispanics. That is who I'm fighting for. The people that Washington leaves behind.
  (CROSSTALK)
  FIORINA: Becky, it is the height of hypocrisy for Mrs. Clinton to talk about being the first woman President, when every single policy she espouses, and every single policy of President Obama has been demonstrably bad for women.
  FIORINA: 92 percent -- 92 percent of the jobs lost during Barack Obama's first term belonged to women. Senator Cruz is precisely right. Three million women have fallen into poverty under this administration. The number of women --
  QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina --
  FIORINA: -- living in extreme poverty is the highest level on record. I am a conservative because I know our values, our principles and our policies --
  QUICK: Mrs. Fiorina, we will come back to you.
  FIORINA: -- work better to lift everyone up, men and women.
  QUICK: Thank you, Mrs. Fiorina. Carl?
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUINTANILLA: Dr. Carson, we know you as a physician, but we wanted to ask you about your involvement on some corporate boards, including Costco's. Last year, a marketing study called the warehouse retailer the number one gay-friendly brand in America, partly because of its domestic partner benefits.
  Why would you serve on a company whose policies seem to run counter to your views on homosexuality?
  CARSON: Well, obviously, you don't understand my views on homosexuality. I believe that our Constitution protects everybody, regardless of their sexual orientation or any other aspect. I also believe that marriage is between one man and one woman. And there is no reason that you can't be perfectly fair to the gay community.
  They shouldn't automatically assume that because you believe that marriage is between one man and one woman that you are a homophobe. And this is one of the myths that the left perpetrates on our society, and this is how they frighten people and get people to shut up. You know, that's what the PC culture is all about, and it's destroying this nation.
  The fact of the matter is we the American people are not each other's enemies, it's those people who are trying to divide us who are the enemies. And we need to make that very clear to everybody.
  (APPLAUSE) QUINTANILLA: One more question. This is a company called Mannatech, a maker of nutritional supplements, with which you had a 10-year relationship. They offered claims that they could cure autism, cancer, they paid $7 million to settle a deceptive marketing lawsuit in Texas, and yet you're involvement continued. Why?
  CARSON: Well, that's easy to answer. I didn't have an involvement with them. That is total propaganda, and this is what happens in our society. Total propaganda.
  I did a couple of speeches for them, I do speeches for other people. They were paid speeches. It is absolutely absurd to say that I had any kind of a relationship with them.
  Do I take the product? Yes. I think it's a good product.
  QUINTANILLA: To be fair, you were on the homepage of their website with the logo over your shoulder --
  CARSON: If somebody put me on their homepage, they did it without my permission.
  QUINTANILLA: Does that not speak to your vetting process or judgment in any way.
  CARSON: No, it speaks to the fact that I don't know those --
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  See? They know.
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUINTANILLA: Apparently. We will take a break. We'll be back in Boulder in just a minute.
  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  HARWOOD: Welcome back to the Republican presidential debate on CNBC, live from Boulder, Colorado at the University of Colorado.
  Senator Huckabee, I mean -- excuse me -- Senator Rubio, Wired magazine recently carried the heading, ''Marco Rubio wants to be the tech industry's savior.'' It noted your support for dramatically increasing immigration visas called H1B, which are designed for workers with the special skills that Silicon Valley wants.
  But your Senate colleague, Jeff Sessions of Alabama, says in reality, the tech industry uses this program to undercut hiring and wages for highly qualified Americans. Why is he wrong?
  RUBIO: Well, first of all, if a company gets caught doing that, they should never be able to use the program again. If you get caught abusing this program, you should never be able to use it again.
  The second thing I said is we need to add reforms, not just increase the numbers, but add reforms. For example, before you hire anyone from abroad, you should have to advertise that job for 180 days. You also have to prove that you're going to pay these people more than you would pay someone else, so that you're not undercutting it by bringing in cheap labor.
  But here's the best solution of all. We need to get back to training people in this country to do the jobs of the 21st century. Why, for the life of me, I do not understand why did we stop doing vocational education in America, people that can work with their hands; people you can train to do this work while they're still in high school so they can graduate ready to go work. But the best way to close this gap is to modernize higher education so Americans have the skills for those jobs. But in the interim, in the absence of that, what's happening is some of these tech companies are taking those -- those centers (ph) to Canada because they can get people to go over there instead of here.
  But the ideal scenario is to train Americans to do the work so we don't have to rely on people from abroad.
  HARWOOD: It sounds like you think Senator Sessions is wrong to believe there is enough abuse in that program that we shouldn't...
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: Well, I believe that there are abuses, those companies should be permanently barred from ever using the program again and we should put strict standards in place to ensure that they're not being abused, like the prevailing wage requirement and like the advertising requirement.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator.
  Becky?
  QUICK: Mr. Trump, let's stay on this issue of immigration. You have been very critical of Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook who has wanted to increase the number of these H1Bs.
  TRUMP: I was not at all critical of him. I was not at all. In fact, frankly, he's complaining about the fact that we're losing some of the most talented people. They go to Harvard. They go to Yale. They go to Princeton. They come from another country and they're immediately sent out.
  I am all in favor of keeping these talented people here so they can go to work in Silicon Valley.
  QUICK: So you're in favor of...
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: So I have nothing at all critical of him.
  ' QUICK: Where did I read this and come up with this that you were...
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: Probably, I don't know -- you people write the stuff. I don't know where you...
  (LAUGHTER)
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: And if I could say just one thing. I am the only person in either campaign that's self-funding. I'm putting up 100 percent of my own money. And right now, I will be putting up a tremendous -- so far, I've put up less than anybody and I have the best results. Wouldn't that be nice if the country could do that?
  But I will be putting -- I will be putting up, you know, tremendous amounts of money. SuperPacs are a disaster. They're a scam. They cause dishonesty. And you better get rid of them because they are causing a lot of bad decisions to be made by some very good people. And I'm not blaming these folks -- well, I guess I could.
  (LAUGHTER)
  Very good people are making very bad decisions right now. And if anything comes out of this whole thing with some of these nasty and ridiculous questions, I will tell you, you better get rid of the SuperPacs because they causing a big problem with this country, not only in dishonesty and what's going on, but also in a lot of bad decisions that have been made for the benefit of lobbyists and special interests.
  QUICK: You know, Mr. -- you know, Mr. Trump, if I may (inaudible). You've been -- you have been -- you had talked a little bit about Marco Rubio. I think you called him Mark Zuckerberg's personal senator because he was in favor of the H1B.
  TRUMP: I never said that. I never said that.
  QUICK: So this was an erroneous article the whole way around?
  TRUMP: You've got another gentleman in Florida, who happens to be a very nice guy, but not...
  QUICK: My apologies. I'm sorry.
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: ... he's really doing some bad...
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: Since I've been mentioned, can I respond?
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUICK: Yes, you can.
  RUBIO: OK. I know the Democrats have the ultimate SuperPac. It's called the mainstream media who every single day...
  (APPLAUSE)
  ... and I'll tell you why. Last week, Hillary Clinton went before a committee. She admitted she had sent e-mails to her family saying, ''Hey, this attack at Benghazi was caused by Al Qaida-like elements.'' She spent over a week telling the families of those victims and the American people that it was because of a video. And yet the mainstream media is going around saying it was the greatest week in Hillary Clinton's campaign.
  It was the week she got exposed as a liar. It was the week that she got exposed as a liar...
  (APPLAUSE)
  But she has her super PAC helping her out, the American mainstream media.
  QUICK: Senator Rubio, thank you very much.
  I would like to introduce my colleague, Rick Santelli, he has some comments as well, sir.
  SANTELLI: Senator Cruz, let's focus on our central bank, the Federal Reserve. You've been a fierce critic of the Fed, arguing for more transparency. Where do you want to take that?
  Do you want to get Congress involved in monetary policy, or is it time to slap the Fed back and downsize them completely? What are your thoughts? What do you believe?
  CRUZ: Well, Rick, it's a very important question. I have got deep concerns about the Fed. The first thing I think we need to do is audit the Fed. And I am an original co-sponsor of Rand Paul's audit the Fed legislation.
  The second thing we need to do is I think we need to bring together a bipartisan commission to look at getting back to rules- based monetary policy, end this star chamber that has been engaging in this incredible experiment of quantitative easing, QE1, QE2, QE3, QE- infinity.
  And the people who are being impacted, you know, a question that was asked earlier, Becky asked, was about working women. You know, it's interesting, you look at on Wall Street, the Fed is doing great. It's driving up stock prices. Wall Street is doing great.
  You know, today, the top 1 percent earn a higher share of our income than any year since 1928. But if you look at working men and women. If you look at a single mom buying groceries, she sees hamburger prices have gone up nearly 40 percent.
  She sees her cost of electricity going up. She sees her health insurance going up. And loose money is one of the major problems. We need sound money. And I think the Fed should get out of the business of trying to juice our economy and simply be focused on sound money and monetary stability, ideally tied to gold.
  SANTELLI: Senator Paul, the same question to you.
  PAUL: Well, thank you very much. I would like to thank Ted for co-sponsoring my bill, audit the Fed. And I think it's precisely because of the arrogance of someone like Ben Bernanke, who now calls us all know-nothings, that is precisely why we need audit the Fed.
  I think it is really very much a huge problem that an organization as powerful as the Fed comes in, lobbies against them being audited on the Hill. I would prevent them lobbying Congress. I don't think the Fed should be involved with lobbying us.
  I think we should examine how the Fed has really been part of the problem. You want to study income inequality, let's bring the Fed forward and talk about Fed policy and how it causes income inequality.
  Let's also bring the Fed forward and have them explain how they caused the housing boom and the crisis, and what they've done to make us better or worse. I think the Fed has been a great problem in our society.
  What you need to do is free up interest rates. Interest rates are the price of money, and we shouldn't have price controls on the price of money.
  SANTELLI: Thank you, Senator.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Dr. Carson, you told The Des Moines Register that you don't like government subsidies, it interferes with the free market. But you've also said that you're in favor of taking oil subsidies and putting them towards ethanol processing.
  Isn't that just swapping one subsidy for another, Doctor?
  CARSON: Well, first of all, I was wrong about taking the oil subsidy. I have...
  ... the best results, wouldn't that be nice if the country could do that?
  But I will be putting -- I will be putting up, you know, tremendous amounts of money. Super PACs are a disaster. They're a scam. They cause dishonesty. And you had better get rid of them, because they are causing a lot of bad decisions to be made by some very good people.
  And I'm not blaming these folks -- but I guess I could.
  (LAUGHTER)
  Very good people are making very bad decisions right now. And if anything comes out of this whole thing with some of these nasty and ridiculous questions, I will tell you, you had better get rid of the super PACs, because they're causing a big problem with this country, not only in dishonesty and what's going on, but also in a lot of bad decisions that are being made for the benefit of lobbyists and special interests.
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUICK: You know, Mr. Trump, if I may...
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUICK: Just a minute, Ms. Fiorina, let me follow up on this for just a moment.
  You talked a little bit about Marco Rubio. I think you called him ''Mark Zuckerberg's personal senator'' because he was in favor H- 1B...
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: I never said that. I never said that.
  QUICK: So this was an erroneous article the whole way around?
  TRUMP: He has got another gentleman in Florida, who happens to be a very nice guy, but not...
  QUICK: My apologies. I'm sorry...
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: Everybody is really doing some bad fact...
  RUBIO: Since I've been mentioned, can I respond?
  QUICK: Yes. Yes, you may.
  RUBIO: OK. You know, the Democrats who have the ultimate super PAC, it's called the mainstream media. (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
  And I'll tell you why, last week, Hillary Clinton went before a committee, she admitted she had sent emails to her family saying, hey, this attack in Benghazi was caused by al Qaeda-like elements.
  She spent over a week telling the families of those victims and the American people that it was because of a video. And yet the mainstream media is going around saying it was the greatest week in Hillary Clinton's campaign.
  It was the week she got exposed as a liar. It was the week that she got exposed as a liar...
  (CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
  But she has her super PAC helping her out, the American mainstream media.
  QUICK: Senator Rubio, thank you very much.
  I would like to introduce my colleague, Rick Santelli, he has some comments as well, sir.
  SANTELLI: Senator Cruz, let's focus on our central bank, the Federal Reserve. You've been a fierce critic of the Fed, arguing for more transparency. Where do you want to take that?
  Do you want to get Congress involved in monetary policy, or is it time to slap the Fed back and downsize them completely? What are your thoughts? What do you believe?
  CRUZ: Well, Rick, it's a very important question. I have got deep concerns about the Fed. The first thing I think we need to do is audit the Fed. And I am an original co-sponsor of Rand Paul's audit the Fed legislation.
  The second thing we need to do is I think we need to bring together a bipartisan commission to look at getting back to rules- based monetary policy, end this star chamber that has been engaging in this incredible experiment of quantitative easing, QE1, QE2, QE3, QE- infinity.
  And the people who are being impacted, you know, a question that was asked earlier, Becky asked, was about working women. You know, it's interesting, you look at on Wall Street, the Fed is doing great. It's driving up stock prices. Wall Street is doing great.
  You know, today, the top 1 percent earn a higher share of our income than any year since 1928. But if you look at working men and women. If you look at a single mom buying groceries, she sees hamburger prices have gone up nearly 40 percent.
  She sees her cost of electricity going up. She sees her health insurance going up. And loose money is one of the major problems. We need sound money. And I think the Fed should get out of the business of trying to juice our economy and simply be focused on sound money and monetary stability, ideally tied to gold.
  SANTELLI: Senator Paul, the same question to you.
  PAUL: Well, thank you very much. I would like to thank Ted for co-sponsoring my bill, audit the Fed. And I think it's precisely because of the arrogance of someone like Ben Bernanke, who now calls us all know-nothings, that is precisely why we need audit the Fed.
  I think it is really very much a huge problem that an organization as powerful as the Fed comes in, lobbies against them being audited on the Hill. I would prevent them lobbying Congress. I don't think the Fed should be involved with lobbying us.
  I think we should examine how the Fed has really been part of the problem. You want to study income inequality, let's bring the Fed forward and talk about Fed policy and how it causes income inequality.
  Let's also bring the Fed forward and have them explain how they caused the housing boom and the crisis, and what they've done to make us better or worse. I think the Fed has been a great problem in our society.
  What you need to do is free up interest rates. Interest rates are the price of money, and we shouldn't have price controls on the price of money.
  SANTELLI: Thank you, Senator.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Dr. Carson, you told The Des Moines Register that you don't like government subsidies, it interferes with the free market. But you've also said that you're in favor of taking oil subsidies and putting them towards ethanol processing.
  Isn't that just swapping one subsidy for another, Doctor?
  CARSON: Well, first of all, I was wrong about taking the oil subsidy. I have studied that issue in great detail. And what I have concluded is that the best policy is to get rid of all government subsidies, and get the government out of our lives, and let people rise and fall based on how good they are.
  And -- you know, all of this too big to fail stuff and picking and choosing winners and losers -- this is a bunch of crap, and it is really causing a great deal of -- great deal of problems for our society right now.
  And -- and -- you know, it goes back to the whole concept of regulations, which are in everything. The reason that I -- I hate them so much is because every single regulation costs in terms of goods and services.
  That cost gets passed on to the people. Now, who are the people who are hurt by that? It's poor people and middle class. Doesn't hurt rich people if their bar of soap goes up ten cents, but it hurts the poor and the middle class.
  And Bernie Sanders will tell them that it's because of the rich. Well, I'll tell you something: you can take everything from the top 1 percent, and you apply it to our fiscal gap, and you won't even make a dent in it.
  SANTELLI: Thank you, Doctor.
  Becky?
  QUICK: Rick, thank you very much.
  Governor Huckabee, you have railed against income inequality. You've said that some Wall Street executives should have gone to jail over the roles that they played during the financial crisis.
  Apart from your tax plan, are there specific steps you would require from corporate America to try and reduce the income inequality.
  HUCKABEE: I don't think it's so much about when the government orders a corporation to do something. In fact, that's part of the problem. If you saw that blimp that got cut loose from Maryland today, it's a perfect example of government.
  I mean, what we had was something the government made -- basically a bag of gas -- that cut loose, destroyed everything in its path, left thousands of people powerless, but they couldn't get rid of it because we had too much money invested in it, so we had to keep it.
  That is our government today. We saw it in the blimp.
  (APPLAUSE)
  That's exactly what we saw. So look, corporations ought to exercise some responsibility. When CEO income has risen 90 percent above the average worker, when the bottom 90 percent of this country's economy has had stagnant wages for the past 40 years, somebody is taking it in the teeth.
  And it's not the folks on Wall Street. I'm not anti-Wall Street, but I don't believe the government ought to wear a team jersey, pick winners and losers.
  QUICK: Governor?
  HUCKABEE: The government ought to wear a striped shirt and just make sure the game...
  QUICK: Governor?
  HUCKABEE: ...is paid -- played fairly.
  QUICK: Thank you. Now, everybody else has fudged their time and gone over, so please, don't cut me off too quick, Becky.
  QUICK: All right, Governor Huckabee.
  HUCKABEE: Let me just close it out this way.
  QUICK: How about 15 more seconds?
  HUCKABEE: We need to be focusing on what fixes this country. And I'll tell you one thing that we never talk about -- we haven't talked about it tonight.
  Why aren't we talking about -- instead of cutting benefits for old people, cutting benefits for sick people -- why don't we say, ''let's cure the four big cost-driving diseases...
  QUICK: Governor?
  HUCKABEE: ...''diabetes, heart disease, cancer and Alzheimer's?''
  QUICK: Governor, I'm sorry...
  HUCKABEE: If you do that, you don't just change the economy, you transform the lives of millions of hurting Americans.
  QUICK: Governor, thank you.
  HUCKABEE: Gosh, I'd love for us to talk about something like that. Thank you. QUICK: Governor, thank you. Appreciate it.
  John?
  HARWOOD: Governor Bush, the tax reform bill that Ronald Reagan signed in 1986 cut the top personal income tax rate to 28 percent -- just like your plan does. But President Reagan taxed capital gains at the same rate, while you would tax them at just 20 percent.
  Given the problems we've been discussing, growing gap between rich and poor, why would you tax labor at a higher rate than income from investments?
  BUSH: Look, the -- the simple fact is that my plan actually gives the middle class the greatest break: $2,000 per family. And if you make $40,000 a year, a family of four, you don't pay any income tax at all.
  Simplifying the code and lowering rates, both for corporations and -- and personal rates, is exactly what we need to do. You think about the regulatory cost and the tax cost -- that's why small businesses are closing, rather than being formed in our country right now.
  The big corporations have the scale to deal with all of this. And what I think all of us are saying is, our monetary policy, our tax policy, regulatory policy needs to be radically changed so we can create high sustained growth for income to rise.
  The government has tried it their way. Under -- under Barack Obama and the proposals of Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders and others, they've tried it their way, and it has failed miserably.
  We need to take a new approach of taxing -- reforming how we tax, and reforming the regulations in our -- in our country before it's too late.
  HARWOOD: Senator Rubio, 30 seconds to you.
  The Tax Foundation, which was alluded to earlier, scored your tax plan and concluded that you give nearly twice as much of a gain in after-tax income to the top 1 percent as to people in the middle of the income scale.
  Since you're the champion of Americans living paycheck-to- paycheck, don't you have that backward?
  RUBIO: No, that's -- you're wrong. In fact, the largest after- tax gains is for the people at the lower end of the tax spectrum under my plan. And there's a bunch of things my tax plan does to help them.
  Number one, you have people in this country that...
  HARWOOD: The Tax Foundation -- just to be clear, they said the...
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: ...you wrote a story on it, and you had to go back and correct it.
  HARWOOD: No, I did not.
  RUBIO: You did. No, you did.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (CROSSTALK)
  HARWOOD: Senator, the Tax Foundation said after-tax income for the top 1 percent under your plan would go up 27.9 percent.
  RUBIO: Well, you're talking about -- yeah.
  HARWOOD: And people in the middle of the income spectrum, about 15 percent.
  RUBIO: Yeah, but that -- because the math is, if you -- 5 percent of a million is a lot more than 5 percent of a thousand. So yeah, someone who makes more money...
  HARWOOD: (inaudible)
  RUBIO: ...numerically, it's gonna be higher. But the greatest gains, percentage-wise, for people, are gonna be at the lower end of our plan, and here's why: because in addition to a general personal exemption, we are increasing the per-child tax credit for working families.
  We are lowering taxes on small business. You know, a lot of business activity in America is conducted like the guy that does my dry cleaning. He's an S corporation. He pays on his personal rate, and he is paying higher than the big dry-cleaning chain down the street, because he's paying at his personal rate.
  RUBIO: Under my plan, no business, big or small, will pay more than 25 percent flat rate on their business income. That is a dramatic tax decrease for hard-working people who run their own businesses.
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: ...The other thing I'd like to make about our plan, one more point, it is the most pro growth tax plan that I can imagine because it doesn't tax investments at all. You know why? Because the more you tax something, the less of it you get.
  I want to be in -- I want America to be the best...
  PAUL: ...John...
  RUBIO: ...in the world for people...
  HARWOOD: Senator, thank you.
  PAUL: John, I'd like to address this? John, could I follow up on this?
  QUINTANILLA: ...We'll come back around. I want to get to governor Kasich.
  PAUL: What are the rules on who gets to follow up. How do we decide on who gets to follow up? I've seen plenty of other people follow up?
  QUICK: It's at the moderator discretion.
  QUINTANILLA: Governor Kasich, let's talk ...
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: ...about Marijuana, Governor Kasich...
  PAUL: I'd like to just mention something about my tax plan, and how it relates to the discussion...
  QUINTANILLA: Alright, but 30 seconds, you made a case. Sure, 30 seconds.
  PAUL: Alright. Much of the discussion is centered over whether or not the different tax plans help, or affect the middle class. In fact, it's the chief argument by democrats against many of the different flat tax proposals. Mine is unique in the sense that my tax plan actually gets rid of the payroll tax as well. It shifts it to the business, and it would allow middle class people to get a tax cut.
  If you just cut their income tax, there isn't much income tax to cut. Mine actually cuts the payroll tax, and I think it would spread the tax cut across all socioeconomic levels, and would allow then it to be something that would be broadly supported by the public in an election.
  QUINTANILLA: Senator, thank you.
  CRUZ: Let me say on that...
  QUINTANILLA: Oh, no, no, no...
  CRUZ: ...Rand is exactly right. His plan is a good plan, and I will note that my 10% plan also eliminates the payroll tax, eliminates the death tax,
  QUINTANILLA: ...Ok...
  CRUZ: ...eliminates the business...
  MALE: (INAUDIBLE)
  CRUZ: ...income tax...
  MALE: What are you doing?
  CRUZ: ...10% flat rate...
  QUINTANILLA: ...We're going to go to...
  CRUZ: ...is the lowest personal rate any candidate up here has, and what it would also enable us to do is for every citizen to fill out their taxes on a postcard so we can eliminate the IRS.
  (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)
  QUINTANILLA: OK. Thank you, Senator. Governor Kasich, let's talk about marijuana. We're broadcasting from Colorado which has seen $150 million in new revenue for the state since legalizing last year. Governor Hickenlooper is not a big fan of legalization, but he's said the people who used to be smoking it are still smoking it, they're just now paying taxes.
  Given the budget pressures in Ohio, and other states, is this a revenue stream you'd like to have?
  KASICH: Well, first of all, we're running a $2 billion dollar surplus, we're not having a revenue problem right now. And, sending mixed signals to kids about drugs is a disaster. Drugs is one of the greatest scourge in this country, and I spent five years of my administration working with my team to do a whole sort of things to try to reign in the problem of overdoses, and it goes on and on. We could do a whole show on that.
  I want to go back for a second thought on this issue of income inequality. My program would move the 104 programs of the federal Department of Education into four block grants, and send them back to the states because income inequality is driven by a lack of skills when kids don't get what they need to be able to compete and win in this country.
  The fact is, in order to get this economy moving again, I call for freezing regulations for a year except for the problem of public safety. I believe that we need to cut these taxes down, we need to be on a roadmap to balancing the budget, and we need to send power, money, and influence, the welfare department, the education department, job training, infrastructure, Medicaid, all of that out of Washington back to the states so we can run these programs from where we live to the top, not a one size fits all mentality that they have in Washington.
  And, that will get to the nub of opportunity for our children, and an ability to see wages rise. Again...
  (CROSSTALK)
  KASICH: ...One more time, in Ohio, our wages are growing faster than the national average. We've cut taxes, balanced budgets, changed the regulatory environment. Folks, you want to --
  QUINTANILLA: Thank you, Governor.
  KASICH: -- fix America, this is the formula. It worked for Reagan and it works for our team in Ohio. Thank you.
  QUINTANILLA: Thank you. We'll be back from Boulder, Colorado in just a moment.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (BREAK)
  QUICK: Welcome back to the University of Colorado and the Republican presidential debate right here on CNBC.
  Mr. Trump, I want to go back to an issue that we were talking about before, the H-1B visas. I found where I read that before. It was from the donaldjtrump.com website and it says -- it says that again, Mark Zuckerburg's personal senator, Marco Rubio has a bill to triple H-1Bs that would decimate women and minorities. Are you in favor of H-1Bs or are you opposed to them?
  TRUMP: I'm in favor of people coming into this country legally. And you know what? They can have it anyway you want. You can call it visas, you can call it work permits, you can call it anything you want. I've created tens of thousands of jobs, and in all due respect -- and actually some of these folks I really like a lot -- but I'm the only one that can say that. I have created tens of thousands of jobs, and I'll be creating many millions of jobs if I'm given -- if I'm given the opportunity to be president.
  As far as Mark is concerned, as far as the visas are concerned, if we need people, they have -- it's fine. They have to come into this country legally. We have a country of borders. We have a country of laws. We have to obey the laws. It's fine if they come in, but they have to come in legally.
  QUICK: Thank you, sir.
  RUBIO: I was mentioned in the question.
  QUICK: You were. You get 30 seconds.
  RUBIO: Thank you.
  Well, I've learned the rules on this.
  (LAUGHTER)
  Look, in addition to what Donald was saying is we also need to talk about the legal immigration system for permanent residents. Today, we have a legal immigration system for permanent residency that is largely based on whether or not you have a relative living here. And that's the way my parents came legally in 1956.
  But in 2015, we have a very different economy. Our legal immigration system from now on has to be merit-based. It has to be based on what skills you have, what you can contribute economically, and most important of all, on whether or not you're coming here to become an American, not just live in America, but be an American.
  QUICK: Thank you, Senator. Thank you, Senator.
  Carl?
  QUINTANILLA: Mr. Trump, you've said you have a special permit to carry a gun in New York.
  TRUMP: Yes.
  QUINTANILLA: After the Oregon mass shooting on October 1st, you said, ''By the way, it was a gun-free zone. If you had a couple of teachers with guns, you would have been a hell of a lot better off.''
  TRUMP: Or somebody else. Right.
  QUINTANILLA: Would you feel more comfortable if your employees brought guns to work?
  TRUMP: Yes, I might feel more comfortable. I would say that I would and I have a permit, which is very unusual in New York -- a permit to carry. And I do carry on occasion, sometimes a lot. But I like to be unpredictable so that people don't know exactly... (LAUGHTER)
  QUINTANILLA: Are you carrying one now?
  (LAUGHTER)
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: By the way, unlike our country where we're totally predictable and the enemy, whether it's ISIS or anybody else, they know exactly what we're doing because we have the wrong leadership.
  (APPLAUSE)
  But I feel that the gun-free zones and, you know, when you say that, that's target practice for the sickos and for the mentally ill. That's target. They look around for gun-free zones. You know, we could give you another example -- the Marines, the Army, these wonderful six soldiers that were killed. Two of them were among the most highly decorated -- they weren't allowed on a military base to have guns. And somebody walked in and shot them, killed them. If they had guns, he wouldn't be around very long. I can tell you, there wouldn't have been much damage.
  So, I think gun-free zones are a catastrophe. They're a feeding frenzy for sick people.
  QUINTANILLA: We called a few Trump resorts, a few Trump properties that -- that do not allow guns with or without a permit. Would you change those policies?
  TRUMP: I would change them. I would change them.
  QUINTANILLA: OK. All right. Thank you.
  John?
  HARWOOD: Governor Huckabee, you've written about the huge divide in values between middle America and the big coastal cities like New York and Los Angeles. As a preacher as well as a politician, you know that presidents need the moral authority to bring the entire country together.
  The leading Republican candidate, when you look at the average of national polls right now, is Donald Trump. When you look at him, do you see someone with the moral authority to unite the country?
  HUCKABEE: You know, of the few questions I've got, the last one I need is to give him some more time. I love Donald Trump. He is a good man. I'm wearing a Trump tie tonight. Get over that one, OK?
  (APPLAUSE)
  (CROSSTALK)
  (UNKNOWN): Is it made in Mexico?
  HUCKABEE: I don't know.
  (UNKNOWN): Where's it made? Is it made in China?
  (UNKNOWN): Is it made in China or Mexico?
  HUCKABEE: I have no idea.
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: Such a nasty -- such a nasty question, but thank you, Governor.
  HUCKABEE: You're welcome.
  (LAUGHTER)
  Let me tell you, Donald Trump would be a president every day of the week and twice on Sunday, rather than Hillary. I've spent a lifetime in politics fighting the Clinton machine.
  (APPLAUSE)
  You want to talk about what we're going to be up against next year? I'm the only guy on this stage -- you know, everybody has an ''only guy'' -- ''I'm the only guy this; I'm the only guy that.'' Well, let me tell you one thing that I am the only guy: The only guy that has consistently fought the Clinton machine every election I was ever in over the past 26 years. And not only did I fight them, but I beat them.
  Somebody says ''I'm a fighter.'' Well, I want to know, did you win? Well, I did. And not only did I fight them and win, I lived to tell about it and I'm standing on this stage tonight as evidence of that. And I think that ought to be worth something.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  CHRISTIE: John, I'll tell you something. You want to talk about moral authority. Let's talk about something that happened this week in the news. You know, the FBI director, the president's appointed FBI director has said this week that because of a lack of support from politicians like the president of the United States, that police officers are afraid to get out of their cars; that they're afraid to enforce the law. And he says, the president's appointee, that crime is going up because of this.
  And when the president of the United States gets out to speak about it, does he support police officers? Does he stand up for law enforcement? No, he doesn't. I'll tell you this, the number one job of the president of the United States is to protect the safety and security of the American people. This president has failed, and when I'm in the Oval Office, police officers will know that they will have the support of the president of the Untied States. That's real moral authority that we need in the Oval Office.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  Don't forget my colleague, Sharon Epperson.
  EPPERSON: Thank you, John.
  Mrs. Fiorina, you were the CEO of a large corporation that offers a 401(k) to its employees. But more than half of American have no access to an employer sponsored retirement plan.
  That includes the workers at small businesses, and the growing ranks of Uber drivers and other part-timers in the freelance economy.
  Should the Federal Government play a larger role in helping to set up retirement plans for these workers?
  FIORINA: No, the Federal Government should not play a larger role.
  Look, every time the Federal Government gets engaged in something it gets worse. And then the Government steps in to try and solve the problem and we get a little further down to that progressive vision that Hillary Clinton is talking about.
  Companies should, if they want to attract the best workers, provide a good set of benefits. But honestly, if you're a small business owner today you are being crushed. We have 400,000 small businesses forming every year in this country. How great is that? They are employing themselves, they are potentially employing others.
  The bad news is, we have 470,000 going out of business every year. And why? They cite Obamacare.
  They are refusing to...
  EPPERSON: So you wouldn't agree -- you wouldn't agree with a start for 401(k) for businesses or anything like that?
  FIORINA: I think it's a wonderful that that businesses start a 401(k). The point I'm making is this, the Federal Government should not be in a lot of things.
  There is no Constitutional role for the Federal Government in setting up -- retirement plans. There is no Constitutional role for the Federal Government to be setting minimum wages...
  EPPERSON: Thank you very much.
  FIORINA: ... The more the Government gets engaged in the economy, the slower the economy becomes. The more the Government gets engaged in the economy, it is demonstrably true...
  EPPERSON: Thank you, the rules say one minute.
  FIORINA: ... The more the big, the powerful, the wealthy and the well-connected are advantaged.
  EPPERSON: Thank you, Ms. Fiorina. We appreciate it. Thank you, thank you.
  I want to turn my attention now, to you now, Governor Kasich.
  Most people can't get a college degree without going into debt. Over 40 million Americans have student loans and many of them cannot pay them back.
  This country has over $100 billion in student loan defaults. That's billion with a b.
  What will you do to make sure that students, their families, taxpayers, won't feel the economic impact of this burden for generations?
  Well, first of all, in Ohio we're changing the whole system. Universities will not get paid one dime unless the student graduates or -- graduates or completes a course.
  Secondly, you can be in high school and complete almost an entire first year before you go to college and get credit to do that. And, of course, in addition to that, we are working now to go after the cost drivers in our universities. And let me give you an example. Universities today have so many non-academic assets. At Ohio State they sold the parking garage and the parking lot, and they got $500 million because they shouldn't be in the parking lot business. They shouldn't be in the ding business, they shouldn't be in the dorm business.
  And, of course, we need to take advantage of on-line education to reduce these costs and begin to dis-intermediate the cost of four years.
  Now, for those who that have these big high costs, I think we can seriously look at an idea of where you can do public service. I mean legitimate, public service and begin to pay off some of that debt through the public service that you do. And in the meantime, it may inspire us to care more about our country, more about ourselves.
  This is a big moral issue in America. Living a life bigger than yourself, and being a center of healing and justice. And people can learn it through public service.
  EPPERSON: Thank you, thank you.
  BUSH: We don't need the federal government to be involved in this at all.
  QUICK: Higher education is the example...
  BUSH: We don't need the Federal Government to be involved in this, because when they do we create a $1.2 trillion debt.
  In Florida, we have the lowest in-state tuition of any state, because there's accountability, just as John said. Let the states do this. You'll create a much better graduation rate at a lower cost, and you won't in debt the next generation with recourse debt on their backs.
  It's always a solution of the left to create more Government from the Federal Government. It is broke, it is not working.
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: Governor Bush, daily fantasy sports has become a phenomenon in this country, will award billions of dollars in prize money this year. But to play you have to assess your odds, put money at risk, wait for an outcome that's out of your control. Isn't that the definition of gambling, and should the Federal Government treat it as such?
  BUSH: Well, first of all, I'm 7 and 0 in my fantasy league.
  QUINTANILLA: I had a feeling you were going to brag about that.
  BUSH: Gronkowski is still going strong. I have Ryan Tannehill, Marco, as my quarterback, he was 18 for 19 last week. So I'm doing great. But we're not gambling.
  And I think this has become something that needs to be looked at in terms of regulation. Effectively it is day trading without any regulation at all. And when you have insider information, which apparently has been the case, where people use that information and use big data to try to take advantage of it, there has to be some regulation.
  If they can't regulate themselves, then the NFL needs to look at just, you know, moving away from them a little bit. And there should be some regulation. I have no clue whether the federal government is the proper place, my instinct is to say, hell no, just about everything about the federal government.
  (CROSSTALK)
  CHRISTIE: Carl, are we really talking about getting government involved in fantasy football?
  (LAUGHTER)
  We have -- wait a second, we have $19 trillion in debt. We have people out of work. We have ISIS and al Qaeda attacking us. And we're talking about fantasy football? Can we stop?
  (APPLAUSE)
  CHRISTIE: How about this? How about we get the government to do what they're supposed to be doing, secure our borders, protect our people, and support American values and American families. Enough on fantasy football. Let people play, who cares?
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUICK: I want to go back, if I can, to the issue of...
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUICK: I want to go back, if I may, to the... HARWOOD: Governor Christie, you've said something that many in your party do not believe, which is that climate change is undeniable, that human activity contributes to it, and you said, quote: ''The question is, what do we do to deal with it?''.
  So what do we do?
  CHRISTIE: Well, first off, what we don't do is do what Hillary Clinton and John Kerry and Barack Obama want us to do, which is their solution for everything, put more taxes on it, give more money to Washington, D.C., and then they will fix it.
  Well, there is no evidence that they can fix anything in Washington, D.C.
  HARWOOD: What should we do?
  CHRISTIE: What we should do is to be investing in all types of energy, John, all types of energy. I've laid out...
  HARWOOD: You mean government?
  CHRISTIE: No, John. John, do you want me to answer or do you want to answer?
  (LAUGHTER)
  How are we going to do this?
  (APPLAUSE)
  Because, I've got to tell you the truth, even in New Jersey what you're doing is called rude. So...
  (LAUGHTER)
  We've laid out a national energy plan that says that we should invest in all types of energy. I will tell you, you could win a bet at a bar tonight, since we're talking about fantasy football, if you ask who the top three states in America are that produce solar energy: California and Arizona are easy, but number three is New Jersey.
  Why? Because we work with the private sector to make solar energy affordable and available to businesses and individuals in our state.
  We need to make sure that we do everything across all kinds of energy: natural gas, oil, absolutely. But also where it's affordable, solar, wind in Iowa has become very affordable and it makes sense.
  That is the way we deal with global warming, climate change, or any of those problems, not through government intervention, not through government taxes, and for God's sake, don't send Washington another dime until they stop wasting the money they're already sending there.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  (APPLAUSE)
  HARWOOD: Becky.
  QUICK: Senator Paul, among the leading conservative opponents to the creation of Medicare back in the 1960s was Ronald Reagan. He warned that it would lead to socialism. Considering the mounting cost of Medicare, was he right to oppose it?
  PAUL: The question always is, what works better, the private marketplace or government? And what distributes goods better? It always seems to be the private marketplace does a better job.
  Is there an area for a safety net? Can you have Medicare or Social Security? Yes. But you ought to acknowledge the government doesn't do a very good job at it.
  The main problem with Medicare right now is that the average person pays in taxes over their whole lifetime about $100,000. But the average person takes out about $350,000. We have this enormous mismatch because we have smaller and smaller families.
  When people ask me, whose fault is it? Whose fault is it that Medicare is broken, out of money, that Social Security is broken, out of money? And I say, look, it's not Republicans' fault, it's not Democrats' fault, it's your grandparents' fault for having too many damn kids.
  (LAUGHTER)
  After the war we had all of these kids, Baby Boomers. Now we're having smaller families. We used to have 16 workers for one retiree, now you have three workers for one retiree.
  It's not working. I have a bill to fix Medicare. I've a bill to fix Social Security. For both of them you have to gradually raise the age. If you're not willing to do that, nobody wants to do it, but if you're not willing to gradually raise the age, you're not serious about fixing either one of them.
  QUICK: Senator, thank you.
  UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Becky, may I...
  QUINTANILLA: This is the-- well, we're going to take a break. We want to save time for closing statements after the break.
  So this is the Republican presidential debate in Boulder, and we'll be right back.
  (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  (APPLAUSE)
  QUICK: Welcome back to Boulder, Colorado and the Republican presidential debate right here on CNBC.
  Governor Huckabee, you wanted to respond to the points that Senator Rand Paul was just making when it comes to Social Security. Your time, sir.
  HUCKABEE: Well, and specifically to Medicare, Becky, because 85 percent of the cost of Medicare is chronic disease. The fact is if we don't address what's costing so much, we can't throw enough money at this. And it's why I've continued to focus on the fact that we need to declare war on the four big cost drivers because 80 percent of all medical costs in this country are chronic disease. We don't have a health care crisis in America, we have a health crisis.
  And until we deal with the health of Americans and do what we did with polio -- when I was a little kid, we eradicated it. You know how much money we spent on polio last year in America? We didn't spend any. We've saved billions of dollars.
  You want to fix Medicare? Focus on the diseases that are costing us the trillions of dollars. Alzheimers, diabetes, heart disease and cancer. Eradicate those and you fix Medicare and you've fixed America, its economy and you've made people's lives a heck of a lot better.
  BUSH: Becky --
  QUICK: Thank you, Governor.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BUSH: -- the governor's absolutely right. But we also need to reform Medicare and Social Security. We can't just allow it to continue on its current path the way that Hillary Clinton wants to do because there'll be major reductions in benefits in the next decade if we do nothing.
  I have a concrete plan to do just that, which allows people to keep HSAs to encourage savings, it allows for people that are retiring with Social Security to be able to get a minimum of 125 percent of the poverty level so that there is a baseline that in this generous country of ours no one goes below.
  HARWOOD: Governor Bush, Mr. Trump says that he is capable of growing the economy so much that Social Security and Medicare don't have to be touched. Do you want to explain how that is going to happen, Mr. Trump?
  TRUMP: Yes, it's very simple. We're going to make a really dynamic economy from what we have right now, which is not at all dynamic. We're going to bring jobs back from Japan, we're going to bring jobs back from China, we're going to bring, frankly, jobs back from Mexico where, as you probably saw, Nabisco is leaving Chicago with one of their biggest plants, and they're moving it to Mexico.
  We're going to bring jobs and manufacturing back. We're going to cut costs. We're going to save Social Security, and we're going to save Medicare.
  (UNKNOWN): Governor, you just heard him.
  BUSH: You have to reform Social Security, and the simple way to do it is to make sure that the wealthiest don't receive the same benefits as people that are lower-income.
  And make sure you enhance savings in the private market. The idea of 401(k)s. I have a small business that I set up. It took -- it took an arm and a leg to be able to set up a 401(k). Because of all the federal mandates and federal laws, it was too expensive.
  We need to incent private savings and make sure that Social Security is protected for those that have it.
  KASICH: John.
  BUSH: But the idea that you can't -- that you're just gonna grow your way out of this -- I have a plan to grow the economy at 4 percent, but you're gonna have to make adjustments for both Medicare and Social Security.
  (UNKNOWN): Governor Kasich, do you want 30 seconds?
  KASICH: I wanna tell you, in my state, we took Medicaid, the hardest program to control, and we took it from a 10 percent growth rate to 2.5 percent without taking one person off the rolls or cutting one single benefit.
  And so much of what we did -- to force competition, to use technology, to stand down the special interest groups -- can you imagine taking Medicaid from 10 to 2.5 percent?
  We can take many of those same procedures, we can apply it to Medicare. We can make a stronger program. But I agree with Jeb, you can't just do this by growing the economy. You can't grow your way out of demographics.
  But we can give people better health care. And finally, on health care, why don't we start treating -- keep giving...
  QUICK: Governor.
  KASICH: ...incentives for people to keep people healthy, rather than giving the incentives to treat them when they're sick?
  QUICK: Governor, thank you.
  Senator Paul, let's go back to you. Do these solutions sound like they work?
  PAUL: Say again?
  QUICK: Do these solutions sound like they would work?
  PAUL: You can't do nothing. And that's what I hear from some people, ''we'll do nothing and it will just be fixed.'' That's absurd, and I think people who don't want to fix it, really, or unwilling to take the chance to say, ''something has to change,'' are missing the boat here.
  The age will have to gradually rise, there is no question. It's the only way you fix Medicare, the only way you fix Social Security. You will also have to means-test the benefits and declare there's not enough money.
  It isn't ''I put money in, I'm getting it back.'' There is no money, it's a stack of paper. There is no money in the Social Security account. There is no money in the Medicare account. There's only a promise to pay by the next generation, and the next generation's not big enough to pay it.
  (CROSSTALK)
  (UNKNOWN): ...to deal with this. We did it 200 days ago.
  HARWOOD: Hold on, Governor. I've got a question for -- for Dr. Carson.
  CARSON: About Medicare?
  HARWOOD: Yes. You've said that you would like to replace Medicare with a system of individual family savings accounts, so that families could cover their own expenses.
  Obviously, that would be a very controversial idea. Explain how that would work, exactly.
  CARSON: Well, first of all the -- the plan gives people the option of -- of opting out. But I think they will see a very good option here. You know, the annual Medicare budget is over $600 billion. And there are 48 million people involved -- 40 million, 65 and over, and 8 million other.
  Divide that out. That comes out to $12,500 for each one. Now, I can tell you there are a lot of private-sector things that you could do with $12,500, which will get you a lot more than you get from this government program.
  And that's really a theme of a lot of the things that I'm talking about. How do we utilize our intellect rather than allowing the government to use its, quote, ''intellect,'' in order to help us to be able to live healthier and better lives?
  It was never intended that the government should be in every aspect of our lives. This is a country that is of, for and by the people.
  QUICK: Thank you, Dr. Carson.
  Governor?
  CHRISTIE: And -- and -- and I -- you know, Ben is absolutely right in saying that what we don't need to do is to send more money to Washington, D.C. to fix this problem.
  And that's what you'll hear from Hillary Clinton -- and I've already heard from her -- is that, send more money in Social Security, send more money in Medicare taxes, send more money for Medicaid, and that's gonna solve the problem.
  What we know is we're living longer. That's a blessing. It's a blessing that we're living longer, so we have to increase the retirement age to reflect that blessing.
  We need to make sure that people understand, as Jeb said before, that if you've done extraordinarily well in this country, do you want them to take more out of your taxes now and think they're gonna give it back to you later? Or would you rather take less later on?
  QUINTANILLA: Senator Rubio...
  HARWOOD: Governor, do you also think that...
  QUINTANILLA: ...yeah, I just wanted (inaudible).
  HARWOOD: ...that Dr. Carson's right, that we can replace Medicare with individual savings accounts?
  RUBIO: No. No. What I said was that I think that Dr. Carson's ideas are good ideas. They're not my ideas, and I don't necessarily agree with all of them.
  But this is what you're seeing in the Republican debate that you didn't see in that Democrat debate.
  You didn't see it for a minute. You didn't see these kind of ideas being batted around, and being batted around in a way that's civil and smart and that's trying to help to inform the voter out there.
  What you saw was a parade of, ''I'll give you this for free; I'll give you that for free.''
  Let me tell you, everybody, when they say they want to give it to you for free, keep your hands on your wallets because they're coming to you to pay for it. And that's why I think these ideas up here are great, and that's what we should have is have more discussions like this and less gotcha.
  (CROSSTALK)
  QUINTANILLA: I want to give you 30 seconds here.
  RUBIO: I want to take off from that point and argue the same thing. And that is that one of the things you're watching tonight are 11 quality candidates debating an important issue. The Republican Party is blessed to have 11 good candidates, (inaudible) 10 good candidates. The Democrats can't even come up with one.
  And on this issue of the Medicare in particular, it's important because they're going to demagogue what we're saying here tonight. Everyone up here tonight that's talking about reforms, I think and I know for myself I speak to this, we're all talking about reforms for future generations. Nothing has to change for current beneficiaries. My mother is on Medicare and Social Security. I'm against anything that's bad for my mother.
  (LAUGHTER)
  So, we're talking about -- we're talking about reform for people like me and people like Senator Cruz, as he talked about earlier, who are years away from retirement that have a way to plan for these changes, and way that's very reasonable. And it's not too much to ask of our generation after everything our parents and our grandparents did for us.
  FIORINA: John, I -- if I -- a lot of people have jumped in here. I'd like to jump in. A lot of people have jumped in here.
  HARWOOD: Mrs. Fiorina, we're right at the end of our time.
  FIORINA: I understand.
  HARWOOD: You all wanted us to limit (inaudible).
  All right. Go ahead.
  FIORINA: I would just say that...
  (LAUGHTER)
  ... I would just say this, we've heard a lot of great ideas up here, and I agree with what Senator Rubio said. Every election we talk about this. Every election we talk about Medicare and Social Security reform. It never happens.
  I would like to start with a basic. Let us actually go to zero- based budgeting so we know where the money is being spent. It's kind of basic. There is a bill sitting in the House that would actually pass and have us go to zero-based budgeting so we know where every dime of your money is being spent instead of only talking about how much more we're going to spend year after year after year.
  My point is this. While there are lots of good ideas for reform, we have never tackled the basics. And we finally need to tackle the basics to cut this government down to size and hold it accountable. So let's start by knowing where your money is being spent by the federal government.
  HARWOOD: We have now reached the point in the program where candidates are going to give their closing statements, 30 seconds apiece. We're going to go right to left and start with you, Senator Paul.
  PAUL: Liberty thrives when government is small. I want a government so small I can barely see it. I want a government so small that the individual has a chance to thrive and prosper. I think, though, government is too big now. And what you're going to see in Washington this week is establishment Republicans have made an agreement with the president to raise the debt ceiling in an unlimited fashion; no limit to the debt ceiling raise.
  This is extraordinary. It's extraordinarily wrong. You'll see me on the floor of the Senate tomorrow filibustering this and saying enough is enough, no more debt.
  HARWOOD: Governor Christie?
  CHRISTIE: I want to talk to the folks at home. I want to ask you: Are you fed up with how Washington taxes you? Are you fed up with how Washington wastes your money? Are you concerned like I am that the debt and deficits of Washington, D.C. are endangering America's future?
  I've got one more question for you then. Are you serious about this election? Because if you are, you need to elect someone who's deadly serious about changing this culture. I am deadly serious about changing this culture. I changed it in New Jersey. I'm deadly serious about doing this job the right way.
  I'm prepared. I'm tested. I'm ready. And I want to make this our government. For the people who say we can't do it, I say hell no, we can do it together.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: You know, everyone here talks about the need to take on Washington. The natural next question is who actually has done so. Who actually has stood up not just to Democrats, but to leaders in our own party? When millions of Americans rose up against Obamacare, I was proud to lead that fight. When millions of Americans rose up against amnesty, I was proud to lead that fight. When millions of Americans rose up against Planned Parenthood, I was proud to lead that fight.
  If people are promising they're going to take on Washington and cronyism, you need to look to who has been doing it. In my family, my dad fled oppression in Cuba to come to America. Freedom is personal for me, and I will always keep my word and fight for freedom.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator.
  Mrs. Fiorina?
  FIORINA: You know, every election we hear a lot of talk. We hear a lot of good plans. We hear actually a lot of good intentions. But somehow for decades, nothing really has changed. What we need now is a proven leader who has produced results. That's how you go from secretary to CEO. You lead and you produce results. I will cut this government down to size and hold it accountable, simplify the tax code, roll back the regulations that have been spewing out of Washington, D.C. for 50 years.
  I may not be your dream candidate just yet, but I can assure you I am Hillary Clinton's worst nightmare. And in your heart of hearts, you cannot wait to see a debate between Hillary Clinton and Carly Fiorina. I will tell you this, I will beat Hillary Clinton. And with your vote and your support and your prayers, I will lead with the citizens of this great nation the resurgence of this great nation.
  HARMAN: Thank you, Mrs. Fiorina.
  Dr. Carson?
  CARSON: I just want to thank all my colleagues here for being civil, and not falling for the traps. And, I also just want to thank the audience for being attentive, and noticing the questions, and the noticing the answers. And, this is what I am finding throughout America.
  People are waking up because it is going to be us who will determine the direction of our country. And, it was made for we the people, we are the ones who decide who we are, and we should never give away the values and principles that made America into a great nation for the sake of political correctness.
  (APPLAUSE)
  HARWOOD: Mr. Trump?
  TRUMP: Our country doesn't win anymore. We used to win, we don't win anymore. We lose on trade. We lose with ISIS. We lose with one of the worst deals I've ever seen negotiated of any kind, that's our recent catastrophe with Iran. We don't win.
  Let me give you one quick example. These folks, CNBC, they had it down at three, three and a half hours. I just read today in the New York Times, $250,000 for a 30 second ad. I went out and said, it's ridiculous. Nobody -- I could stand up here all night. Nobody wants to watch three and a half, or three hours. It was a back sacrifice, and I have to hand it to Ben.
  We called Ben, he was with me 100%. We called in, we said, that's it. We're not doing it. They lost a lot of money, everybody said it couldn't be done. Everybody said it was going to be three hours, three and a half, including them, and in about two minutes I renegotiated it so we can get the hell out of here. Not bad.
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: And, I'll do that with the country. We will make America great again. And, thank you everybody. Just for the record.
  HARWOOD: Just for the record, the debate was always going to be two hours. Senator Rubio?
  TRUMP: That's not right. That is absolutely not right. You know that. That is not right.
  MALE: Thank you.
  HARWOOD: Senator Rubio.
  RUBIO: You know, America doesn't owe me anything. I have a debt to America I'll never repay. This isn't just the country I was born in, this is the nation that literally changed the history of my family. My parents in this country were able to give me the chance to do all the things they never did. We call that the American Dream, although, it's built on the universal dream of a better life.
  The fact that it's happened for so many people here throughout our history, that's what makes us special. But, now for millions of Americans, it's slipping away. And, we have a government and leaders in government that are completely out of touch, and that's why I'm running for president. Because we can't just save the American Dream, we can expand it to reach more people, and change more lives than ever before.
  And, that's why tonight I'm asking you for your vote.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Senator. Governor Bush?
  BUSH: America's at a crossroads. The D.C. politicians continue to make things worse. I have a proven record of success, 32 years in business, and 8 years as Governor of the state of Florida.
  I will change the culture in Washington, just as I changed the culture in Tallahassee. I will do so in a way that will bring people together. We need a unifier, not a cynical divider in chief, and that's exactly what I will do.
  Imagine a country where people are lifted out of poverty again. Imagine a country where the middle class can get rising income again. I know we can do this because we're still the most extraordinary country on the face of the Earth.
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor. Governor Huckabee.
  HUCKABEE: You know, I know to a lot of people in the media, this is just a great big game, and we're the players. And, we come out here, and we do our thing. And, sometimes we're held up in contempt by people who write columns, but, I guarantee you to every person on this stage there's something deep inside of us that would cause us to give up our livelihoods and step out on this stage and fight for the people of America.
  I've got five grandkids. I do not want to walk my five grandkids through the charred remains of a once great country called America, and say, ''Here you go, $20 trillion dollars of debt. Good luck making something out of this mess.''
  And, for those of us who are serious enough to run for president, think long and hard why we're here, and hopefully you'll know we're not here for ourselves. We honest to god are here to get this country back on track. I know this, I certainly am.
  HARWOOD: Thank you...
  HUCKABEE: ...Thank you.
  HARWOOD: Governor Kasich?
  KASICH: I was on morning Joe at a town hall and a young student stood up and said, ''Can I still be idealistic?''
  I said, absolutely, you can still change the world. And, you know the old inscription, if you save one life, you've changed the world. Folks, we have a problem here with the leadership in Washington, but I'll tell you another problem. We need to rebuild our families. We need to have stronger families. We need to know who our neighbors are. We need to come together as a country because we have to realize that America is great, not from the top-down. Oh yeah, we want to elect a good president, but America is great from the bottom-up, and the bottom-up is us in our families, in our communities, in our neighborhoods. We will renew America if we work together, and I am totally confident that we will. And God bless America.
  (APPLAUSE)
  HARWOOD: Thank you, Governor.
  QUINTANILLA: That concludes tonight's debate. On behalf of my colleagues Becky Quick, John Harwood, Sharon Epperson, Rick Santelli and Jim Cramer, we'd like to our host, the University of Colorado at Boulder, the Republican National Committee, the candidates and, of course, tonight's audience.
  CNBC's Kelly Evans and Joe Kernan pick up our continuing coverage.
  END
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/29/us/politics/transcript-republican-presidential-debate.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Text

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: POLITICAL DEBATES (92%); TRANSCRIPTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); MEDICARE (89%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (89%); EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWS (69%); SENIOR CITIZENS (60%); TAX LAW (60%)

Industry: MEDICARE (89%); BUDGETS (77%); PERSONAL FINANCE (72%); BUDGET CUTS (50%)

Person: JOHN KASICH (89%); CARLY FIORINA (79%); CHRIS CHRISTIE (79%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JEB BUSH (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); MICHAEL HUCKABEE (78%); BEN CARSON (58%); MARCO RUBIO (58%); RAND PAUL (58%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2015


End of Document
L.I. @ WORK; 
Skilled Foreign Workers: More to Come
The New York Times
November 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Long Island Weekly Desk
Section: Section 14LI;; Section 14LI; Page 6; Column 2; Long Island Weekly Desk; Column 2;
Length: 1125 words
Byline: By WARREN STRUGATCH

By WARREN STRUGATCH
Body


ROBERT THOMPSON wasn't "Bob" until he came to Long Island. When he lived and worked in Europe, and before that in Canada, he was called Mr. Thompson.
"I walked into an office not long after I got here, and the receptionist asked me my name," he said. "I blurted out, 'Mr. Thompson.' The receptionist just looked at me in wonder for a moment and said, 'But what do I call you?' "
An Ottawa native, Mr. Thompson, 52, realized he had committed a cultural blunder. "Down here," he said, referring to the United States, "people automatically call one another by first names. It takes a bit getting used to for those of us who come here from other cultures."
Mr. Thompson is the chairman and chief executive of the QueryObject Systems Corporation, a publicly traded software company in Roslyn Heights. About a third of its 60 employees are foreign-born.
As the Long Island economy becomes more and more high-tech, foreign-born professionals and managers like Mr. Thompson -- Bob, if you will -- are taking their places in a culture that is often strikingly different from the ones left behind in like Russia, Poland and India, even Canada. But many high-tech executives on the Island believe that recruiting well-educated foreigners is a key to keeping the economy humming.
Their numbers will likely be increasing.  Last month, President Clinton signed the American Competitiveness in the 21st Century Act. Beginning in January, it will increase the number of H-1B visas issued annually, from 115,000 to 195,000 through 2003. Individuals eligible for this visa are in "specialty occupations," including scientists, researchers, high-tech professionals, health-care workers and, inexplicably, high-fashion models. The visas last six years.
There are about 3,000 foreign workers on Long Island holding this visa, said John Bolton, an associate at Nixon Peabody, a Garden City law firm, who specializes in immigration issues. "Many of these visitors do ultimately apply for permanent residence," he said.
The competitiveness act was passed with much support nationally from the software industry, but on Long Island, support has been tepid, at least publicly. The Long Island Association, the regional Chamber of Commerce affiliate that includes significant representation from organized labor, did not support the legislation. But "the buzz among our members was that, definitely, we need to bring in more foreign workers in order to fill jobs," said Mitchell Pally, the vice president for legislative affairs.
On Long Island, the complaint is often heard that there are not enough qualified workers, although rarely is that complaint hitched to hiring foreign workers as a solution. Earlier this month, Tomo Razmilovic, the president of Symbol Technologies in Holtsville, departed from his prepared speech to an association of business executives to call attention to the shortage of skilled labor, which he identified as the single biggest challenge facing Symbol. Mr. Razmilovic, a Croatian-born Swedish citizen, did not mention the competitiveness act in his comments about the labor shortage. Indeed, few Long Island business leaders have commented on the issue.
Peter Goldsmith, the president of the Long Island Software & Technology Network, called the legislation a Band-Aid solution. "Our companies need the help now," he said. "But procedures need to be put in place to train our own people here."
Privately, many companies like Query Object have addressed the labor shortage by recruiting professionals overseas, helping them to get visas but also to deal with the mundane issues of resettlement: housing, furniture and at least minimal acculturation. Many of them first worked for QueryObject in an earlier global network of software programmers in cities like Moscow and Warsaw but also in smaller cities in China, India and Pakistan. The network was set up by a previous management team; about two years ago, new investors decided to concentrate operations on Long Island and began recruiting workers from the far-flung network to resettle on Long Island.
"The company has been very good to us," said 36-year-old Piotr Parlewicz (pronounced PEE-oat PARL-ah-veech), an information architect from Poland. "It took about four months for them to get me and my wife a visa. They rented us a house in North Bellmore. We told them we needed a bigger house, and they found us one in Hicksville. Now we are looking to buy a house. But will the government let us stay here? Who knows? We are in a suspended state."
A colleague, Grzegorz Nowakowski (pronounced GREG-orz no-vah-KOF-ski), is even more unsettled. Unlike Mr. Parlewicz, his countryman, he is not certain whether he will return to Poland or remain in the United States. "My soul is Polish, my heart is Polish," said Mr. Nowakowski with some emotion. "My friends are all in Poland. When I return there for a visit, coming back here is very difficult for me."
One thing he misses is the cosmopolitan life he knew in Warsaw. "New York City is the capital of the world, but Long Island is a place to come home after work, to sleep," said Mr. Nowakowski, 34, who is single and lives in Levittown. After work, he said, groups of co-workers sometimes go out together to movies or bookstores with cafes. "Sometimes, after work, we just play on the computers," he said with some resignation.
Another colleague, Humera Qazi (pronounced who-MARE--ah QUAH-zee), depicts herself as happily adjusted to American life. A native of Kashmir, the strife-torn border state between India and Pakistan, she was raised mainly in London. "I feel comfortable both in the West and the East," she said.
After coming to the United States on a student visa about 11 years ago, Ms. Qazi, now 28, was hired by a Long Island software company that agreed to sponsor her for a green card. When the company refused to pay for her master's degree in business, which she completed two years ago at Hofstra University, she decided it was time to change jobs. She liked the more generous tuition reimbursement policies at QueryObject and was hired there.
"I think you will find that the foreigners who come to the U.S. to work are in general very big on education," she said. "However, it is such a different system than what most of us are used to. I never got used to calling my professors by their first names, and certainly not putting my feet up on the desk."
If some of her colleagues are pining for the familiarity of home as the holiday season rolls around, Ms. Qazi is not among them. "My husband is here; I have many friends here," she said brightly. "You'd be surprised how many Kashmiri there are on Long Island. We run into each other all the time at birthdays, social events, private parties. Every day my circle seems to get bigger."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: At QueryObject, which is based in Roslyn Heights, about a third of the company's 60 employees come from foreign countries. Standing, from left: Piotr Parlewicz (from Poland), Grzegorz Nowakowski (Poland), Amjad Khan (Kashmir), Wei Chen (China) and Alex Genkin (Russia). Seated, from left: Bing He (China), Suba Rajesh (India) and Larisa Berenshteyn (Ukraine). (Richard Lee for The New York Times)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ADMINISTRATIVE & CLERICAL WORKERS (78%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); ISLANDS & REEFS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); PUBLIC COMPANIES (73%); LEGISLATION (69%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (67%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (66%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (60%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (60%)

Company: QUERYOBJECT SYSTEMS CORP  (83%);  NIXON PEABODY LLP  (81%); QUERYOBJECT SYSTEMS CORP  (83%);  NIXON PEABODY LLP  (81%);    LONG ISLAND ASSOCIATION  (65%)

Organization: LONG ISLAND ASSOCIATION  (65%); LONG ISLAND ASSOCIATION  (65%)

Ticker: OBJ (AMEX)  (69%)

Industry: NAICS334614 SOFTWARE & OTHER PRERECORDED COMPACT DISC, TAPE & RECORD REPRODUCING  (83%);  SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE  (83%);  NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS  (81%);  SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES  (81%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (74%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (68%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (68%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (67%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (66%)

Person: BILL CLINTON (54%)

Geographic: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (79%); CANADA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: November 26, 2000


End of Document
For Lack of a Visa...
The New York Times
November 1, 2015 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ED; Column 0; Education Life Supplement; Pg. 18
Length: 912 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Liz Robbins is a Metro reporter for The Times covering immigration.
Body


Decades ago there was a hit song in India, ''Chitthi Aayi Hai,'' a tear-jerking anthem about mothers mourning the loss of sons who went to school abroad and never came back.
The tune has changed. ''It used to be by default students from India and China, in particular, bought one-way tickets over here,'' said Vivek Wadhwa, who has written extensively on international tech talent. ''Now it's a two-way street. They work for a few years and go home.'' 
  Mr. Wadhwa, a fellow at the Rock Center for Corporate Governance at Stanford, suggests a reason: After earning their graduate degrees in the United States, potential entrepreneurs and programmers are unable to get work visas.
  According to a Brookings Institution analysis, in 2010 only 30 percent of foreign graduates of U.S. universities received an H-1B visa, awarded to temporary workers in specialty occupations. And though 64 percent of all international students in science, technology, engineering and math, or STEM, come from India and China, they are still subject to the 7 percent cap per country that immigration law places on green cards. The wait is so long for permanent residency, many simply leave.
  In what they believe will stimulate innovation and the economy, tech companies, lawmakers and universities have been urging the administration to make it easier for international students to stay in the United States. Thus, the fate of foreign graduates has become yet another spark in the contentious debate over immigration reform, prompting a variation on a familiar question: Do foreign graduates get jobs at the expense of American workers?
  That is what a technology workers union out of Washington State argued when it sued the Department of Homeland Security last year over an extension to its Optional Practical Training program. OPT allows international students to work for one year in the United States; in 2008, in response to the recession, the department had granted STEM graduates an additional 17 months. But the Federal District Court hearing the suit has ruled that the department had erred by skipping the formal approval process and has until February to present its plan for public review, and then offer a revised rule. Meanwhile, the union, the Washington Alliance of Technology Workers, has filed an appeal challenging the legality of the department even making such a policy.
  The OPT extension, opponents argue, represents an end-around to the H-1B visa program that makes it easier for companies to hire low-cost foreign labor and for some unaccredited institutions to bring in students for short-term work instead of education. ''I would hope that D.H.S. would say this is a really bad idea and we should phase this out,'' said John Miano, the lawyer representing the union. ''When people are on student visas serving as guest workers, how absurd is that? They are supposed to be students.''
  Ostensibly, an OPT extension improves the long odds of being selected in the H-1B lottery, one of the paths to permanent residency. ''A longer OPT might mean they get two bites of that apple,'' said Ben A. Rissing, a professor at Cornell's School of Industrial and Labor Relations. But chances are still slim. Congress caps H-1B visas yearly at 65,000, with another 20,000 slots for graduates with advanced degrees. Consider the crush every April: Last spring, there were 233,000 petitions for H-1B visas within the first five days of their being offered.
  Amid pleas from Microsoft and other tech companies, two bills were introduced in Congress this year that would eliminate caps on employment-based visas and ease residency restrictions for those with graduate degrees -- the ''green cards for grads'' solution. Both bills are stalled in committees.
  In a letter supporting the Senate bill, 14 associations representing thousands of higher education institutions described an urgent need: ''According to projections, the United States will face a shortfall of more than 200,000 advanced-degree STEM workers by 2018,'' the associations wrote. ''In many STEM areas, foreign students are a majority of the Ph.D. graduates from U.S. universities.'' It went on to say that the ''immigration system forces many of them to leave, sacrificing the innovation and economic growth they would create here.''
  Or, as one prominent immigration lawyer, Stephen Yale-Loehr, put it: ''Imagine if the next Google or Facebook were to be developed in India or China. All those jobs that could have been in the United States instead are being developed overseas and competing against our best companies.''
  For labor proponents, that is far too simplistic. ''Basing immigration policy on something as unpredictable as entrepreneurship is one of the things that sounds good,'' Mr. Miano said, ''but it just doesn't make sense.''
  For graduates working under OPT, the uncertainty is frightening. ''You're gambling your whole career based on some lottery,'' said Venkatesh, 27, who did not want his last name published for fear of its affecting job prospects. Having graduated from New York University in 2014 with a master's in computer science, he now works as a programmer for a large financial institution.
  Venkatesh, who is from Hyderabad, India, says that 12 months is not enough time to pay back university loans or to gain sufficient work experience.
  ''I would probably prefer to find a way to do something better in India,'' he said, ''because you can't rely on a broken immigration system.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/education/edlife/should-foreign-graduates-get-a-visa-edge.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); STEM EDUCATION (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (88%); IMMIGRATION LAW (87%); CORPORATE GOVERNANCE (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); RECESSION (76%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (73%); LABOR UNIONS (72%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (71%); APPROVALS (71%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (68%); LAWYERS (67%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (66%); APPEALS (65%); SUITS & CLAIMS (64%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); NATIONAL SECURITY (50%)

Organization: BROOKINGS INSTITUTION (56%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); LAWYERS (67%)

Geographic: WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (93%); CHINA (92%)

Load-Date: November 1, 2015


End of Document
Papers, Please;
Europe's Love-Hate Affair With Foreigners
The New York Times
December 24, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Week in Review Desk
Section: Section 4;; Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; Column 1;
Length: 1783 words
Byline: By ROGER COHEN

By ROGER COHEN
Dateline: BERLIN
Body


SEVERAL European nation-states including Germany, Austria and Italy -- emerged about a century ago from the vast multinational, polyglot empires that dominated 19th-century Europe. Their roots are not deep, their reality one of mingled blood. Yet, as the advance of the European Union encroaches on national sovereignty and the wealth of Europe draws the world's dispossessed migrants, a nationalist reaction has set in, marked by jingoistic hymns to national cultures, anti-immigrant tirades and the scapegoating of foreigners for everything from rising crime to rotten schools. It is no longer Communism that haunts Europe: it is the outsider.
This appears perverse in that, by any estimate, the 15-nation European Union is the continent's most successful postwar project and, by most estimates, an aging Europe needs immigrants. The proportion of the elderly in the union, defined as people aged 65 and over, is expected to rise to 22.4 percent in 2025 from 15.4 percent today. With birth rates low, Europe's already strained state pension system faces collapse unless the working population that supports these people is expanded through immigration. One European Union working paper puts the number needed at 75 million immigrants by 2050.
So, for the first time in decades, Europe is debating whether to abandon an official policy of "zero immigration" (which has meant that increasing numbers of people resort to asylum-seeking or illegal entry) and shift to the selective encouragement of economic migration. "Europe must move to a proactive immigration policy," the European Commission said recently, but warned that this would require strong political leadership to combat "racism and xenophobia."
Such hostile sentiments are widespread. Say immigrant and the word "problem" -- not "potential" -- tends to flash into people's minds. Immigrants cost money as they benefit from generous welfare systems; they build mosques whose minarets are unwelcome beside church spires; they take but do not give. All these accusations are frequently made. But something deeper, it seems, is at work.
The European nation, often forged in repetitive bloodletting, was created against the outsider; it was not forged from the amalgam of diverse outsiders washing up on its shores as in North America. At some level, this history inhabits people's minds, marking one of the fundamental transatlantic cultural divides.
Why has the nation -- in many ways an artificial construct on Europe's mottled soil -- so completely obscured an older reality of mingling? Taher Ben Jelloun, a French author of Moroccan descent, sees one problem in the history of empire and the relationship of colonizer to colonized. "For the French, in North Africa the relationship was always one of domination and exploitation," he said, "and even decades later this troubled memory makes full acceptance of the North African difficult."
Similarly, Europe's long memory of repetitive war against Islam and the Ottoman Turks no doubt plays into wide prejudice against Muslims. Still, even bad imperial history provides the French and British with long experience of cohabitation with foreign cultures, whereas the Germans -- who lack this experience -- often seem less able to imagine an integrative model of society.
"Nationalism is ridiculous in an open world," said Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, a member of a high-level committee reviewing immigration in Germany. "But people still say to me: why don't we just chuck the foreigners out?"
Europe is at a crossroads where it is being asked to define its identity. Over the past year, it has had to confront a series of disasters -- 58 dead Chinese migrants in the back of truck in Dover, 59 immigrants lost in a dinghy off Italy, the corpses of more than 100 Moroccans washed up on the beaches of southern Spain -- that testify to its lure and the desperation of those trying to get in. But, at some fundamental level, the continent is uncertain that it wants, or can accommodate, these foreigners.
"It is very delicate to say that we need immigrants, because perhaps 60 percent of Germans still have a certain resistance to the idea," Otto Schily, Germany's Social Democratic interior minister, said in an interview. The nation was a unifying idea imposed on diffuse history, and the German imagination -- like that of many other European states -- still longs for homogeneity, whatever the abundant evidence to the contrary.
But these attitudes now pose an acute quandary. Europe is full of immigrants and needs more if it is not to become moribund. But governments are also aware of an uncomfortable truth: surrounded by countries like Turkey and Morocco, with high birth rates and huge youth populations, Europe is certain to face immigrant pressure over the coming years that may be uncontrollable. Mobility is greater than ever before; no wall divides the continent any longer. A salary of $100 a month south of the Mediterranean becomes $1,000 on a fruit or vegetable farm on the European side.
EUROPE will also be involved, at the other end of the economic scale, in the global quest for the best and the brightest -- whether Sri Lankan or Nigerian -- that characterizes an information economy. But the readiness to confront, let alone embrace, these realities appears limited. Indeed the politics of xenophobic innuendo are enjoying a revival.
Take Germany, where more than seven million foreigners live, or about 9 percent of the population. This has been the year of renascent German pride, or patriotism, or bigotry -- the distinction is not always clear. The opposition Christian Democrats, for example, speak of Leitkultur, or guiding culture -- a potpourri of Christian and Enlightenment values to which immigrants are being asked to conform. The message is clear enough: a complicit wink to that broad swath of Germans who do not like living with more than two million Islamic Turks, believe such "guest workers" should go home one day and still think the German Volk is defined by blood.
Similar trends are evident elsewhere. Silvio Berlusconi, the leader of Italy's center-right Forza Italia, said that illegal immigrants "all too often swell the ranks of organized crime." In Austria, Jorg Haider's governing Freedom Party has made made much of "Uberfremdung," literally "over-foreignerization," and Britain's conservative leader, William Hague, likes to assail the asylum-seekers living off the country's welfare.
Why this refocusing of fear? In part, center-right parties, facing a left that has occupied the economic center and with no cold war left to fight, have been casting around for a new agenda. They have found it in threatened national identity.
In part, European countries, including Italy and Spain and Greece, are struggling with the profound adjustment to their national psyches involved in viewing themselves as countries of immigration, as they have become, rather than emigration, as they always thought they were.
There are other factors. High birth rates in the developing world combined with the so-called Baby Bust in Europe have fed shadowy concerns about being overwhelmed by foreign hordes. Europeans fret that their generous welfare systems cannot support a tide of newcomers who, unlike those in the United States, qualify for a range of benefits as soon as they arrive. Free housing, free medicine and free education are norms.
"The social standard in major receiving countries is higher than in the United States, and a relatively much larger share of social welfare benefits are spent on immigrants," said Kay Hailbronner, an immigration expert. "This creates resentments."
Such comprehensive welfare lifts wage bills, so unemployment has remained high, even as the European economy has picked up over the past year. About 15 million people, or 9.2 percent of the population, remain out of work. In this context, the foreigner often appears as a threat. Contrast this with an America of full employment where employers clamor for more foreign-born workers. In addition, globalization and the very process of European integration built around the shared euro currency feed fears about loss of national identity.
The fears may prove costly. David Hale, the chief economist at Zurich Financial Services, argues that one reason the United States may continue to outperform Europe lies in "its demographic characteristics and high tolerance for immigration."
"During the next 10 years," he said, "the working age population of Japan will decline by 6 percent, in Europe it will stagnate at best, and in the United States it will expand by at least 10 percent." The potential result: a Europe short of labor and struggling to finance retirement payments.
But a European reaction may be at hand. Europeans often argue that their cohesive social model must be defended against the raw social fragmentation of American multiculturalism; they tend to insist that immigrants adapt to local culture rather than introduce new ones. But they are looking closely at one American idea. Several governments are coming around to the view that a model similar to the American H-1B visa -- allowing skilled foreign workers into the country -- needs to be adopted. In the United States, this program has been expanded to allow in 585,000 workers over the next three years. Germany has now offered 20,000 so-called green cards for qualified foreigners.
This would mark a shift, albeit small, toward controlled immigration and away from the policies that have made family reunion, asylum-seeking and illegality the only roads into Fortress Europe. But the deeper problem appears political and cultural. "Politicians have forced us into parallel societies by denying for so long that we existed and pretending for so long that we would go home," said Safet Cinar, who heads an association of the 130,000 Turks in Berlin.
THE problem of immigration in Europe has existed for a long time. Global culture, economics, demography and reactionary politics have now brought it to a head. The corpses on Europe's borders demonstrate its gravity. In his pioneering 19th-century book on nationalism, "What is a Nation?", Ernest Renan pointed out that the idea of the nation was based on shared habits and language but also on a shared ability to forget past hatreds.
Paraphrasing Renan, it may be asked, at the beginning of the 21st century, how a nascent United States of Europe hopes to further the peace and prosperity that the European Union has brought without overcoming the enduring prejudice that divides Christianity and Islam and without burying, once and for all, the ethnic bigotry that has little basis in a multinational history and has so repeatedly plunged the continent into war.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Seeking to curb illegal immigration, Belgian border guards inspect a car coming from Germany earlier this year. (Associated Press)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (89%); MULTILINGUALISM (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (77%); RACE & ETHNICITY (77%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (76%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (76%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (76%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (75%); ADULTS (73%); SENIOR CITIZENS (73%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (71%); COMMUNISM (70%); FINES & PENALTIES (68%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (68%); BIRTHS & BIRTH RATES (67%); RELIGIOUS FACILITIES (66%); RELIGION (61%); NEWS BRIEFS (58%); PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS (52%)

Company: EUROPEAN UNION   (91%);  EUROPEAN UNION  (91%)

Organization: EUROPEAN UNION   (91%);  EUROPEAN UNION  (91%); EUROPEAN UNION   (91%);  EUROPEAN UNION  (91%)

Industry: PUBLIC EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS (52%)

Geographic: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); EUROPE (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); NORTHERN AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (79%); AUSTRIA (79%); FRANCE (79%); GERMANY (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: December 24, 2000


End of Document
Destination Flint. But Why?
The New York Times
November 1, 2015 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ED; Column 0; Education Life Supplement; Pg. 16
Length: 3007 words
Byline: By GORDON YOUNG
Gordon Young, a native of Flint, Mich., is author of ''Teardown: Memoir of a Vanishing City'' and is a senior lecturer in communication at Santa Clara University.
Body


A few months after Abhishek Y. Utekar left Mumbai, India, to start an M.B.A. program at the University of Michigan campus in Flint, his landlord gave him a driving tour of his new home. Dennis Brownfield watched out for his tenants, and he wanted Mr. Utekar to understand the dynamics of a city often defined by deindustrialization and decay. His car provided the first lesson. It was a Honda Civic with a license plate that read ''GM LEFT,'' a commentary on the 70,000 automotive jobs that have disappeared over the years in this birthplace of General Motors.
They rolled to a stop in the empty parking lot between the main library and Central High School, an imposing brick building shuttered because of falling enrollment and budget cuts. ''Now make sure you've got your seatbelt on because I'm going to show you an American custom,'' Mr. Brownfield said. He shifted into reverse, cranked the steering wheel hard to the right, gunned the engine and popped the clutch. The result was a dizzying, deftly executed series of backward 360s. For a final flourish, Mr. Brownfield yanked the emergency brake to abruptly change directions. 
  ''That's called a doughnut,'' he said when they had skidded to a stop. ''It's how we have fun in Michigan.''
  Rattled but impressed, Mr. Utekar realized: This was going to be a lot different than India.
  Culture shock is not unusual among international students pursuing degrees in the United States, but some places are more shocking than others. Flint, 60 miles northwest of Detroit, is perennially ranked one of the most dangerous cities in the country. It has lost half its residents since the 1960s, according to the Census Bureau, and the population recently dipped below 100,000 for the first time in nearly a century. Thousands of homes are abandoned -- often stripped bare by thieves in search of scrap metal -- and arson is commonplace, infusing some neighborhoods with an eerie sense of desolation. In October, the county health department declared a public health emergency after elevated lead levels were discovered in the city's water supply.
  It is not, to state the obvious, a fun-loving college town like Ann Arbor. And yet, they come. This year, more than 700 international students, the largest number ever, are studying at U.M.-Flint, a commuter school of some 8,500 undergraduate and graduate students. Nearly 200 more attend Kettering, a smaller, more selective private university with a focus on automotive engineering. The numbers may seem comparatively modest, but this is a place people leave. These students -- from Saudi Arabia, India, China, South Korea, Nigeria and more than 40 other countries -- had hundreds of choices, and they chose Flint.
  The question, of course, is why.
  Some reasons are practical. Both universities offer degrees in fields popular with international students -- engineering, business, computer science and health care. Tuition at U.M.-Flint is inexpensive compared to private universities, and the cost of living is low; a two-bedroom apartment near downtown rents for about $500 a month, utilities included. The universities actively recruit overseas and have forgiving admissions policies for foreign applicants (no SAT or ACT required). With international enrollment climbing nationwide for nearly a decade, to almost 886,000, it is perhaps inevitable that students find their way to cities like Flint.
  Conversations with some three dozen international students at U.M.-Flint and Kettering reveal another explanation. A coveted degree from the United States was their primary goal; where they attained it was far less important. Many found their way to Vehicle City by accident. Some had hopes of immigrating.
  Once here, they grumble about being homesick and about a strange meteorological term called wind chill factor. Joshua O. Anifowoshe, a Nigerian, would sometimes join in dorm-room griping with other international students who were disappointed in U.M.-Flint. Mr. Anifowoshe had wanted a smaller school, but after attending a boisterous football game in Ann Arbor with more than 100,000 fans, he started to waver, and transferred. ''It was kind of lonely and boring in Flint,'' he said. ''I realized I needed a more rigorous academic environment and a more lively campus.''
  But the majority of international students stick it out -- 57 percent earn degrees in four years and 86 percent in five years, according to U.M.-Flint (impressive, considering that only 11 percent and 28 percent of all full-time freshmen there accomplish the same). In the process, the students said, they developed a deeper, more cleareyed understanding of the real America, and experienced an unanticipated sense of community.
  Mr. Utekar's story illustrates the leap of faith many international students take. He was working in sales for a Mumbai pharmaceutical company when he decided to try to immigrate to the United States. His sister had married an American and become a citizen while working for Wells Fargo on an H-1B visa after attending graduate school at Ithaca College. Mr. Utekar began researching M.B.A. programs.
  He considered the University of Michigan's highly ranked Ross School of Business in Ann Arbor but couldn't afford it. Back then, in 2010, Flint would cost him just $10,000 a year -- $40,000 less than Ross. He checked a map and the two campuses were just an hour's drive apart. How different could they be?
  ''I did not look up anything about Flint, which was good because I wasn't judgmental and paranoid when I got here,'' he said. Besides, he had missed the application deadlines for his other choices.
  Residents seemed surprised and grateful when they learned someone had traveled such a great distance to study in Flint, Mr. Utekar said. He rented a room in a group house for $200 from Mr. Brownfield, and stood in line once a week for free groceries at a nearby church. He discovered McDonald's and Wendy's. A friend in India sent him incense sticks and ink drawings of Krishna on dried palm leaves that he sold at art fairs. A music student lent him a pair of Indian tabla drums, and he was soon playing with various bands in the area. He began dating an American woman.
  After completing his M.B.A. in 2013, Mr. Utekar had a job with a local software firm for a year on his F1 student visa. Students and recent graduates can work or intern for 12 to 29 months under the Optional Practical Training program in jobs related to their area of study. Roughly half of U.M.-Flint graduates take advantage of OPT, but how many succeed in permanently immigrating -- there is still a 7 percent cap-per-country on green cards -- is not known.
  Mr. Utekar's visa was still valid when his job ended, so he enrolled in the master's program in computer science, which he expects to complete next fall. Now 33, he does not want to leave the United States. He and his girlfriend recently bought a 1,344-square-foot house for $9,800 and have begun restoring it. ''Maybe I was just lucky, but I've met amazing people in Flint,'' he said. ''I like it here.''
  That's what Flint officials like to hear. In the past decade, they have worked to make the city more appealing to students. A one-mile stretch that connects the University of Michigan campus and Kettering has been landscaped and rechristened University Avenue. The former Hyatt Regency Hotel downtown was converted into student housing. Last year, the popular farmers' market relocated to the edge of the U.M. campus, a fortresslike collection of interconnected brick buildings constructed in the '70s. A newer classroom building occupies the former site of the AutoWorld theme park, a short-lived attempt to lure tourists that was leveled in 1997. Abandoned buildings are still easy to spot. But a handful of new bars and restaurants have given students more to do, and Susan E. Borrego, chancellor of U.M.-Flint, has been talking to local leaders about sponsoring a cricket tournament.
  For merchants, the students provide an economic boost in a city saddled with double-digit unemployment. The international student in Flint spends on average almost $30,000 a year to cover tuition, fees and living expenses, according to the Association of International Educators. And that translates to more than $25 million annually for the local economy.
  So it's no wonder that six U.M.-Flint staff members regularly travel the world to recruit students. Dan Adams, director of its international center, frequently finds himself in Dubai or Singapore fielding questions from a parent or two whose Google search turned up distressing news about Flint. ''I only have about 60 seconds of their attention to try and sell the school,'' he said, ''so I emphasize all the support services we offer, the small class sizes, and point out that downtown Flint is a safe area.''
  Kip Darcy, vice president for marketing, communications and enrollment at Kettering, takes a focused approach to recruiting engineering students. ''We concentrate on India and China because they are a huge market for students hoping to study in the U.S., and they also have nascent automotive industries.''
  Kettering began working last fall in China with an independent broker, who assists students with the application process. U.M.-Flint contracts with approximately 20 brokers in various countries. In addition to collecting fees from students, the agents are paid $1,000 for each student they deliver who enrolls for at least two semesters. It's a practice the National Association for College Admissions Counseling permits in the recruitment of international students. But it does not endorse it, according to Eddie West, director of the association's international initiatives, and member schools cannot pay commissions for placement of domestic students.
  Brokers can have a huge influence, steering students toward specific schools, whether a good fit or not. Neelam Gire, a soft-spoken 24-year-old, desperately needed direction. She had hoped to attend medical school in India but froze when it came time to take the demanding entrance exam, which is given after high school.
  ''I was sitting in the car with my mom watching people go into the building to take the test,'' she remembered. ''I told her I just couldn't do it and we left. It was a big relief to drive away.''
  Her mother encouraged her to study in the United States and, for $500, hired a broker to suggest schools, help her with applications and prep her for her visa interview. U.M.-Flint was the first to accept her. She had never heard of Michigan, let alone Flint, but she thought the other options -- the State University of New York and Fairleigh Dickinson University -- were too close to her former boyfriend, who attended a community college in New Jersey. What if she bumped into him?
  She checked into her dorm on a Sunday. She was struck by the emptiness of the campus, and downtown. ''I was shocked that there were no tall buildings,'' she said. ''It looked like a village. I had a brochure that showed people sitting on the grass and chatting, and I was wondering, 'Where are they?'''
  When a fellow student from India gave Ms. Gire a tour of Flint to help her acclimate, he presented an array of personal safety tips. Don't walk alone after dark. Stay alert so no one can sneak up on you. Never wear high heels because assailants can hear the click of your shoes on the pavement, and it's hard to run away.
  While Ms. Gire dealt with acute anxiety, her mother, a single parent, struggled to pay her college expenses. In tearful Skype conversations, her two younger sisters complained that the family was suffering financially because of her. ''They thought I was in some beautiful place and enjoying life, but it was hard for me to even go outside because I thought it was unsafe,'' she said.
  Ms. Gire reluctantly moved off-campus into a studio apartment to save money, further isolating herself. She spent entire days playing video games and eating. She gained 10 pounds and dropped out for a semester, holed up in her apartment. Returning home would be shameful.
  Slowly, she got used to living away from her family. The university hired Ms. Gire as an ''international ambassador,'' bolstering her confidence and enabling her to make new friends. The eight ambassadors correspond with prospective applicants from other countries, welcome newcomers and plan events.
  Because it's the international students who live on or near campus, they have an outsize impact on life at U.M.-Flint. In fact, the 2014-15 student government president was from Mauritius, an island off the southeast coast of Africa.
  Ms. Gire got involved with the Indian Student Association and helped organize a celebration last fall to mark Diwali, the Hindu festival of lights. At a school where almost half the students are part-time and 50 is considered a big turnout, more than 400, including a group of exchange students from Mexico and dozens of American students, squeezed into four rooms in the student center. There was food, a D.J. and dancing, both traditional and not so traditional. Fines were levied for overcrowding.
  ''No one wanted to leave,'' Ms. Gire said. ''They just wanted to keep dancing.''
  Ms. Gire now lives with her Canadian boyfriend in East Village, a 16-block neighborhood near downtown that is popular with international students. They want to stay in the United States. After graduating in June with a psychology degree, Ms. Gire got a job, under the OPT program, in the university's international admissions office. She intends on enrolling in a master's program in public administration in about a year, with the career goal of working in higher education with international students.
  ''I used to hate it here,'' she said. ''But now it feels like home.''
  A mile south of U.M.-Flint, Kettering is a block from the former site of Chevy in the Hole, the hulking factory complex where the Flint Sit-Down Strike in 1936-37 catapulted the United Auto Workers union into national prominence. Formerly known as General Motors Institute, Kettering continues to have strong ties with the auto industry. Its undergraduates -- nearly 1,800 of them -- participate in a co-op program that alternates academic studies with paid, full-time employment with corporations, frequently one of the Big Three automakers or their suppliers.
  One Friday night last semester, the International Club at Kettering met at Extreme Indoor Kart Racing in a lonely shopping center, where a handful of customers were playing arcade games or racing under fluorescent lights on a quarter-mile track outlined with old tires. There was a good turnout: 40 students representing Pakistan, India, China, Iran and Brazil along with a few Americans.
  Locksly Wallace, an effervescent Jamaican with a quick smile, doled out tickets and a few students put on their crash helmets, prompting a furious round of selfies. About a dozen men in the automotive systems program gathered at a viewing window, eagerly awaiting their turn and critiquing another group navigating the track. An animated discussion on cornering technique ensued.
  ''We are really car freaks,'' one explained.
  The students stayed for three hours and enthusiastically ate pizza in the otherwise empty parking lot before car-pooling back to campus.
  Mr. Wallace reported that the night took $600 from the International Club budget and injected it directly into the local economy. Money well spent, in his opinion.
  Typical of Kettering students, Mr. Wallace took an intentional route to Flint. He had tested into a high school for students with academic potential and was selected to participate in an intensive five-week pre-college program at Kettering aimed at low-income students of color. Once again, he stood out, earning a scholarship to study chemical engineering.
  Mr. Wallace, whose mother worked as a maid and seamstress to support the family, grew up with seven siblings in Central Village, a rough area between Kingston and Spanish Town characterized by poverty and violence. He admitted that his expectations of life in the United States were formed largely by Hollywood, and like many international students he thought that all of America was prosperous. When he arrived, he discovered a city that had similarities with Central Village. ''It turned out that Flint is pretty much what I'm used to, so I can relate to it,'' he said. ''The only shock was realizing that, 'Oh, this happens in America, too.' ''
  Students describe the Kettering campus, comprising just seven buildings near downtown, as an island isolated from the city's more crime-ridden neighborhoods. There's a police substation across the street from the university, and Kettering's website describes a ''state-of-the art security and high definition closed-circuit television surveillance system'' installed in 2013.
  But Mr. Wallace didn't retreat from the rest of the city. He joined a mentoring program that connects Kettering students with academically promising high school students. He met regularly with three boys, prepping them for college, taking them to art museums, and offering them advice on girlfriends and other mysteries of adolescence.
  ''I had friends back home who dropped out of high school and ended up on the corner smoking weed,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''Some of them were dead before they were 18. So I could empathize and offer good solutions for what they were going through.''
  The young men he befriended had a sense of hopelessness. ''The common theme that I heard was: 'I can't wait to get out of here,''' Mr. Wallace said. ''Flint really has nothing to offer kids with potential. They're going to leave.''
  Mr. Wallace earned his master's in engineering management in June and works as a project manager at an automotive supplier. He hopes to land a job in the renewable energy field in California and, eventually, return to Jamaica.
  He is rooting for better times in Flint but he has no intention of staying. ''The engineer in me loves problem solving,'' he said, ''but I've done my time.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/01/education/edlife/international-students-find-the-american-dream-in-flint.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: SETTLING IN: Abhishek Y. Utekar, from Mumbai, India, is working on a second graduate degree at the University of Michigan in Flint. He's bought a fixer-upper
he plays the tabla drum with local bands. ''I like it here,'' he says. (ED16-ED17)
LEAN STREETS: The distressed city of Flint hosts hundreds of foreign students. Kettering's Great Court flies a flag for each country represented by its student body. (ED18)
 WHEN IN VEHICLE CITY... Locksly Wallace, a Jamaican, above left, center, enjoys a night of go-kart racing with members of the international club at Kettering, above. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY FABRIZIO COSTANTINI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ED19) DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANDREA LEVY)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: COLLEGE STUDENTS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); COMMUTING (77%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (76%); ENGINEERING (75%); HIGH SCHOOLS (74%); AUTOMOTIVE ENGINEERING (71%); PUBLIC HEALTH (65%); CENSUS (62%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (62%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (62%); LEAD (61%); WATER RESOURCES (60%); ARSON (50%); WATER SUPPLY (50%)

Company:  GENERAL MOTORS CO (72%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN (91%)

Ticker: GM (NYSE) (72%)

Industry: NAICS336112 LIGHT TRUCK & UTILITY VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (72%); NAICS336111 AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURING (72%); SIC3714 MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS & ACCESSORIES (72%); SIC3711 MOTOR VEHICLES & PASSENGER CAR BODIES (72%); AUTOMOTIVE (89%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); RENTAL PROPERTY (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); ABANDONED REAL ESTATE (77%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (76%); ENGINEERING (75%); HIGH SCHOOLS (74%); AUTOMOTIVE ENGINEERING (71%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (71%); LEAD (61%); BUDGET CUTS (54%); BUDGETS (54%)

Geographic: DETROIT, MI, USA (79%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (73%); MICHIGAN, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (90%); CHINA (79%); NIGERIA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); SOUTH KOREA (79%)

Load-Date: November 1, 2015


End of Document
Workers, and Bosses, in a Visa Maze 
 The New York Times
April 29, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3464 words
Byline:  By LESLIE WAYNE 
Dateline: ISELIN, N.J.  
Body


AT the Delhi Darbar restaurant, where the Indian expatriate community here comes to eat, the talk is not about the food, but about the uncertainty of life in America these days. Gathered around the table are four computer programmers, born in India and educated at top schools there, who now work in high-technology jobs in the New York area. Along with their wives and children, they came here nearly six years ago, on the promise of a job paying 10 times more than they could earn back home and the expectation of pursuing the American dream.
     But they cannot. The four -- and up to 420,000 others like them -- are caught up in a labyrinth of immigration laws, Congressional politics, the competing forces of the high-tech industry and organized labor and a tortuous, dysfunctional process of gaining "green cards" that allow permanent residency here. As a result, while they write the Java computer programs or manage the C++ computer projects that American business needs, they are never quite sure which end of the earth -- the United States or India -- they should call home. 
 "All of us are in limbo," said Shailesh Gala, one of the four, as they munched on chicken tikka and curries. "They created a false promise for us. Everyone who comes here has worked hard. We are waiting. Waiting. Waiting. Waiting, and nothing is happening." As heads nodded in agreement, another programmer, Bhushan Sethi, said: "We are migrating through legal ways. We are here when the country needed us. But when we need this country, it is not there. Give us the opportunity to stay."
The companies that hire these workers, called H-1B's for the visa that lets them work for six years while seeking green cards, say much the same. From Microsoft to Intel, from Goldman Sachs to Merrill Lynch, from Deloitte Consulting to Ernst & Young, H-1B's are being hired by the planeload to fill a gap in computer skills, especially at higher levels, because Americans have been cool to the computer science and engineering education that foreign students embrace.
The H-1B visa program has its champions. High-tech superstars like Bill Gates, Andy Grove and Scott McNealy have lobbied Congress to expand it. And holders of H-1B's, besides many faceless programmers, have included Linus Torvalds, 31, the Finnish inventor of the Linux operating system, a software rival to Microsoft's Windows, who recently traded his visa for a green card. 
But as the program has grown, so have its problems -- as even its backers acknowledge. 
Both a guest worker program and a road to a green card, the H-1B visa system has become a lightning rod of controversy over immigration policy. High-tech companies say the program is so riddled with bureaucratic delays that they have had to hire whole staffs to keep everything straight. The period for getting green cards now stretches for years, keeping the lives of H-1B's -- and the plans of corporations -- up in the air. After investing in and training an H-1B employee for up to six years, a company may well see him sent packing on the next airplane out. 
Moreover, under pressure from organized labor, Congress enacted complicated rules making it hard for corporations to promote H-1B workers or reward them with more challenging assignments.
The government isn't happy, either. Three agencies -- the Labor and State Departments and the Immigration and Naturalization Service -- administer the program, leading to regulatory gridlock and, according to a blistering report from the General Accounting Office, a breakdown in federal oversight.
As a result, nearly everyone involved with the program -- supporters and detractors -- complains about its flaws, often using words like "disaster" and "train wreck" as descriptions.
"The H-1B system needs to work for everybody and now it works for no one," said Jenifer Eisen Verdery, manager of education and work-force policy at Intel, the fifth-largest employer of H-1B's. "It doesn't work for the immigrant who has it. It doesn't work for the employers who hire them. It doesn't work for agencies that run it."
The H-1B program has its roots in temporary visa programs begun in the 1950's. But it took off in the 1980's and, again, in the late 1990's, as high-tech industries blossomed. 
Late last year, with hefty campaign contributions and a lobbying juggernaut, employers persuaded Congress to increase the number of H-1B visas granted annually to 195,000. And estimates show that the total number of H-1B's here could reach a high of 710,000 over the next three years. Compared with a national work force of 140 million, that number is minuscule. But it is a sizable and growing minority in information technology, where up to 20 percent of the five million high-tech workers are foreign-born, with about half of those coming from the H-1B program. It is too early to tell what impact, if any, the current economic downturn will have on the numbers.
HIGH-TECH companies say they have no choice but to hire H-1B's. "Of course, we make every effort to find skills within U.S. workers," said Zoanne Hennigan, director of immigration at Intel, which hires H-1B's as software, network and component design engineers. "But when there is a skill shortage, H-1B has been absolutely instrumental to making sure our business goals are met. The H-1B program is critical to the success of our company."
Such talk, however, holds little sway with organized labor and American-born computer programmers who have thrown obstacles in the program's way for the last decade. They contend that the program is just a way for high-tech companies, which are largely not unionized, to get programmers on the cheap, hold them captive in jobs where they have little voice over working conditions and jettison them when they are no longer needed. 
These groups have been among the most vocal in pointing out H-1B abuses -- cases of underpayment, fraud and exploitation of a vulnerable, compliant work force. But while waving the banner for worker protection, organized labor has succeeded only in convincing Congress to enact measures that have made the system more byzantine -- and unintentionally made it more open to potential abuse. For example, the paperwork required of high-tech companies to show that they have not replaced American citizens with H-1B's has become so onerous that, as a practical matter, it makes it difficult for H1-B's to change jobs.
"There isn't anything I like about the program," said Paul E. Almeida, president of the Department of Professional Employees at the A.F.L.-C.I.O. "It looks to me like it is just used to suppress wages. These employers don't want to invest in workers if they don't have to. This opens the door to low-wage workers." 
SOME American programmers, who have started Web sites opposed to H-1B, share this fervor. One well-known site, created by John Miano, head of the Programmers Guild, a trade group, features banner headlines like "Slave Trade Still Alive in the U.S." 
"Most H-1B's are blithering incompetents," said Mr. Miano, adding that he has worked alongside H-1B's and has had to correct their mistakes. "They are unbelievably bad. They are not highly skilled, it's laughable. This is not a program for the best and the brightest. Anyone could be packaged by a lawyer and get an H-1B."
Whether a shortage of high-tech workers truly exists -- statistics are inconclusive -- H-1B visa holders are largely highly educated, government reports show. Many are educated at India's well-established engineering schools and, increasingly, at American universities. 
Almost 98 percent of them have bachelor's degrees or higher, and 41.5 percent have master's degrees or higher. The jobs generally pay $45,000 to $150,000 -- versus a more typical $6,000 for similar jobs in India, the biggest source of supply. (While the vast majority of H-1B's are in high-tech industries, a small number of the visas are issued for teachers, medical personnel, artists, fashion models and others.) 
About one-quarter of high-tech H-1B's were already here before getting their visas, typically attending American universities on student visas. Government data from 1998, the most recent available, shows that 35 percent of all high-tech master's degrees at American universities went to foreign nationals, as did about half of all high-tech doctorates. 
In Silicon Valley, many companies recruit these foreign students -- many of whom would otherwise have to leave -- right after graduation. Corporations also send recruiters to India, find workers through Internet job postings or bring them here from previous projects overseas. And some companies, both in high technology and on Wall Street, hire H-1B's from consulting firms working as subcontractors on specific technical projects. 
"The H-1B program takes the creme de la creme," said Sheela Murthy, an immigration lawyer in Owings Mills, Md., and a native of India. "These are not people who are coming here to clean toilets. Many of them have master's degrees and attended top-notch universities. They are coming with a dream and a desire to do something with their lives."
Yet in accepting the visas, high-tech workers often walk into a nightmare. The visa allows workers and their families to stay here for six years, but the lag in getting green cards has grown to four, five or six years. As a result, thousands of H-1B holders, many of whom filed for green cards immediately upon receiving their H-1B's, are bumping against that six-year limit. Some may receive one-year extensions, but others may be forced to leave.
Employers are equally anxious. "An employer has found a person and wants them to stay, and what then, after six years you have to let them go?" said Theresa Cardinal Brown, associate director of the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
The wait for green cards results not only from delays at the immigration service, which now has 900,000 people in its green-card backlog, but also from supply-and-demand imbalances. At a time when the United States is admitting up to 195,000 new H-1B's annually, there are only 140,000 employment-based green cards available annually for H-1B's -- and their spouses, who are usually admitted on a different visa, an H-4. 
There are few specific criteria for obtaining a green card -- an employer must simply certify that the applicant has needed skills, and applicants must not have criminal records. The I.N.S. keeps no statistics on the number of H-1B's who eventually get green cards. 
The squeeze is tightest for citizens of India and China, who represent 57 percent of all H-1B's. Until recently, those two nations were each allotted 9,800 green cards, the same number set aside for citizens of any other country -- for instance, Iceland or Belgium. Late last year, Congress lifted those quotas, allowing for the transfer of unused allocations from small countries to larger ones. But regulations to put the changed law into effect are still in the works.
"The H-1B program is mismanaged," said B. Lindsay Lowell, an immigration specialist at Georgetown University. "People don't think through the connections between the temporary visa program and permanent residency, and it leaves people in these hazily defined roles. There is backlog on backlog. We are increasing the numbers willy-nilly in a system that cannot process the paperwork, and it is a disaster."
By contrast, other countries, particularly Canada, are actively wooing these same workers. Starting in 1998, Canada began to speed up its processing of high-tech workers, allowing them to gain permanent residency in a matter of months if they score enough points on a ranking that considers their education and the needs of the country. Australia and New Zealand have adopted similar changes, and England, Ireland, Germany and Austria are relaxing their rules, too. 
THE I.N.S. is aware of the competition: "Canada has made it a national policy to increase their market share of high-tech workers," said Jacquelyn Bednarz, a special policy assistant at the I.N.S. "They are courting them with attractive ads. They are welcoming them and aggressively pursuing them."
For H-1B's in the United States, the protracted process has practical consequences: They must pay taxes, including Social Security, with no assurance of ever receiving the future benefits. Their spouses are not allowed to work. They raise children as Americans, even though they may, one day, have to go to a country that is foreign to them. 
Because the visa is issued for a specific job, many H1-B's fear that they will hurt their chances of getting green cards if they try to switch employers, despite new rules allowing them to do that. As a result, until they get their green cards, many H-1B's remain tied to their first employers. 
"The bond between me and my employer is stronger than between me and my wife," said Murali Krishna, who works in Silicon Valley. "Break the umbilical cord and let me come and work for who I want to and negotiate what I can get. That way employers can't exploit me. If you want to be legal, you cannot be ambitious and grow."
Similarly, as a practical matter, it is impossible for H-1B's to become high-tech entrepreneurs, no matter how much brain power and drive they may have, because they would lose their green-card sponsors. "I have great business ideas, but I cannot start a company," said Mr. Sethi, one of those dining at the Delhi Darbar restaurant. "The environment in the U.S. makes you think about becoming an entrepreneur. But this process cuts you down."
Many H-1B's say they live in a constant fear of being deported, should they lose their jobs. The I.N.S. has said it plans to be lenient in the current high-tech downturn, but if an H-1B worker is out of work for more than 10 days, he is "out of status" and can be told to leave immediately. While the I.N.S. has had no reports of deportations recently, serious life decisions, like buying a home and car, having children, and firming up a career, are made more difficult by such uncertainty.
Consider S. Samuels, an H-1B computer programmer who spoke on condition that his first name not be used. He came to the United States to get an M.B.A., after graduating from India's top engineering school, the Indian Institute of Technology. That was more than five years ago. Now, with a pregnant wife and one child who knows only of life here, he is worried.
"If a citizen or a green-card holder loses their job, they lose time or money," Mr. Samuels said. "For us, we can lose our whole life."
Moreover, the lengthy green-card process makes H-1B's much more vulnerable to abuse and exploitation, like underpayment or a practice called "benching," in which H-1B's working for computer consulting firms are not paid for time spent waiting between assignments. Many of these consulting firms, also called "body shops," act as middlemen, hiring H-1B's and sending them on temporary assignments for Fortune 500 companies.
While reports of "body shop" abuse are common among H-1B's, it is hard to come up with hard evidence, since workers fear being sent back to their home country if they challenge their employer. But some have. 
Earlier this month, in response to a suit filed by an H1-B worker, a California superior court ordered a Silicon Valley consulting firm, Compubahn, to drop a restrictive noncompete clause requiring H-1B's to pay the firm $25,000 if they quit. The firm is appealing. H-1B's have complained in computer chat rooms about this practice elsewhere. 
Fraud in obtaining visas has also been found, including one tragic case in Berkeley, Calif., in which three Indian girls were brought in on H-1B visas for sexual purposes. The case came to light in November 1999 after one of the three, a 17-year-old pregnant girl, died of carbon monoxide poisoning in the rented apartment the girls shared. Last month, the landlord, Lakireddy Reddy, 63, a native of India worth more than $50 million, pleaded guilty in federal court in Oakland, as did two of his relatives. His two sons have also been charged in the case, in which the group is accused of fraudulently bringing Indian nationals to the United States for cheap labor and sex.
BEYOND the headlines, it is difficult to determine how much abuse has occurred. By most accounts, it is a small but troubling aspect of the program. In the 2000 fiscal year, the Department of Labor received 140 complaints from H-1B workers and ordered back wages of $1.6 million to 339 people. But the statistics may understate the problem, because H-1B workers' dependence on their employers may make them reticent. "There is a huge disincentive for H-1B's to complain," said a labor department enforcement official. "They are very unwilling to come to us."
One advocate of a speedier green-card process is Mr. Torvalds, the inventor of the Linux computer operating system, who received his green card five months ago. Mr. Torvalds, who lives in Silicon Valley and is chief scientist at the Transmeta Corporation, which sponsored him for a green card, was luckier than most -- he came from Finland, a country with no waiting list. 
Yet even he faced the same difficulties as many other H-1B's. He paid cash for his home to avoid problems in getting a mortgage; he was put in the "problem queue" at United States Customs whenever returning from overseas trips, adding hours to his journey; and it took him more than nine months to get a California driver's license because of the need for immigration paperwork.
"People who end up coming on the program are pretty much at the mercy of the system," Mr. Torvalds said in an interview by e-mail. "That makes people nervous. It can cause total disruption in your life if the six-year clock runs out and you have to go back to a life you've long since left behind. That uncertainty is the nasty kind. 
"Right now," he added, "the whole process is nothing but bureaucracy, with nobody driving it, and nobody really responsible."
On the front lines of many of these problems are employers, who pay $1,000 for the visa, an additional $3,500 to $5,000 in legal fees and untold dollars in employee time to hire H-1B's. Under pressure from organized labor, Congress enacted a cap in 1990 to limit the number of H-1B visas. And, in the mid-1990's, labor pressed Congress to require that all H-1B employers file a "labor condition application" with the Labor Department to protect American workers from being displaced.
The paperwork for this application has grown; the regulations for it now run to 150 pages. At a minimum, an employer must show he has advertised the job to the local work force, is not paying an H-1B any more or any less than comparable workers, is not using H-1B's as strikebreakers and has sought to hire an American citizen first. As a result, the hiring of an H-1B can take months. 
One Wall Street firm has employees who are designated to process H-1B's, including counseling for the bosses of H-1B workers to understand the complications. "They have no idea of the intricacies of the process," said a representative of the firm, which asked not to be named. "And explaining it can last up to a couple of hours."
This mountain of paperwork also discourages companies from promoting H-1B workers or transferring them to another job site. 
"One of the major problems is that an employee is locked into a post," said Sandra J. Boyd, a lobbyist for the National Association of Manufacturers, a trade group. "If they want to move up the ladder, all this paperwork has to start again."
SOME employers, especially those in small companies, have even adopted a no-H-1B policy. A search of popular Internet high-tech employment sites like www.Dice.com finds dozens of solicitations for software engineers with the following designation: "U.S. citizens and green-card holders only." Calls to recruiters placing these ads resulted in the same responses -- that many employers do not want to face the costs, paperwork or delays that come with hiring an H-1B. 
"A lot of companies want someone right away," said one recruiter, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "Time kills these deals."
So does money. Last December, Congress increased H-1B visa fees from $500 to $1,000, to pay for government-sponsored job training programs for high-tech workers. In the current fiscal year, the Department of Labor estimates that it will receive $180 million for these training programs and $213 million next year. 
But will this money go toward training United States citizens to take the highly-skilled jobs now filled by H-1B's? It is hard to say. The training program is still in its infancy. So far, a large portion of the money is going into basic programs to train disadvantaged youths, single parents and the unemployed in entry-level computer jobs -- jobs not filled by H-1B's, but largely by American workers.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Shailesh Gala, an H-1B visa holder, with his wife, Varsha, and daughter, Rashi. The visa system "created a false promise," he said. (Nancy Wegard for The New York Times); The Web site of the Programmers Guild, above, condemns the H-1B program, which lets foreign workers fill U.S. jobs. Other sites support the idea. (pg. 1); High-tech industries have attracted Indian immigrants to places like Iselin, N.J. Women tried on wedding saris, above, at Libaas, a local shop. Iselin, in Middlesex County, supports many other Indian businesses, like a restaurant, left. (Photographs by Nancy Wegard for The New York Times)(pg. 12) Chart: "Bringing Expertise From Abroad"H1-B visas have been rising steadily as more technology companies look abroad to find the specialized workers they need. India, with its longstanding tradition of science and engineering education, has been a ready source of systems analysts and programmers. Graph shows number of H-1B visas granted from 1989-1999. VISAS GRANTED, BY COMPANY, OCT. 1999 TO FEB. 2000 Motorola: 618Oracle: 455Cisco Systems: 398Mastech: 389Intel: 367Microsoft: 362Rapidigm: 357Syntel: 337Wipro: 327Tata Consultancy Services: 320PricewaterhouseCoopers: 272People.com Consultants: 261Lucent Technologies: 255Infosys Technologies: 239Nortel Networks: 234 SHARE OF VISAS GRANTED, BY COUNTRY, MAY 1998 TO JULY 1999* Other countries: 27.8Japan: 2.0Taiwan: 2.1South Korea: 2.3Philippines: 2.7Canada: 3.0Britain: 3.2China: 9.3India: 47.5% *Figures do not add to 100 because of rounding(Sources: State Department; Immigration and Naturalization Service)(pg. 12)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (79%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (78%); LOBBYING (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%); ENGINEERING (76%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (72%); IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES (%);  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  LABOR (%);  LAW AND LEGISLATION (%);  ORGANIZED LABOR (%);  BUREAUCRATIC RED TAPE  (%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (58%);  MERRILL LYNCH & CO INC (55%);  GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC (53%);  MICROSOFT CORP (53%);  DELOITTE LLP (53%);  ERNST & YOUNG GLOBAL LTD (52%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE; STATE DEPARTMENT; LABOR DEPARTMENT (US) 

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); GS (NYSE) (53%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (53%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (55%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (55%); NAICS523120 SECURITIES BROKERAGE (55%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (55%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (55%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (55%); SIC6798 REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS (53%); SIC6289 SERVICES ALLIED WITH THE EXCHANGE OF SECURITIES OR COMMODITIES, NEC (53%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (53%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (53%); NAICS541211 OFFICES OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS (53%); SIC8721 ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING SERVICES (53%); NAICS541613 MARKETING CONSULTING SERVICES (52%); NAICS541611 ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT & GENERAL MANAGEMENT CONSULTING SERVICES (52%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); COMPUTER OPERATING SYSTEMS (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); C++ PROGRAMMING (78%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (78%); RESTAURANTS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (77%); ENGINEERING (76%)

Person: BILL GATES (79%); WAYNE, LESLIE 

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (92%); UNITED STATES

Load-Date: April 29, 2001


End of Document
Subject, Meet Verb
The New York Times Blogs 
(After Deadline)
November 10, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMESTOPICS
Length: 1609 words
Byline: PHILIP B. CORBETT
Highlight: Singular subject, singular verb; plural subject, plural verb. What could be simpler? And yet, we stumble with embarrassing frequency over this most basic grammatical rule. 
Body


Singular subject, singular verb; plural subject, plural verb. What could be simpler? And yet ...
We stumble with embarrassing frequency over this most basic grammatical rule. Haste and overly complicated syntax are often the root causes. Several specific constructions create problems: "neither" expressions, compound subjects, and prepositional phrases following the subject. 
Some recent lapses:
 But neither of those proposals are in a bill to increase H-1B visas that Mr. Rubio sponsored this year with other senators. 
The subject is "neither," which is singular. Here's what The Times's stylebook says:
 neither, neither ... nor. When neither is the subject, the verb is singular: Neither of the cars is available. When neither and nor link singular terms, the verb is singular: Neither the car nor the truck is available. When neither and nor link a singular term and a plural one, put the plural term second and use a plural verb: Neither the car nor the trucks are available. If the mixture of terms and verbs gets awkward, recast the sentence: The car is not available, and neither are the trucks. 
 Among the class actions thrown out because of the clauses was one brought by Time Warner customers over charges they said mysteriously appeared on their bills and another against a travel booking website accused of conspiring to fix hotel prices. 
The complicated sentence and inverted order disguised the fact that we had a compound subject that required a plural verb: "Among the class actions were one brought by Time Warner customers and another against a travel-booking website."
 Carolina's success is not so neatly defined, but strong defense, excellent fourth-quarter play from quarterback Cam Newton and a friendly schedule has helped the Panthers remain unbeaten. 
Another compound subject - "strong defense, excellent fourth-quarter play from quarterback Cam Newton and a friendly schedule" - that requires a plural verb, "have helped."
 The suspicions that the right always had about Boehner, and would have had about McCarthy - that they care more about the deal than about the outcome, more about the party's donors than any defined small-government principle - does not attach to Ryan in the same way. 
Here the subject is so far away from the verb, with so much intervening, that we seemed to have lost track. Make it "The suspicions ... do not ..."
 Their bill of particulars against Mr. Ryan have shifted from the national debt and spending to immigration. 
The prepositional phrase "of particulars" fooled us, but the subject is the singular noun "bill."
 After presiding over a three-week trial, she concluded that N.C.A.A. rules prohibiting college athletes from receiving cash compensation was a violation of the nation's antitrust laws. 
Make it "rules ... were a violation," of course.
  The proceedings became so tense that it even featured a bench-clearing incident in the 13th when Texas reliever Keone Kela got into a shouting match with Josh Donaldson, who had homered in the first. 
Here the agreement problem concerns pronoun and antecedent rather than verb and subject. "Proceedings" is plural, so we needed "they even featured" (or we could use a different noun).
 
 In a Word 
This week's grab bag of grammar, style and other missteps, compiled with help from colleagues and readers.
 Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's repeated insistence that Israel had not and would not change anything at an Old City holy site was endorsed over the weekend by the United States and Jordan, which administers the contested Jerusalem complex that is at the center of this month's violent Palestinian uprising.    
This construction doesn't work because "had not" requires "changed," not "change." 
Example No. 1:
 After the raid, a photograph of a bloodied press card held by one of the channel's journalists went viral. 
Example No. 2:
 Videos of a classroom arrest that quickly went viral have put a spotlight on the proliferation of armed, uniformed officers in schools. 
Example No. 3:
 A recording of the call went viral, and like Mr. Flores before him, Will in Queens - a 42-year-old middle-school teacher named Will Collins - became a folk hero. 
This slang was once an exciting metaphor but it has grown tired with overuse and is not always accurate. We mean the content "was popular online," "was widely shared," or "spread quickly online."
 In 2014, people age 50 and above were twice as likely to go through a divorce than in 1990, according to the National Center for Family and Marriage Research at Bowling Green State University in Ohio. 
Make it "twice as likely ... as."
 Mrs. Clinton was ahead in national polls in 2007 by nearly a two-to-one margin. 
A margin is the difference between two numbers; make this "nearly a two-to-one ratio."
 With the Mets starting the World Series here Tuesday against the Kansas City Royals, Murphy was one home run away from tying the record for home runs in a postseason, which was eight, set originally by Barry Bonds. 
"Set originally" is redundant.
 The militants were wary of anybody who had served in the Iraqi police or army, or whom they thought might have had contact with Americans or Kurds. 
Make it "who"; it's the subject of "might have had," just as the first "who" is the subject of "had served."
 In a sign of their uncertainty about who to support, none of the six hopefuls tested found enthusiastic support from a majority of their party's primary voters. 
Aargh. Here it should be "whom," the object of "to support."
 Out of view to tourists, the first family has installed more than a dozen pieces of contemporary and modern art throughout the upstairs living quarters of the White House residence, where the family spends most of their private time. 
Make it "the family spends most of its private time" or "family members spend most of their private time."
 This took us through the beach traffic; we grew quiet as the SUV zipped along beach cliffs above blue water. 
Use periods for the abbreviation.
 Valeant strips out a laundry list of expenses from its revenue, including those related to stock-based compensation, legal settlements and costs associated with restructuring and acquisitions. 
"Laundry list" is a cliché; we could just say "list" or "long list."
 Deborah L. Pierce, an emergency room doctor in Philadelphia, was optimistic when she brought a sex discrimination claim against the medical group that had dismissed her. ... 
When Ms. Pierce showed up one day for a hearing, she said she noticed Mr. Kalogredis having a friendly coffee with the head of the medical group she was suing.
She should be Dr. Pierce, particularly since the story involved her work as a doctor; this was eventually fixed. 
 Ms. Casimir, a Haitian-American whose parents did not graduate college, calls her 1580 (out of 2400) SAT score "an embarrassment" after graduating high school with a 4.0 G.P.A. 
Our style is "graduate from."
 These are the Mets, and this was their first home World Series game in 15 years, and the first-ever at Citi Field. 
No need for a hyphen.
 In a telephone interview, the donor and former ambassador under Presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush, Mel Sembler, said that the super PAC supporting Mr. Bush, Right to Rise, is holding strong with Florida supporters. 
This identification is awkward and hard to digest. Why not put the name first, then the long identifying phrase?
 Rattled but impressed, Mr. Utekar realized: This was going to be a lot different than India. 
Make it "different from."
 But overall, he added, "anything that brings down the costs of attorneys providing indigent defense is a good thing." 
In this use, make it two words, "over all."
 She swiftly sent whomever it was to voice mail. 
Make it "whoever."
 That is one of the things that makes this transcendent horror series, which returns to SundanceTV on Saturday (Halloween), so transfixing and unsettling. 
Recorded announcement: The verb should be plural in a relative clause like this. The subject "that" is plural because it refers to "things," not to "one."
 In 2012, officials forbade Quintarius from attending his local high school and said a transfer to a school with a nurse was mandatory. 
From the stylebook:
 forbid, prohibit. Use to with forbid and from with prohibit: forbid them to attend; prohibit them from attending.
 While most species are named after islands or British explorers, the new species, Chelonoidis donfaustoi, has a distinctly local namesake: "Don Fausto" - Fausto Llerena Sánchez, a 75-year-old park ranger who recently retired after 43 years of helping to save endangered tortoises. 
And more from the stylebook:
 namesake properly describes the receiver of a shared name, not the giver. A grandchild may be the namesake of her grandmother, but not the other way around.
 The researchers found that large chain groceries had the lowest percentage of misidentified salmon, and were eight times less likely to offer such mislabeled salmon than small groceries. 
And again from the stylebook:
[D]o not write times less or times smaller (or things like times as thin or times as short). A quantity can decrease only one time before disappearing, and then there is nothing left to decrease further. Make it one-third as much (or as tall, or as fast).
 The jump in temperatures was probably caused by a combination of atmospheric warming and warm water carried into the gulf by a northward shift of the powerful Atlantic current known as the gulf stream, according to the researchers, who include scientists at the University of Maine, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and other institutions. 
It's amazing what's in the stylebook:
 Gulf Stream for the ocean current. 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (88%); CLASS ACTIONS (87%); LITIGATION (87%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY SPORTS (85%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (71%); FOREIGN LABOR (71%); IMMIGRATION (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (71%); ONLINE TRAVEL BOOKINGS (70%); CONSPIRACY (65%); PUBLIC DEBT (64%); STUDENT ATHLETES (62%); COLLEGIATE SPORTS ORGANIZATIONS (61%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (50%); NATIONAL DEBT (50%); After Deadline (%); Grammar (%)

Industry: COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY SPORTS (85%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (71%); ONLINE TRAVEL BOOKINGS (70%); HOTELS & MOTELS (65%); COLLEGIATE SPORTS ORGANIZATIONS (61%)

Person: CAM NEWTON (86%)

Load-Date: November 10, 2015


End of Document
BACKSLASH; Survivor: The New Economy
 The New York Times
May 13, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 762 words
Byline:  By MATT RICHTEL;  Matt Richtel reports on technology for The Times. His column about living and working in the technology maelstrom appears the second Sunday of each month. E-mail: , mrichtel@nytimes.com.
Body


REALITY-BASED television shows are heavy with sexual themes and romance, with the action often set against exotic backdrops. It's captivating stuff, no doubt, but the formula is growing a bit tired.
     In order for reality TV to thrive, it needs new material, inspired by action found closer to home, and in a world filled with the elements of great television -- big money, power struggles and heated intellectual property disputes. 
 Yes, this is reality TV drawn from Silicon Valley. Real shows about real people, all watching their stocks tank. The lineup might look something like this:

TECH SUPPORT ISLAND -- On a tiny island, a man finds himself stranded with a laptop computer and an ample power supply. To walk away with a cool $1 million, all he has to do is install a new software upgrade. Fortunately, a crack seven-member technical support staff is marooned with him.
The man needs only to get the support staff's attention and to enlist its help in installing the software. Following is a sample of dialogue from the season opener. 
Man: "Excuse me, can I get some help with this upgrade?" 
Tech support staff member: "For technical assistance, press 1." 
Man: "Press 1? On what? You're standing in front of me!" 
Tech support staff member: "I'm going on break." 

REBOOT CAMP -- Eight people in their 50's try to log on to the Internet while their drill instructor, a tech-wise 10-year-old, yells at them. ("It's an internal modem, maggot! Now drop and give me 20!")

VIRTUAL REAL WORLD -- Silicon Valley's answer to MTV's "Real World" chronicles the daily adventures of six young people living under one roof in Palo Alto, Calif. The twist is that the residents are all electrical engineers. The fast-paced action centers on 20-somethings dealing with growing up, romance and taut, sexually charged discussions of the alternative minimum tax.
A synopsis of the first week: Noel calls a house meeting after someone spills a juice shake on his algorithm. Annie and Rick argue over the value of "X." Jay wants to use the garage for a keg party, but Andy wants to use it for a start-up. 

THE WALKER -- A team of nine strangers is assembled to track down one man. That man has been set down on one coast and is trying to cross the country, undetected. He is Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman. The team is equipped with cellular phones, radio-tracking devices and the Consumer Price Index.
If Mr. Greenspan is not found, he wins a season-long reprieve from public scrutiny. If he is found, the team splits $1 million in Treasury bills, while Mr. Greenspan must announce a lowering of interest rates on national television and read excerpts from his diary. 

ULTIMATE POWER STRUGGLE -- Twelve Californians are locked in an opulent Silicon Valley mansion. At their disposal are the latest technology gadgets -- so advanced that they surpass anything at NASA's disposal. There are ultrafast computers, an electric toothbrush that doubles as a global positioning system, and a microwave oven that can receive e-mail messages. There is one catch: they have no electricity. The object is for the participants to figure out how to feed themselves, communicate with the outside world and elect a legislature with a clue.

CHAINS OF ANGST -- A die-hard user of a Macintosh and a die-hard user of a Windows-based PC are chained together. The room is empty except for two computers, one of each variety, at opposite ends. Each player must use his wile, zeal and muscle to drag his opponent to the computer with the preferred operating system. The winner is the first to log on. Nothing is at stake, but the winner can be completely secure in the notion that he has no life.
Next season: a 12-year-old video-game enthusiast is chained together with someone addicted to chocolate. 

LOW-COST-OVERSEAS-LABOR ISLAND -- Thousands of indigenous laborers, vying for H-1B visas to come to the United States, work in factories that make computer goods for distribution around the world. The big American companies that employ these contract workers do not pay benefits and provide wages far beneath the wages available in the United States. Shot on location in Taiwan.

MULTITASKING SURVIVOR -- Fifteen people race around the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. As they drive, they must talk on cell phones and place day trades constantly. The object is to make the most money in the stock market while making the fewest number of pit stops (during which tires are changed, gas is replenished and hands-free headsets are returned for ones that actually work). All the cars are sport utility vehicles.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (Randy Jones) 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TECHNICAL SUPPORT (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (78%); NEW ECONOMY (78%); PRICES (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (73%); ENGINEERING (68%); PRODUCT ENHANCEMENTS (68%); TREASURY SECURITIES (60%); COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  TELEVISION  (%)

Industry: REALITY TELEVISION (92%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (85%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); LAPTOP COMPUTERS (78%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (76%); MODEMS (73%); ENGINEERING (68%); TREASURY SECURITIES (60%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

Person: ALAN GREENSPAN (58%); RICHTEL, MATT 

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (93%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (91%); CALIFORNIA, USA (91%); SILICON VALLEY (CALIF)

Load-Date: May 13, 2001


End of Document
Firms Game Visa System, Costing the U.S. Jobs
The New York Times
November 11, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1745 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Théo Négri, a young software engineer from France, had come up with so many novel ideas at his job at an Internet start-up in San Francisco that the American entrepreneur who hired him wanted to keep him on.
So he helped Mr. Négri apply for a three-year work visa for foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills, mainly in technology and science. With his master's degree from a French university and advanced computer abilities, Mr. Négri seemed to fill the bill. 
  But his application for the H-1B visa was denied, and he had to leave the United States. Back in France, Mr. Négri used his data skills to figure out why.
  The answer was simple: Many of the visas are given out through a lottery, and a small number of giant global outsourcing companies had flooded the system with applications, significantly increasing their chances of success. While he had one application in last year's lottery and lost, one of the outsourcing companies applied for at least 14,000. The companies were squeezing out American employers like his boss.
  ''I had this great American dream that got broken,'' Mr. Négri said, speaking by telephone from Lyon, France.
  Congress set up the H-1B program to help American companies hire foreigners with exceptional skills, to fill open jobs and to help their businesses grow.
  But the program has been failing many American employers who cannot get visas for foreigners with the special skills they need.
  Instead, the outsourcing firms are increasingly dominating the program, federal records show. In recent years, they have obtained many thousands of the visas -- which are limited to 85,000 a year -- by learning to game the H-1B system without breaking the rules, researchers and lawyers said.
  In some years, an American employer could snag one of these coveted visas almost anytime. But recently, with the economy picking up, the outsourcing companies have sent in tens of thousands of visa requests right after the application window opens on April 1. Employers who apply after a week are out of luck.
  ''The H-1B program is critical as a way for employers to fill skill gaps and for really talented people to come to the United States,'' said Ronil Hira, a professor at Howard University who studies visa programs. ''But the outsourcing companies are squeezing out legitimate users of the program,'' he said. ''The H-1Bs are actually pushing jobs offshore.''
  Those firms have used the visas to bring their employees, mostly from India, for large contracts to take over work at American businesses. And as the share of H-1B visas obtained by outsourcing firms has grown, more Americans say they are being put out of work, or are seeing their jobs moved overseas.
  Of the 20 companies that received the most H-1B visas in 2014, 13 were global outsourcing operations, according to an analysis of federal records by Professor Hira. The top 20 companies took about 40 percent of the visas available -- about 32,000 -- while more than 10,000 other employers received far fewer visas each. And about half of the applications in 2014 were rejected entirely because the quota had been met.
  Two of those applications came from Mark Merkelbach and his small engineering firm in Seattle. For water projects in China, he needed engineers and landscapers who speak Mandarin, and he could not find them in the local market. With his H-1B visas denied, Mr. Merkelbach had to move the jobs to Taiwan. Another denial went to Atulya Pandey, an entrepreneur from Nepal who founded an Internet company in the United States and now can no longer work legally in this country for his own business.
  The top companies receiving H-1B visas in recent years, Professor Hira found, include Tata Consultancy Services, known as TCS, Infosys and Wipro, all outsourcing giants based in India; Cognizant, with headquarters in New Jersey; and Accenture, a global operation incorporated in Ireland.
  ''They have spent a lot of time and money creating a business model that fits within the rules so they can use the visas to offer cheaper labor,'' said Bruce Morrison, a lawyer representing an association of American engineers.
  For example, federal law requires global companies employing large numbers of H-1B workers to sign a declaration saying they will not displace Americans. But there is a loophole: An exemption cancels that requirement if employers pay H-1B workers at least $60,000 a year -- significantly less than an experienced technology worker's salary in many parts of the country.
  Many of the outsourcing firms' temporary workers earn $60,000 or just a little more, according to federal data compiled by Professor Hira.
  Among the immigration visas offered by the United States, the H-1B program stands out for its peculiar rules. The annual quota includes 65,000 visas for foreign workers applying for the first time, while the remaining 20,000 are for foreign students graduating with advanced degrees from American universities. Each year the period for applications opens on April 1, and they are accepted first come first served.
  Federal officials allow only one application for each foreign worker. But there is no limit on the number of visas a company can seek. A company with thousands of employees can submit many applications. By law, if applications quickly exceed the quota, officials use a computer-run lottery to select the visa recipients.
  Recently, demand for the visas has soared; each year since 2013 the selection went to the lottery. This year, 233,000 applications were received in just seven days, and about two-thirds were denied because the quota was met.
  Immigration officials do not acknowledge the outsourcing firms' advantage. ''The selection process is completely random,'' said Shinichi Inouye, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency in charge of the visa program. ''We cannot speculate as to why one company has more petitions selected in the cap.''
  But Mr. Négri, who is now 27, wanted to understand it. He had been hired by David Petersen through an open job search after he posted his professional profile online. Mr. Petersen was looking for engineers to expand his start-up, BuildZoom, which helps people find construction contractors.
  ''I was just looking for great people,'' said Mr. Petersen, in San Francisco. ''And Théo had been building cool stuff since he was a 13-year-old.'' Mr. Petersen said he had hired several local tech workers at the same time, and Mr. Négri, rather than displacing Americans, brought in more.
  Then his visa was denied. So Mr. Négri combed through public documents that employers file with the Department of Labor as a first step in an H-1B application. For the limited quota of visas, Mr. Négri discovered, the outsourcing companies had submitted far more applications than a small company like BuildZoom could manage or afford -- each application costs up to $4,000.
  Together the top five outsourcing companies had prepared as many as 55,000 H-1B applications. TCS, the company that had prepared applications for at least 14,000 visas, won 5,650 of them.
  Mr. Négri is now working on a tech start-up of his own -- in France.
  American titans like IBM, Microsoft, Facebook and Google also use H-1B visas and have pressed Congress to increase the annual quota.
  A representative of The New York Times Company said it had about 70 employees on visas, most of them skilled technology workers. This year, the company obtained an H-1B visa for Mark Thompson, the president and chief executive, who is British.
  Lawmakers have largely overlooked the outsourcing companies' role in the visa process. On Sept. 30, Congress allowed an extra fee of $2,000, which it imposed five years ago on H-1B applications from the biggest outsourcing companies, to lapse.
  On Tuesday, Senators Richard Durbin of Illinois, a Democrat, and Charles H. Grassley of Iowa, a Republican, introduced a bill to change the H-1B program and another temporary work visa, the L-1B, to raise wage requirements, increase monitoring and enforcement and add other protections for American workers. ''The H-1B visa program was never meant to replace qualified American workers,'' the senators said.
  Most of the global firms focus on technology, offering services to American companies to upgrade their systems and help them compete amid rapid change in the international marketplace.
  The companies say they follow all of the rules when they apply for the visas. Benjamin Trounson, a spokesman for TCS, one of the largest consultants, with 325,000 employees worldwide, said the company serves its customers ''using our U.S. and global talent pool that most effectively meets their needs.''
  Several consulting companies said H-1B workers were only a small part of their work force in the United States. Cognizant said in a statement that it regularly recruits experienced American workers and qualified students, and uses H-1B visas only ''to supplement our U.S. hiring in order to fill talent gaps in the market.''
  Still, Cognizant was the second-largest recipient of H-1B visas in 2014, getting more than 4,200.
  The outsourcing companies say they are hiring more Americans and contributing to the economy. In August, TCS announced a $35 million donation to Carnegie Mellon University for a new research center on its campus in Pittsburgh.
  But Mr. Pandey, after losing out in the H-1B lottery, had to set up shop back in Nepal to try to manage a growing company based in New York.
  As an undergraduate at the University of Pennsylvania, Mr. Pandey befriended an American classmate from Arizona, Vincent Sanchez-Gomez. By their junior year, they were running a start-up. In 2013, after graduating, they turned full time to their venture, Pagevamp, which helps small businesses create and run their own websites.
  The H-1B denial was a blow. ''It was quite stressful, for me and for the entire company, because it's what we were counting on,'' Mr. Pandey, 25, said during a brief stop in New York last month; now he can come to the United States only on a visitor's visa.
  Mr. Sanchez-Gomez, 24, has to handle investors, a staff of 10 and the company's plans for expansion through video calls with a business partner halfway around the globe.
  ''I would expect most people would feel Atulya was making a positive contribution to the U.S. economy,'' he said. ''There is no American who could do his job. Without Atulya, there would be no company.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/11/us/large-companies-game-h-1b-visa-program-leaving-smaller-ones-in-the-cold.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: David Petersen hired American and foreign workers at a start-up, BuildZoom, in San Francisco. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Atulya Pandey, right, an entrepreneur from Nepal, founded an Internet company, Pagevamp, with Vincent Sanchez-Gomez. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PERRY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Théo Négri in Lyon, France, where he returned after he was denied an H-1B visa. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BERTRAND GAUDILLÈRE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); WORKFORCE DEMAND (78%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (76%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); STARTUPS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (71%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (90%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); INTERNET & WWW (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (71%)

Geographic: LYON, FRANCE (73%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); RHONE-ALPES, FRANCE (73%); UNITED STATES (96%); FRANCE (90%); INDIA (67%)

Load-Date: November 11, 2015


End of Document
Complexities of Visas 
 The New York Times
May 20, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 3; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 170 words
Body


To the Editor:
"Workers, and Bosses, in a Visa Maze" (April 29), spells out clearly the problems plaguing the H-1B visa program that brings skilled foreign workers to the United States for up to six years.
     But the program was conceived and expanded to benefit high-technology companies in this country, which cited a shortage of qualified American workers. 
 It was not devised to benefit foreign workers, many of whom are being harmed by the law's complex provisons.
Most of the program's problems stem from a desire to ensure that no American workers are available for these jobs before allowing foreign workers to be hired.
Foreign workers in the H-1B visa program find that obtaining permanent residency can take some time, especially if they come from countries like India, which generates large numbers of foreign workers and produces a long waiting list.
This wait means the workers can be committed to one company, with restricted opportunities to advance or change jobs.

STEPHEN NORDLINGER
Chevy Chase, Md., April 29

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FOREIGN LABOR (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (88%); IMMIGRATION (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); LABOR (%);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES (%);  VISAS  (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Person: NORDLINGER, STEPHEN 

Geographic: MARYLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: May 20, 2001


End of Document
How Outsourcing Companies Dominate the H-1B Program
The New York Times
November 11, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 374 words
Byline: By HAEYOUN PARK
Body


H-1B visas are designed to bring foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. But in recent years, global outsourcing companies have dominated the program, winning tens of thousands of visas and squeezing out many American companies. Congress set a limit of 85,000 visas annually, and more than 10,000 companies applied in 2014. But just 20 companies received more than 32,000 visas, according to Ronil Hira, a professor at Howard University who studies visa programs and analyzed federal H-1B data. 
The top 20 included several large outsourcing firms that provided temporary workers for businesses like Disney and Toys ''R'' Us. The federal government approves the visas on a first-come-first-served basis. Officials allow only one application for each foreign worker, but firms can submit an unlimited number of applications for their employees, so global outsourcing giants can, and do, submit many requests. Since 2011, as the American economy returned to growth, there has been a spike in the number of H-1B visas granted to outsourcing companies. Some companies are receiving at least four times as many visas as they did just a few years ago. To prepare an H-1B visa application, employers must first submit a public document known as a labor condition application. Companies can apply for more than one worker based on one labor condition application, and many outsourcing firms use one application to apply for 10 or more. The more labor condition applications a company gets approved, the more H-1B applications it can submit. Because H-1B visa applications are not public record, the labor condition applications are an indicator of how many applications a company intends to file. Under federal rules, employers with large numbers of H-1B workers must declare that they will not displace American workers. But the firms are exempt from that requirement if the workers are paid at least $60,000 a year. H-1B workers at outsourcing firms often receive wages at or slightly above $60,000, below what skilled American technology professionals tend to earn, so those firms can offer services to American companies at a lower cost, undercutting American workers. 

Graphic

 
CHARTS: Thirteen outsourcing companies took nearly one-third of all H-1B visas in 2014.
The outsourcing companies dominate the visa program by flooding the system with applications.
With more applications, the number of visas given to outsourcing companies has risen sharply.
Many H-1B workers earn salaries below market rates, and the vast majority of H-1B workers are from India. (Sources: Ronil Hira, Howard University
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
U.S. Department of Labor
 Théo Négri, jobsintech.io)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); PUBLIC RECORDS (75%); APPROVALS (74%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (73%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (67%)

Organization: HOWARD UNIVERSITY (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF LABOR (59%); US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: November 11, 2015


End of Document
Thanks for Coming. Now Go. 
 The New York Times
July 15, 2001 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 14NJ; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2490 words
Byline:  By ABHI RAGHUNATHAN 
Dateline: EDISON  
Body


THEY wrote many of today's computer codes, set up networks spanning millions of miles, designed and built Web sites and databases. The role of Indian immigrants in the development of the Internet has been likened to the contribution made by earlier waves of immigrants who built the nation's railroads and subway systems.
     Yet today -- as the ranks of dot-com companies continue to thin and businesses pare their payrolls and put off costly projects -- many of these workers are finding that the businesses that brought them to this country now consider them expendable. 
 "People come here with very high hopes and then all of a sudden they find that they don't have any options," said Ashok Dave (pronounced DAH-vey), a priest at the BAPS Swaminarayan Temple here who over the last few months has spoken to a growing number of Indian immigrants who are worried they will lose their jobs. "When they come here they are hopeful, and then, without their fault, they are forced to leave the job."
Interestingly, many of the thousands of Indians who came to this country and settled in this technology-rich state did so only after the federal government made it easier for them to come here. A new visa category, known as H-1B, was established by the Immigration Act of 1990 specifically to bring specialists in the high-tech industry and other fields to the United States. As recently as last year, President Clinton signed legislation raising to 195,000 the number of workers permitted to come to this country over a three-year period.
According to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, about 134,000 such workers came to the United States from May 1998 to July 1999 -- nearly 40 percent of whom were Indians who specialized in systems analysis and programming. Overall, Indians accounted for nearly half of the H-1B visas issued during this time.
But the new visa classification also required the immigrant workers to return home if they did not have a job. Although there are no firm numbers, business executives and consultants estimate that so far from 20,000 to 80,000 Indian workers have been forced to return home.
Given the air of uncertainty, it is not at all surprising that more and more anxious men are coming to the Hindu temple here to pray that the economy turns around soon, so they are not forced to return to India, where the hours are longer and the pay is lower.
The effect of the downturn has infested just about all aspects of their lives; talk about green cards and layoffs dominates conversation at parties. Many computer consultants say they spend their time at work browsing Web sites that have immigration advice and job listings. Some, nervous that their particular area of expertise will soon become obsolete, are scrambling to learn new programming languages and networking skills.
There few places where the threat of returning to India loom larger than in New Jersey, a popular destination for Indians with computer expertise. Indeed, the Immigrants Support Network, an advocacy group for these workers that numbers more than 20,000 nationally, has its second-largest state membership in New Jersey, which is behind only California.
To be sure, there are still companies willing to hire such workers, and some computer consultants who lose their jobs still manage to find work elsewhere. But the feelings of hope and optimism that prevailed only months ago seem like some distant dream in the current reality of layoffs and spending cuts.
"So many Indian nationals were getting into the mainstream U.S. work force and doing well; that was a trend until early this year," said Cyrus Mehta, who has been an immigration lawyer for 10 years and is chairman of the immigration law committee of the New York City Bar Association. "What I'm seeing is these very people are now getting laid off and benched. It's not a totally desperate situation, but it's clearly a whole new ballgame."
For instance, the situation has dominated the agenda of the Immigrants Support Network. What bothers members most is that their immigration fates are tied to the fortunes of the companies that brought them here. A company can sponsor a worker for up to six years on an H-1B visa, and can also sponsor the same workers for a green card. Workers who are laid off immediately become eligible for deportation if they cannot find another job in the high-tech industry. 
Until recently, if a worker waiting for his green card left the company that sponsored him, his application had to go through the entire system again, a process that could take years to complete. The law President Clinton signed last year allowed workers who were near the end of their green card process but moved to another company to maintain their place in the application stack rather than start all over. But many immigrants say this provision has been poorly publicized and is not widely observed.
"Someone should not be rejected for a green card because they changed the job," said Shailesh Gala, president of the Immigrants Support Network. "I.N.S. has not come out with any kind of guidelines or memo, so people are afraid of changing jobs because they don't want to jeopardize their green card."
The frustration with immigration policy overshadowed all other topics during a recent networking session organized by the Immigrants Support Network in a spare room at the Edison Public Library. Instead of discussing promotions and stock options, a frazzled group of 18 people spent much of the meeting denouncing rumored job cuts and stalled green card applications. 
"My company has been laying off workers," said one consultant waiting for his green card who requested that he be identified as Mr. Ramesh. "And basically, if I am laid off, then I don't know where I am."
Mr. Ramesh, 30, said he hated having his green card dependent on his employer's graces. He has been working here on an H-1B visa for three and a half years and has seen friends who were close to getting a green card lose their jobs -- and with that their hopes for becoming permanent residents. 
"It's all basically geared toward the employers," he said. "The employee has no power. You have no rights. It's pretty much slavery if you ask me."
For its part, the immigration service says it sympathizes with workers who are forced to leave the country abruptly, but maintains that the H-1B program was never intended to be a steppingstone to a green card. 
"The H-1B is something the employer submits, not the employee," said Bill Strassberger, a spokesman for the federal agency. "It's an employer-sponsored program; it's a type of nonimmigrant visa, and at the end of six years if they don't have an immigration visa pending they are expected to depart and go home. There is no guarantee, and there should be no expectation that a green card should result in the end."
Mr. Strassberger did add that the agency was "looking at the situation" and considering setting up a grace period for workers who had been laid off so they could look for other jobs.
But the agency has not changed its policy, under which its individual officials decide what happens to unemployed H-1B workers eligible for deportation. 
"The only thing we can offer at this time is to take a look at someone's application in the claim of extraordinary circumstances," said Mr. Strassberger. "These are judged on a case-by-case basis."
Linking a worker's immigration status to his employer offers protection to companies that spend money -- sometimes thousands of dollars -- to bring H-1B workers here from another country because it discourages workers from jumping to a competitor after they arrive.
In the current market, however, computer consultants who talk about having too many job offers are usually being sarcastic, and employers are not too concerned that their workers will be overwhelmed by generous job opportunities.
"All the money we spent on training people on the latest technology we would lose if they joined somewhere else,' said Venkat Venkataramanan, who has been working in the computer industry since 1985, most recently as a senior vice president of MindTree Consulting, a computer consulting company with offices in Somerset. "Now, with the downturn in the economy, the problem went away because there is no demand for these guys. They're not getting offers from competitors like they used to."
MindTree employs about 50 people in New Jersey, of which about two-thirds are H-1B workers. So far, the company -- which has H-1B workers with very specialized skills -- has not had to lay off anyone.
"It takes humongous human effort to do anything substantial on the Internet," said Mr. Venkataramanan. "We may not be good on the creative side, but once you go past the interface we're very good at it. We're true engineers."
He said that workers with more common skills were most at risk. For example, many who specialize in Java, a widely used programming language used to design Web pages and other Internet applications, had once been able pick and choose among companies and projects. Now, however, they are having trouble finding work.
"Every Tom, Dick and Harry that could spell Java could get a job, but not anymore," he said.
Indeed, executives said that Java had become the equivalent of a four-letter word among computer consultants. A current joke in the community is that "B2B" -- business to business -- now stands for "Back to Bangalore," a city in India from which many of them have come from.
Many of the programmers, who were recruited to the United States to help combat the threat posed by the Y2K bug, helped create a glut of computer consultants. 
"For the Y2K the U.S. was short of programmers, and that's the time I believe a lot of Indians helped American companies through the tough time," said Srini Venkat, 29, a programmer in Hackensack who has lived here for four years on the H-1B. "I know a lot of people who worked 12 hours a day, 16 hours a day to make sure things are in place. Those were the times we really helped the economy, in crunch time. Most people, what they want now here is to settle down, to have a life."
But those times are over, and now many of these immigrants are trying to learn new programming and technical skills. Yet they say the specialized nature of the computer industry makes it hard for them to upgrade themselves.
"The computer market is a very, very, very fluctuating market," said Venkat Parmeshwaran, 45, a computer consultant -- also here on an H-1B visa -- who has set up software for several companies. "It's very difficult for me to jump into programming or into e-commerce. They're all totally different. The expertise required for one kind of computer job can be completely different from another."
Even companies that are doing well have less of a need for technical workers. Moreover, as those companies expand, consulting firms say they are trying to recruit potential employees with business and people skills, which H-1B workers tend to lack because of the cultural differences.
"It's important to have higher level guys with technical know-how that can also speak to customers," said Paul D'Souza, director of marketing and alliances for Exinom Technologies, a computer consulting company with offices in Iselin. "That's not a commodity you can get from India."
Mr. D'Souza added: "We tend to not bring anyone from India like we used to in the past. Someone who floats off the boat with an I.I.T. degree from Madras has absolutely no value to us."
And those who are already here -- particularly those holding H-1B visas -- are of little more value. One computer consultant from Edison who worked with Java and database programs before losing his job said that the interview process was much more rigorous now than when he came here three and a half years ago. Indeed, many job listings specifically ask for green card holders and American citizens only. 
The Edison resident, who requested anonymity so as not to jeopardize his job prospects, said that he hoped to get another position because he now had experience working in the United States.
Those who had worked here for just a year or two, he said, were having the most trouble finding another job. "People are very choosy these days," he said. "They go for more experience. Right now, we don't have jobs in the market."
By the same token, H-1B visa holders who still hold jobs say they have very little work to do in this time of cost-cutting. Many of them work for consulting companies, called "body shops," that farm them out to work on short-term projects for corporations. But today many of those corporations have decided to postpone or cancel plans to set up databases or telecommunications networks, leaving many consultants without any work, or in their parlance, "on the bench."
Shobhit Rastogi, 27, has been on the bench for more than a month, ever since Lucent decided to cancel a wireless networking project that he had been working on. Since then, he has spent much of his time at work brooding over his future. 
"I know a whole lot of friends who were working on different contracts, and when they didn't have a project the companies told them to go back to India," Mr. Rastogi said. "Those sort of things make everyone nervous."
He said that those forced to return to India could look forward to a job market just as harsh as the one here. "They don't have jobs in India either," he said.
Mr. Rastogi is clinging to the hope that things will improve, though he is skeptical. For now, he has moved out of his town house in Piscataway and is living with an uncle in Philadelphia because he does not want to sign a long-term lease.
"There's no point of putting up a one-year lease, which I might need to break after 10 days," he said.
While the possibility of having to return to India looms over their lives, many Indians who have been here for years continue to settle down and assert their right to stay. They are buying houses, bundling up for New Jersey winters, learning to drive. These H-1B visa holders plan to rear their families in the United States, not in India.
A group of four such computer consultants talked heatedly about the Immigration and Naturalization Service recently over soft drinks at an Applebee's in the Woodbridge Mall, a popular weekend spot for the growing Indian community.
All four of them complained that as H-1B workers, they had to pay Social Security and unemployment taxes that they will never get to benefit from if forced to leave. And they said they resented the fact that companies were dismissing them just when they were starting to think of this country as their home.
"They lobbied for it, and now they are the first to lay off these people," said Amar Veda, 37, who has been here for five years. "I believe I have a right to stay here. I made my employers rich, paid $200,000 in taxes, $40,000 to $50,000 in Social Security."
He put it this way: "If you are like us, you have a car, a house, you have to pay your mortgage. Are we gypsies?"

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Shobhit Rastogi, idled since Lucent canceled a networking project on which he was working, says those forced to return to India could look forward to a job market just as harsh as the one here. (Nancy Wegard for The New York Times)(pg. 1); "People come here with very high hopes and then all of a sudden they find that they don't have any options," said Ashok Dave, priest at the Swaminaryan Temple in Edison, above, who says immigrants often speak to him of their fear they will lose their high-tech jobs. Shailesh Gala, left, stands at a meeting of the Immigrants Support Network in Edison. Scene in Iselin, a center of Indian culture in the state, above left. (Jill C. Becker for The New York Times); (Photographs by Nancy Wegard for The New York Times)(pg. 7) 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LAYOFFS (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (68%); EXECUTIVES (64%); COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  LABOR (%);  FOREIGN LABOR (%);  INDIAN-AMERICANS (%);  LAYOFFS AND JOB REDUCTIONS (%);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES  (%)

Industry: COMPUTER NETWORKS (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%); WEB DEVELOPMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); CONSULTING SERVICES (75%)

Person: RAGHUNATHAN, ABHI 

Geographic: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (79%); NEW JERSEY

Load-Date: July 15, 2001


End of Document
Immigration Is Litmus Test in G.O.P. Race
The New York Times
November 13, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1330 words
Byline: By MAGGIE HABERMAN and MATT FLEGENHEIMER; Jonathan Martin contributed reporting.
Body


A long-simmering debate over immigration in the Republican presidential contest boiled over on Thursday, as Senator Ted Cruz accused his colleague, Senator Marco Rubio, of ''trying to jam this amnesty down the American people's throats.''
From appearances on conservative talk radio to the campaign trail in South Carolina and New Hampshire, five Republican candidates jumped on the issue as they sought to appeal to grass-roots conservatives alarmed about immigration. And the eruption of open warfare between Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz, two candidates representing different wings of the party, showed the likely contours of the Republican presidential fight as it hurtles toward the Iowa caucuses in less than 90 days. 
  Immigration is a key vulnerability for Mr. Rubio, who was initially part of an effort in 2013 to formulate a bipartisan bill in the Senate to overhaul the immigration system. His subsequent moves to distance himself from his role in fashioning the bill have left some conservatives distrustful of his candidacy.
  Mr. Cruz, in an appearance with the conservative radio host Laura Ingraham, denounced Mr. Rubio without using his name and by using a biblical allusion, saying: ''You know where someone is based on their actions. As the Scripture says, you shall know them based on their fruits.''
  The flare-up came as three other lower-polling candidates -- Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky; Rick Santorum, a former Pennsylvania senator; and Carly Fiorina, a former chief executive of Hewlett-Packard -- joined the fight, piling on Mr. Rubio or Mr. Cruz as insufficiently pure on a key litmus test for segments of the Republican base.
  The long-distance skirmishing illustrated the degree to which several candidates see immigration, which emerged as a key issue in the 2014 midterm elections, as the most potent weapon in their arsenal in a presidential contest that has been characterized by concerns about the direction of the country.
  Yet, because of his work on the 2013 immigration reform effort, Mr. Rubio is more familiar with the nuances of the immigration debate than some of his rivals. When asked about Mr. Cruz's critique while campaigning Thursday in South Carolina, Mr. Rubio sought to turn the tables, highlighting the Texas senator's support of allowing more visas to bring foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills into the country.
  ''He supported a massive expansion of the H-1B program, a 500 percent increase,'' he said. ''So, if you look at it, I don't think our positions are dramatically different. I do believe that we have to deal with immigration reform in a serious way, and it begins by proving to people that illegal immigration is under control.''
  During his campaign, Mr. Rubio has said that immigration reform can be addressed only after the border is first secured. He is not in favor of deporting illegal immigrants en masse, as proposed by Donald J. Trump, who leads most polls for the nomination.
  The topic of immigration, and the candidates' efforts to appeal to conservatives on the issue, are taking on new urgency in a race in which Mr. Trump has used caustic language about immigrants and has also called for a ''beautiful'' border wall to keep Mexican immigrants from illegally entering the country.
  Indeed, the strident language on immigration percolated Thursday to the lower rungs of the Republican field, with Mrs. Fiorina and Mr. Paul echoing Mr. Cruz's comments.
  ''I think Marco Rubio's tax credit plan will extend more tax credits to illegal aliens,'' Mr. Paul said. ''There's no way in the world we should support this.''
  Mrs. Fiorina suggested that Mr. Rubio's recent comments against illegal immigration showed how he was a conventional politician shifting to fit the mood of the party.
  In New Hampshire on Thursday morning, Mr. Cruz denounced what he called ''campaign conservatives'' and insisted he had been consistent on issues.
  And Mr. Cruz on Thursday found himself exposed to criticism on immigration from others beside Mr. Rubio: Mr. Santorum, a staunch conservative who was vocal during the culture wars of the 1990s and who won the Iowa caucuses in 2012, sought to paint the Texas senator as inconsistent.
  ''Cruz tough on immigration? Not so fast!'' read a release from Mr. Santorum's campaign, citing the same issue -- guest-worker visas -- that Mr. Rubio did. In an interview, Mr. Santorum pointed to Mr. Cruz's support in 2013 for an amendment to the immigration bill that Mr. Rubio worked on, which would have eliminated a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, but would have granted them legal status to remain in the country.
  Most Republicans ''would say in either case, it's amnesty,'' Mr. Santorum said.
  And in a signal of how hard he intends to fight back, Mr. Rubio's aides posted on Twitter and emailed supporters about a video clip of Mr. Cruz discussing that amendment. Mr. Cruz has since changed his stand on increasing the number of H-1B visas, saying the program needs to be reformed to guard against abuses.
  Illegal immigration has been an animating issue among a segment of the Republican voters for years. But that has particularly been the case in this year's contest, as the party's base is increasingly dominated by older, whiter, working-class voters who have seen their political clout and numbers dwindle in recent years.
  The immigration issue flared briefly during the Republican debate on Tuesday night in Milwaukee, with Jeb Bush, the former governor of Florida, and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio saying there was no way to conduct the types of mass deportations that Mr. Trump has called for.
  Just after they addressed the issue, the Fox Business Network moderators turned to Mr. Rubio, but instead of pressing him on the issue, they turned to a new topic, sparing him difficult questions in front of a nationally televised audience. But Mr. Cruz seized on the issue when the questions turned to him that night, criticizing those who support ''amnesty,'' and opening up a new front that was followed by directly targeting Mr. Rubio on Thursday.
  Many establishment Republicans and donors support an immigration overhaul and legislation that allows a pathway to citizenship. They are a group to whom Mr. Rubio has appealed in part by arguing that the party has to change the way it speaks to Hispanic voters. And they have been vocal in their fears that the party will be hindered in the general election among Hispanic voters after a nominating contest in which the word ''amnesty'' is frequently used.
  But Mr. Rubio's own language has at times grown harsher; on Thursday, in an interview with the Fox News Channel, Mr. Rubio sounded a note of law and order.
  ''We are going to have to deport some people; otherwise, if you're not going to enforce the law, what's the point of having those laws?'' Mr. Rubio said. ''Criminals are going to be deported. People who haven't been here very long are going to be deported. People overstaying visas are going to have to be deported. That's how you enforce immigration laws.''
  Javier Palomarez, the president of the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, suggested in an interview that what Mr. Rubio was describing would still involve deporting nearly six million people. ''We have to be careful with our words,'' he said. But he declined to criticize Mr. Rubio, saying he wants the chance to speak with him first.
  But for immigration hard-liners, Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz fall short of their expectations.
  ''They still want to talk about this issue in a way that will get a visceral reaction from primary voters but still won't alienate their fund-raisers,'' said Mark Krikorian, the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies. ''At some point, they're going to have to choose between the voters and the billionaires.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/13/us/politics/immigration-fight-boils-over-as-ted-cruz-and-marco-rubio-battle.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); CONSERVATISM (90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CAUCUSES (78%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (73%); RELIGION (66%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (62%); EXECUTIVES (50%)

Company:  HEWLETT-PACKARD CO (54%)

Ticker: HPQ (NYSE) (54%)

Industry: NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (54%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%)

Person: CARLY FIORINA (79%); MARCO RUBIO (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); RAND PAUL (58%); RICK SANTORUM (58%)

Geographic: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); IOWA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: November 13, 2015


End of Document
Interstate Competition for Teachers From Abroad 
 The New York Times
July 18, 2001 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Education Page; Pg. 9
Length: 1071 words
Byline:  By ABBY GOODNOUGH 
Body


New York City did not realize just how hot the market for foreign teachers had become until Schools Chancellor Harold O. Levy sent recruiters to Madrid in the spring. There, the astonished New Yorkers ran into school officials from Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts and Washington -- all eager to lure teachers to the United States from Spain.
     More evidence of stiff competition emerged early this month, when city recruiters learned that Florida was offering enticements to mathematics and science teachers from Austria. New York has hired more than 100 Austrian teachers since 1998, and so far, the Austrian government has rejected attempts by other school systems to recruit its teachers. 
 But Alfred Posamentier, a City College professor who has helped the Board of Education's recruiting effort in Austria, said that Austrian officials had alerted him about a recent visit by Florida recruiters. In an e-mail message, one official reported that Florida was dangling incentives like mentors for each Austrian recruit.
"I wasn't surprised," Dr. Posamentier said, "because Florida had been calling me incessantly, asking, 'Can we have your leftovers? Can we take some of your people?' "
Three years after New York City made international headlines by recruiting a small number of Austrian teachers to help fill shortages in math and science departments, most of the nation's other large school systems are searching abroad for teachers who can at least temporarily fill a growing number of classroom vacancies. Atlanta, Chicago, Houston and Los Angeles have all stepped up foreign recruiting this year, as have Maryland, Massachusetts and a number of other states, creating competition for sources that New York had hoped to tap. Most of the foreign teachers will work in math, science, special education and bilingual education, according to recruiters for various school systems.
But despite the intense competition, New York remains far ahead of the pack. The Board of Education plans to hire more than 800 teachers from about a dozen countries for September, up from just 53 from Austria and Germany in the 2000-2001 school year. Board officials said that the recruits, many of whom have already accepted job offers, were from Austria, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Spain, Canada and several Caribbean countries.
Most will teach in the roughly 100 city schools that the state has identified as failing, because those schools have chronic vacancies.
Mr. Levy, who with the foreign instructors has already hired 4,700 teachers for this fall and still needs to find 3,300 more, said that the foreign teachers were not an ideal solution to the shortage. But he said that until the city negotiated a new contract for teachers that included substantial raises, it would not be able to find enough homegrown recruits.
"These are useful and hopefully successful sources of additional teachers, but very much on the margin," Mr. Levy said in an interview yesterday. "None of this is a substitute for growing our own."
The chancellor said he had expanded the board's international recruitment efforts because he and other education officials were impressed with the Austrians who have taught in city high schools over the last three years. The number of Austrian and German teachers will grow to about 90 this fall, up from 53 in the 2000-2001 school year, Dr. Posamentier said.
Joyce Coppin, the head of teacher recruitment for the Board of Education, said that the board had also hired about 150 Canadians from Toronto and Vancouver, many of whom would teach math and science. Every foreign teacher hired by the board must have a degree in the subject he or she teaches, a state requirement that makes it difficult to find qualified math and science teachers, Ms. Coppin said.
For the first time, the board also recruited in Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago, where they hired about 550 teachers, Ms. Coppin said. Most of those recruits will teach elementary and middle school in central Brooklyn, the South Bronx and southern Queens, which have growing Caribbean populations.
The ill-fated trip to Spain netted only about 20 teachers, most of whom will teach bilingual education at elementary schools in the Bronx, board officials said. The board also hired about 40 teachers from Italy during a visit there last week, the officials said.
"We picked the countries very carefully," Ms. Coppin said. "We didn't want to spread ourselves all over."
Basically, the board focused on countries whose teachers could meet particular needs in New York City schools: math, science and bilingual education in particular. The board was also eager to hire Caribbean teachers because of the city's fast-growing Caribbean student population.
Most of the new recruits are coming on what is known as a J-1 visa, under which they can stay up to three years under a special classification of "research scholars." Like the Austrians who have been coming since 1998, they will get some training at the City University of New York and at the board's Center for Recruitment and Induction.
The Canadian teachers will come on H-1B visas, which are generally given to foreigners coming to work for a specific employer and are good for three years, with the possibility of a three-year renewal. The Canadians can stay longer because that country's teacher education programs "replicate ours almost exactly," said Charles Mackey, executive coordinator of the state's Office of Teaching. Mr. Mackey said that the State Education Department had two experts in "comparative education," who determine whether teachers from other countries are qualified to teach in New York.
The foreign teachers will start arriving in New York in early August e board is already planning for 2002-2003: Mr. Levy has put out requests for proposals from immigration lawyers and from companies that specialize in recruitment of foreign teachers -- a small but growing business.
The president of one such company, Teachers Placement Group in Plainview, on Long Island, said this week that he hoped to help New York hire teachers from India. The president, Michael Vanjani, said his company had already placed Indian teachers in Cleveland, Baltimore, Philadelphia and Newark, charging the school districts a fee for each recruit.
"We have been talking to New York for the past year and a half and we hope to have some positive results soon," Mr. Vanjani said. "We want to handle New York."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Chart: "Teachers Wanted"The number of teachers recruited from foreign countries is expected to increase next year in some of the nation's largest school disctricts. Chart tracks teachers recruited from foreign countries and projected recruitment of teachers.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TEACHING & TEACHERS (92%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (90%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (90%); TEACHER RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (89%); FOREIGN LANGUAGE EDUCATION (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); MATHEMATICS (78%); MENTORS & ROLE MODELS (78%); URBAN SCHOOLS (78%); BILINGUAL EDUCATION (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (73%); MULTILINGUALISM (73%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (73%); ACADEMIC YEAR (71%); EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS (%);  TEACHERS AND SCHOOL EMPLOYEES (%);  SHORTAGES (%);  MATHEMATICS (%);  SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (%);  SPECIAL EDUCATION (HANDICAPPED) (%);  BILINGUAL EDUCATION  (%)

Industry: EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); URBAN SCHOOLS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%)

Person: GOODNOUGH, ABBY 

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (72%); NEW YORK, USA (96%); MARYLAND, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%); AUSTRIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); SPAIN (91%); GERMANY (88%); CANADA (79%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%); NEW YORK CITY;  AUSTRIA

Load-Date: July 18, 2001


End of Document
Sharpening His Attacks on Rubio, Cruz Urges New Immigration Limits
The New York Times
November 14, 2015 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 855 words
Byline: By MATT FLEGENHEIMER
Body


ORLANDO, Fla. --  Escalating a confrontation with Senator Marco Rubio of Florida over immigration policy, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, one of his rivals for the Republican presidential nomination, introduced proposals on Friday outlining his own approach, calling for a halt to increases in legal immigration ''so long as American unemployment remains unacceptably high.''
Mr. Cruz did not detail any plans to handle the cases of the roughly 11 million people in the country illegally. But he heightened an attack on Mr. Rubio's past efforts to forge a bill in the Senate to overhaul the immigration system, repeatedly assailing those who support ''amnesty'' for undocumented immigrants by suggesting, among other things, that the approach would help Democrats at the ballot box. 
  ''If you're supporting amnesty, you're supporting the Obama-Clinton weakness and appeasement to radical Islamic terrorism,'' Mr. Cruz told an often raucous crowd at a large church rally here. ''If you are supporting amnesty, you're supporting the Ayatollah Khamenei having nuclear weapons in Iran.''
  Mr. Rubio has countered Mr. Cruz's criticisms by arguing that their immigration positions are now essentially the same, noting Mr. Cruz's past support for a large increase in visas issued to bring foreign professionals with college degrees and special skills into the country.
  Mr. Cruz has recently backed off that position, and on Friday, his divorce from it seemed complete. He said the issuance of such visas, known as H-1B visas, should be suspended for 180 days to conduct an audit of allegations of abuse. The program has been criticized for displacing American workers in favor of cheaper foreign labor.
  ''As it was designed, it was a program that I have supported, and if it operated that way, I would continue to support it,'' he said.
  In recent days, Mr. Cruz has reminded voters that Mr. Rubio was one of the ''Gang of Eight'' senators from both parties who supported the immigration overhaul, which included a path to citizenship but was never enacted. He accused the Florida senator of ''trying to jam this amnesty down the American people's throats.''
  When Mr. Cruz began discussing the bill on Friday, condemning the work of Democrats like President Obama and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, members of the crowd started shouting Mr. Rubio's name.
  ''And maybe a Republican or two,'' Mr. Cruz said coyly, ''joined together to try to push through a massive amnesty plan.''
  Mr. Rubio has said that Mr. Cruz was also ''a supporter of legalizing people that are in this country illegally'' by pointing to an amendment Mr. Cruz proposed to the Gang of Eight bill. The amendment would have eliminated a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants while maintaining a provision allowing them to gain legal status to remain in the country. (Some observers believed Mr. Cruz proposed the provision to undermine support for the bill.)
  On Friday, after giving remarks at a Republican summit here attended by several candidates, Mr. Rubio said he was ''puzzled and quite frankly surprised by Ted's attacks.''
  ''He is a supporter of legalizing people that are in this country illegally,'' Mr. Rubio said. ''If he changed that position, then he certainly has a right to change his position on that issue, but he should be clear about it.''
  Speaking to reporters after his speech at the church, Mr. Cruz said he could ''understand why some people might want to blur the history and confuse where people stood.''
  ''I introduced an amendment to eliminate citizenship,'' he said. ''It is an amazing attempt at misdirection to suggest that the person helping lead the fight to defeat the Gang of Eight somehow supported the Gang of Eight.'' 
  The immigration debate, long simmering in the Republican primary, has dominated the campaign in recent days. Beyond the policy implications, the discussion reflects divergent electoral strategies in the party. While some establishment Republicans fret that any caustic language on immigration could lessen a nominee's odds in November, Mr. Cruz has argued that selecting a far-right candidate will inspire more of the party's base to vote.
  The debate also reflects the outsize role that another candidate, Donald J. Trump, has played in driving the issue.
  In his remarks, Mr. Cruz surmised that the national conversation surrounding immigration would be far different if immigrants were competing with bankers and lawyers for jobs.
  ''Then we'd build a wall,'' he said. Mr. Cruz then added a Trumpian adjective at the urging of a shouting audience member. ''And it would be huge.''
  Speaking at the summit, which was hosted by the state's Republican Party, Mr. Trump took full credit for bringing the immigration conversation to the fore.
  ''I watched Ted Cruz and I watched Marco Rubio,'' he said. ''They're fighting over who's tougher. Well, let me tell you something. I was tougher when it wasn't very politically popular to be tough.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/14/us/politics/sharpening-attacks-on-marco-rubio-ted-cruz-urges-new-immigration-limits.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Above, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas at the Sunshine Summit, a Republican gathering in Orlando, Fla., on Friday. Below, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida spoke at the meeting and afterward said he was ''puzzled and quite frankly surprised by Ted's attacks.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); AMNESTY (89%); CITIZENSHIP (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); ABUSE & NEGLECT (78%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); VOTERS & VOTING (77%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (76%); TERRORISM (73%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (71%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (69%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%); RELIGION (68%); WEAPONS & ARMS (68%); MILITARY WEAPONS (52%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (52%)

Person: MARCO RUBIO (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); ALI KHAMENEI (52%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: November 14, 2015


End of Document
A NATION CHALLENGED: THE TRADING FIRM; After Havoc, Reviving a Legacy
 The New York Times
September 29, 2001 Saturday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1459 words
Byline:  By RIVA D. ATLAS with GERALDINE FABRIKANT 
Body


Frederick Moulton Alger III is not a man easily given to sentiment. He gave up his American citizenship six years ago in a calculated attempt to preserve his fortune, built during a 40-year career in the money management business. He turned over day-to-day management of his firm, Fred Alger Management, to his brother, David, who had worked by his side since 1971.
     But on Sept. 11, David, 57, the chief executive, was lost in the World Trade Center attack, as were 24 of the firm's 32 fund managers and research analysts. That is forcing Mr. Alger to relocate from his self-imposed tax exile in Switzerland to resume direct control of the firm, which manages $15 billion. Once again, he was drawn not so much by sentiment as by the conviction that there was no other way to make sure that the fortune he built is preserved for future generations of his family. 
 While Mr. Alger turned teary-eyed when describing how he watched on television as the World Trade Center burned and collapsed, he showed calm resolve, even hubris, in describing how he and his firm will go on after losing so many of the firm's best and brightest employees.
"Everything David knew he learned from me, which he would freely admit," Mr. Alger said in an interview last week at the firm's disaster recovery center in Morristown, N.J. He left no doubt that as far as he was concerned, Fred Alger Management will come back because Fred Alger himself has come back.
"One advantage to having your name on the door," he said, "is you are Louis XIV."
But leaders -- even absolute monarchs -- need people to follow orders. One of Mr. Alger's most urgent tasks is to rebuild his devastated staff, which was among those hit hardest in terms of percentage of employees lost. And, like other fund managers, he must also quickly reassure clients that he can help them recover from the worst quarter for the American stock market since the end of 1987.
To address the staff issue, Mr. Alger is personally recruiting new talent, and has named a new chief investment officer and second-in-command. Hiring has been made easier by recent layoffs on Wall Street caused by the faltering economy, but that same slump has hit the speculative growth stocks that are the firm's specialty.
Mr. Alger noted that he had never retired completely from the firm and had continued to make strategic decisions even while his brother handled the day-to-day investment management.
"At 66, I am healthy, active, and still motivated and fascinated by the marketplace," he wrote in a letter to clients on Tuesday. "You should know that my personal assets are managed by this firm and will continue to be managed by this firm. So I have much at stake as well."
Still, Mr. Alger's transition back to the role of chief executive could be complicated by the fact that he currently lives outside the United States for as much as six months of the year, to avoid forcing his heirs to have to sell the company to pay estate taxes upon his death.
Mr. Alger insists his foreign residence will not be a problem. He is applying for a special work-related visa, known as an H-1B, that he said would let him stay in the country for as long as six years.
But the terrorist attack could make those visas harder to get, said Michael J. Wildes, an immigration lawyer. "Our government may look into his case with greater scrutiny," he said.
If Mr. Alger cannot stay in the United States for an extended period, he will run the business from his home in Geneva, an Alger executive said.
Indeed, Mr. Alger casts his absence from Wall Street as an asset.
"In an interesting way, I come back to this fresh," he said. "I haven't been beaten up by the stock market over the last 18 months."
Mr. Alger is determined to rebuild his firm because, like many proud Wall Street entrepreneurs, he views it as his legacy.
He said he was inspired to enter business when his mother told him in the early 1950's that the family fortune, which dates back to a great-grandfather in the lumber business in Michigan, would essentially die with her and Mr. Alger's father.
"It was at that moment that I decided to rebuild the family fortune," he said.
Mr. Alger's father served as United States ambassador to Belgium but "had no business training whatsoever," Mr. Alger said.
"He knew how to ride a horse and that was it," he added.
Mr. Alger wants a more tangible legacy. He and his three daughters control 80 percent of the firm, while his brother -- who is survived by his wife and two daughters -- held the other 20 percent.
Mr. Alger built his personal reputation -- and a valuable brand name -- with his early focus on growth-stock investing. That will help him to rebuild the firm, which employed 235 people before the attack.
His career dates from the 1960's, when -- like the late 1990's -- investing in fast-growing new-technology companies was very lucrative.
In his self-published biography, he said that in 1965 an equity growth fund he managed rose 78 percent -- seven times the gain in the Dow Jones industrial average. (In 1990, he was criticized by the Securities and Exchange Commission for implying that his firm had operated the fund, when he was actually an outside adviser to the fund's manager. He settled the case without admitting or denying the charge.)
David Alger joined the firm in 1971, and oversaw the management of the firm's 17 mutual funds. One of them, Spectra, was the ninth-best- performing fund in the 1990's, according to Morningstar, a Chicago company that ranks mutual funds. The fund had a 29 percent average annual return in that decade.
Like many other fund-management firms, Alger has found the current decade more difficult. Even before the World Trade Center tragedy, Alger's performance was under pressure. As of Thursday, most Alger funds had fallen in value by more than 20 percent this year, according to Morningstar. Investors can take some small comfort from the fact that most of the Alger funds are doing better than a majority of other growth funds.
Still, the loss of talented personnel prompted at least one client to pull its account shortly after the terrorist attack. The Commonfund, which manages $30 billion on behalf of college endowments and foundations, decided two days after the attack to shift the $70 million it had invested with Alger.
"It was a phenomenally painful decision for us to make," said the Commonfund's chief investment officer, Todd Petzel, on a conference call with his clients last week. "But we felt it was the right step to take, and I would do it again today."
Executives at Alger insist that the Commonfund is an exception. Clients have redeemed less than 2 percent of the firm's mutual fund assets since the attack, they said.
To try to calm investors, Mr. Alger announced his new role as chief executive and promoted his son-in-law, Daniel Chung, to chief investment officer on the day after the attack. The next day, he was host to a conference call for 300 clients. He has since held separate meetings or conference calls with several of the big mutual fund distributors, including Fidelity, Charles Schwab and Merrill Lynch.
Four former employees have rejoined to help out, including David Hyun, a former portfolio manager at Alger who left in June 2000 to join OppenheimerFunds. He will now run three mutual funds formerly managed by David Alger. Mr. Hyun said he came back at the urging of Mr. Alger himself, who contacted him the Friday after the terrorist attack.
Fred Alger was at his home in East Hampton, N.Y., preparing to return to Switzerland after a summer at the beach, when the planes hit the World Trade Center.
"I didn't have a tremendous sense of alarm until the second plane hit," he said. After that, like the rest of the country, "we were frozen to the television set."
At some point, Mr. Alger said, he called his brother's wife, Josephine, to comfort her. "I said to Josie, 'David is probably gathering the troops to walk uptown,' " he recalled. "I said, 'Go out and get a lot of bread and make some sandwiches,' " since when the group arrived they would undoubtedly be hungry.
As he told this story, Mr. Alger's calm demeanor dissolved and tears came to his eyes.
While Mr. Alger is determined to do what it takes to keep his business going -- he has already arranged for new permanent offices on Fifth Avenue at 18th Street in Manhattan -- he said that he has had no second thoughts about giving up his United States citizenship, even with patriotic fervor so strong.
"I was in the Marines," he said, noting that although he is a citizen of St. Kitts, a Caribbean nation 1,300 miles southeast of Miami, he still pays income taxes in the United States. But his concern for preserving his fortune is paramount.
"I will continue to take steps to avoid estate taxes," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Fred Alger, left, and his brother, David, who was lost in the World Trade Center attack, pictured on a book jacket. Below, Fred is managing the firm again.; Fred Alger (Top, Fred Alger Management; bottom, Emile Wamsteker for The New York Times)(pg. C1) Chart: "Track Record"Year-to-year performance of Alger Capital Appreciation B, one of Fred Alger Management's largest growth funds. Graph tracks growth fund from 1994-2001(Year-to-date)(Source: Morningstar Inc.)(pg. C3)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT (89%); LAYOFFS (89%); MUTUAL FUNDS (89%); INTERVIEWS (78%); INVESTMENT SERVICES (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); STOCK EXCHANGES (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); EXECUTIVE MOVES (76%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (73%); DISASTER & EMERGENCY AGENCIES (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (72%); APPOINTMENTS (71%); ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (67%); STOCKS AND BONDS (%);  AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES (%);  HIJACKING (%);  WORLD TRADE CENTER (NYC) (%);  MISSING PERSONS (%);  TERRORISM (%);  TERRORISM (%);  MUTUAL FUNDS  (%)

Company:  FRED ALGER MANAGEMENT INC (58%)

Organization: ;ALGER, FRED, MANAGEMENT INC 

Industry: NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT (89%); MUTUAL FUNDS (89%); INVESTMENT SERVICES (78%); STOCK EXCHANGES (78%)

Person: ATLAS, RIVA D; FABRIKANT, GERALDINE; ALGER, FRED; ALGER, DAVID 

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); SWITZERLAND (76%); NEW YORK CITY

Load-Date: September 29, 2001


End of Document
Fact-Checking Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio on Immigration
The New York Times
December 17, 2015 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 
Length: 597 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The two Hispanic senators in the Republican presidential race -- Ted Cruz of Texas and Marco Rubio of Florida -- battled over immigration in the debate on Tuesday, competing to show who is tougher on border security. Mr. Rubio is vulnerable with conservatives on the divisive issue because of a bill he sponsored in 2013 that would have given people in the country illegally a pathway to citizenship.
After Tuesday's debate, readers asked us to look into whether the two candidates had accurately portrayed their own records on immigration: ''Cruz and Rubio exchanged conflicting claims on whether Cruz has or will ever support citizenship/amnesty for immigrants who are currently in the country illegally,'' Laurence Schiffman wrote in. ''Please clarify with a bit of historical perspective.'' 
  Mr. Rubio was trying to dim Mr. Cruz's luster with conservative voters, who have been gravitating toward Mr. Cruz in Iowa, by claiming that Mr. Cruz had also supported legalization for those immigrants. Directly challenged by Mr. Rubio, Mr. Cruz said twice, ''I have never supported legalization.''
  That's not quite right. During the debate in the Senate over the bill in 2013, Mr. Cruz introduced an amendment that would have given legal status, but no possibility of citizenship, to those here illegally. At the time Mr. Cruz said such immigrants would be ''out of the shadows'' and eligible eventually to become permanent residents, although not citizens.
  Recently Mr. Cruz, responding to Mr. Rubio, has said the amendment, which was not approved, was a ''poison pill'' designed to kill the entire bill.
  In the debate Mr. Rubio also said, in accusing tones, that Mr. Cruz had supported a 500 percent increase in H-1B visas, which allow American employers to temporarily hire foreign high-skilled professionals, and a doubling of the number of green cards. True. Mr. Cruz did support both measures in 2013, although recently he has called for a halt to any increases in legal immigration and last week he introduced a bill to tighten restrictions on H-1B visas.
  But Mr. Cruz's charge that Mr. Rubio was trying ''to muddy the waters'' also seems right. Mr. Rubio has also supported big increases in green cards, and in January he sponsored a bill to as much as triple the number of H-1B visas. Mr. Rubio, confusingly, was attacking Mr. Cruz for agreeing with him.
  Meanwhile, Mr. Cruz, as he pledged to ramp up deportations, presented figures on the enforcement records of past presidents that were misleading at best. He said President Obama was ''releasing criminal aliens,'' while President George W. Bush had deported more than 10 million immigrants and President Bill Clinton 12 million.
  Mr. Cruz seems to have lumped together deportations -- about 827,000 under Mr. Clinton and about 2 million under Mr. Bush, compared with at least 2.3 million so far under Mr. Obama -- with a figure for migrants who were returned, mainly to Mexico, without being formally deported. The number of those ''returns'' has plunged under Mr. Obama because, with enhanced border enforcement, illegal immigration from Mexico has dropped to 40-year lows.
  The bottom line: In this rivalry, Mr. Cruz has consistently taken a harder line against what he calls ''amnesty'' for people in the country illegally. Mr. Rubio has evolved. He renounced the 2013 bill, saying he concluded that immigration could not be fixed in one package. On Tuesday he said he still supported a pathway to citizenship, but one that would come after new border security and be at least 10 years long -- and likely much longer.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/17/us/politics/fact-checking-ted-cruz-and-marco-rubio-on-immigration.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); CITIZENSHIP (91%); FACT CHECKING (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); DEPORTATION (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CONSERVATISM (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (76%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); VOTERS & VOTING (73%); BORDER CONTROL (72%); AMNESTY (69%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%)

Person: TED CRUZ (92%); MARCO RUBIO (91%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); BILL CLINTON (58%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: December 17, 2015


End of Document
Business; As the Tech Economy Goes, So Go Special Visas
 The New York Times
June 16, 2002 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 728 words
Byline:  By RICK GREEN 
Body


ONE of the last remaining bubbles of the high-technology boom has burst.
     Applications by foreign workers for long-term H-1B work visas plunged by nearly half in the first six months of the government's fiscal year, according to new data from the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Perhaps more significant, approvals of the visas fell by more than one-third. The H-1B, granted to highly skilled foreigners to help fill jobs when no qualified Americans can be found, has been an important recruiting tool for technology companies. 
 The decline has not, however, quieted critics of the H-1B program, who say it was used during more prosperous times to displace American citizens with foreigners willing to work for less money. Now that companies are laying off workers, the critics contend, there is no reason to import labor. Congress, they say, should lower the ceiling on the number of H-1B visas granted. 
Supporters of the program say the quota should remain the same, because more imported workers will be needed when the economy heats up again.
The H-1B visas, which are work permits good for up to six years, are given to professionals with four-year degrees and specialized skills. They are coveted both by employers and would-be immigrants because the visas are ideally suited for long-term work projects and often serve as a first step toward permanent residence status.
H-1B's were in such short supply a few years ago that employers pressed Congress to raise the ceiling to 115,000 in 1999, from 65,000 the year before. It was raised again, to 195,000, in 2001. But the new cap is unlikely to be reached this year.
Halfway through this fiscal year, only 105,800 applications had been filed for visas covered by the cap, said the I.N.S., down 48 percent from the first six months of fiscal 2001. Approval was given to 44,900, down 38 percent.
"The H-1B numbers have finally caught up with the economy," said Mark D. Shevitz, director of marketing at VisaNow.com, an immigration processing service based in Chicago that tracks I.N.S. data.
In 2000 and 2001, the supply of H-1B visas was exhausted in a matter of months.
The government figures are not complete, focusing only on applicants who count against the annual cap. Not included are certain exempt workers with unique knowledge, such as scientists working at national research institutes. The comparisons were also skewed by a large number of extra applications in 2001 as employers hurried to beat an I.N.S. fee increase.
Nevertheless, it is clear to immigration experts that economic weakness has put a damper on demand for foreign workers. Business is down at many technology companies, which accounted for more than half of all H-1B employees in previous years.
Instead, companies are more likely to hire laid-off United States citizens. For foreigners, that means it is no longer good enough to be merely well-educated. 
"It definitely lessens the demand for the cookie-cutter H-1B," said Daryl R. Buffenstein, general counsel for the American Immigration Lawyers Association in Washington.
Economic weakness or not, said Theresa Cardinal Brown, director of immigration policy at the Chamber of Commerce in Washington, American universities are still not producing enough advanced mathematics and science graduates, so employers must look overseas.
Critics of the H-1B program are not so sure. "You can't convince me there's not a U.S. citizen available," said Representative Tom Tancredo, Republican of Colorado, who introduced a bill in November to roll back the H-1B ceiling to the 1998 level of 65,000. 
Mr. Tancredo and some labor advocates say employers are merely using the visas to import cheaper workers. He pointed to Qwest Communications, based in Denver, which he said had been hiring foreign workers in the last two years even as it was eliminating more than 10,000 jobs.
Chris Hardman, a Qwest spokesman, declined to say how many H-1B workers the company employed, or whether it was hiring new ones. "We hire the most qualified person for the position," he said, adding that Qwest is training American workers to reduce reliance on foreign specialists.
Mr. Tancredo conceded that his bill would probably never come to a vote, but said he hoped to create pressure that would prevent the program from expanding. The ceiling is scheduled to revert to 65,000 in 2004 unless Congress acts sooner.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Representative Tom Tancredo wants the number of H-1B visas rolled back to 1998 levels so that Americans can get jobs that have been going to foreign workers. (Associated Press) Chart: "Staying Home"Fewer foreigners are applying for special visas intended for highly skilled workers. Graph tracks H-1B visa applications received by the Immigration and Naturalization Service in fiscal years ended September from 2000 through first two quarters of 2002.(Source: VisaNow.com)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMPORT TRADE (89%); CITIZENSHIP (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); LABOR MARKET (78%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); WORKFORCE DEMAND (78%); LAYOFFS (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (73%); LICENSES & PERMITS (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%); COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES (%);  UNITED STATES ECONOMY (%);  VISAS (%);  FOREIGN LABOR (%);  LABOR  (%)

Organization: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE 

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (90%)

Person: GREEN, RICK 

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: June 16, 2002


End of Document
U.S. Uncertain of How Many Overstay Visas
The New York Times
January 2, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1282 words
Byline: By RON NIXON
Body


WASHINGTON --  The question from the congressman to the Obama administration official was straightforward enough: How many foreign visitors overstay their visas every year?
The reply was simple too, but not in a satisfying way. ''We don't know,'' the official said. 
  The testy exchange during a recent congressional hearing between Representative Mark Meadows, Republican of North Carolina, and Alan Bersin, the assistant secretary for international affairs at the Department of Homeland Security, highlights what some law enforcement officials call a critical weakness in the United States foreign visa program.
  The issue has taken on added urgency as part of a broader examination of immigration policy following the mass shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., that left 14 people dead and 22 wounded. Tashfeen Malik, one of the attackers, was granted entry to the United States under a K-1 visa, also known as a fiancé visa. Her husband, Syed Rizwan Farook, was an American-born citizen. Both died in a shootout with the police. While Ms. Malik did not overstay her visa, the attack added to fears that a terrorist could exploit gaps in the system.
  Nearly 20 years ago, Congress passed a law requiring the federal government to develop a system to track people who overstayed their visas. After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, an entry and exit tracking system was seen as a vital national security and counterterrorism tool, and the 9/11 Commission recommended that the Department of Homeland Security complete a system ''as soon as possible.'' Two of the Sept. 11 hijackers, Satam al-Suqami and Nawaf al-Hazmi, had overstayed their visas.
  Since then, the federal government has spent millions of dollars on the effort, yet officials can only roughly estimate the number of people in the United States illegally after overstaying visas.
  Officials blame a lack of technology to conduct more advanced collection of data like iris scans, resistance from the airline and tourism industries because of cost, and questions about the usefulness of tracking people exiting the country as a counterterrorism measure.
  Some experts also note that a sizable number of those who overstayed their visas are highly skilled workers who come under the H-1B program or are foreign students.
  One widely cited statistic, from a 1997 report by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, puts the number of people who overstay their visas at 40 percent -- which now would mean about 4.4 million of the estimated 11 million undocumented residents in the United States. Numerous lawmakers, including the Republican presidential candidates Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, have used that figure when trying to describe the scope of the problem. But even that number has never been conclusively substantiated.
  Federal agencies have not provided a new report to Congress on overstays since 1994, despite the congressional mandate.
  In early 2013, Janet Napolitano, then the secretary of Homeland Security, testified before Congress that the agency planned to issue a report on overstay rates by December 2013. The agency did not follow through because officials said they did not have confidence in the quality of the data. Mr. Bersin said last month that the report would be issued in the next six months.
  Many members of Congress and some law enforcement officials worry that terrorists could exploit the visa program because the United States does not routinely collect biometric information -- fingerprints, iris scans and photographs that can be used for facial recognition -- of people leaving the country. Nearly three dozen countries, including many in Europe, Asia and Africa, collect such information.
  ''U.S. airports and other entry and exit points were never designed with departure control in mind,'' said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of Immigration Policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center in Washington and a Department of Homeland Security official under President George W. Bush. ''If we want to do that it's going to mean building a lot more infrastructure.''
  The 9/11 Commission report called the establishment of an entry and exit biometric system ''fundamental to intercepting terrorists'' trying to enter the United States because it would allow law enforcement officials to determine if a traveler had overstayed a visa.
  Still, efforts to build such a system to collect the information have stalled for decades. In 2004, lawmakers passed legislation that required Homeland Security officials to accelerate efforts to create an automated biometric entry and exit data system. Congress repeated its demand for a biometric exit system in 2007 and set a deadline for 2009. But the deadline passed, with the department putting into place only a handful of pilot programs.
  Since then, the department has continued to struggle to meet this requirement. A 2013 report by the Government Accountability Office said the Department of Homeland Security had more than one million ''unmatched'' arrival records, meaning that those records could not be checked against other information showing that the individuals had left the country, but again the department could not offer a precise number.
  Despite the call by some lawmakers for an exit system, airports and the airline industry have balked because it would cost airlines $3 billion, according to a 2013 Homeland Security estimate. The department issued regulations in 2008 requiring airports to collect biometric exit information, but carriers have largely ignored the regulation, and there have been no sanctions.
  Some national security experts are not convinced that a biometric system would be an effective counterterrorism tool.
  ''A biometric exit system does little to help stop those who fail to register an exit -- i.e., overstay their visas,'' said David Inserra, a policy analyst on domestic security with the Heritage Foundation. ''The system merely tells officials that an overstay has occurred, not if it is a false positive, a national security risk, or just an honest mistake.''
  Mr. Inserra and other experts like Ms. Brown added that Homeland Security did not have the resources to enforce existing immigration laws, let alone pursue all those who overstay their visas. The best way to deal with terrorism threats, they say, is to give more resources to intelligence agencies.
  ''The biometric exit system is not going to solve all our problems,'' Ms. Brown said. ''All it will ever do is just generate a really expensive list if there aren't any additional resources allocated.''
  The experts say Homeland Security would be better off using biographical information, such as a traveler's name and date of birth, to track exits and collect overstay data. But other experts say names and identifications like passports and travel documents are hardly foolproof.
  Groups like the Islamic State have used fake passports and aliases to bypass border checkpoints and move from country to country, Janice Kephart, former counsel for the Senate Judiciary Committee and a staff member on the 9/11 Commission, said last year in congressional testimony. She provided lawmakers with Islamic State documents that encouraged supporters to get fake credentials.
  ''Having accurate data on who is coming and going -- not who is pretending to be coming and going -- is essential to curtailing the insidious and increasing direct threat that ISIS is loudly declaring at our homeland,'' said Ms. Kephart, who is now the chief executive of the Secure Identity and Biometrics Association, a trade group.
  Follow the New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/02/us/politics/us-doesnt-know-how-many-foreign-visitors-overstay-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Alan Bersin, assistant secretary for international affairs for Homeland Security, at a House hearing last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ZACH GIBSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A10)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); TOURISM EMPLOYMENT (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (75%); LEGISLATION (75%); MASS SHOOTINGS (74%); SHOOTINGS (74%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (73%); HIJACKING (73%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (71%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (69%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (69%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (56%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (50%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (83%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); TOURISM EMPLOYMENT (78%); TRAVEL & TOURISM REGULATION & POLICY (74%); TOURISM (50%)

Person: ALAN BERSIN (79%); JANET NAPOLITANO (79%); TED CRUZ (78%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); MARCO RUBIO (56%)

Geographic: SAN BERNARDINO, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: January 2, 2016


End of Document
Those H-1B Visas And Americans' Jobs 
 The New York Times
June 30, 2002 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 5; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 142 words
Body


To the Editor:
     "As the Tech Economy Goes, So Go Special Visas" (June 16) described the H-1B visa as intended for "highly skilled foreigners to help fill jobs when no qualified Americans can be found." 
 I am so sick and tired of the high-tech employers' whine that schools in the United States are still not turning out enough graduates in math and science. 
American employers don't use the ones that have graduated!
I have a friend with a master's degree in math; I have a bachelor's degree in math and almost a master's in computer science. Yet we've been out of work for over a year with scant opportunities.
Why should we import more H-1B's? Why should my smart college-age kids be interested in pursuing a "career" like their dad's, being a disposable wage slave facing forced early retirement without pension?

JAMES JORDAN
Colorado Springs, June 21


http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (90%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); EARLY RETIREMENT (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (76%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (76%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (73%); MATHEMATICS (73%); IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES (%);  LABOR (%);  COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  VISAS (%);  FOREIGN LABOR  (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (76%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (73%); PERSONAL FINANCE (67%)

Person: JORDAN, JAMES 

Geographic: UNITED STATES (91%)

Load-Date: June 30, 2002


End of Document
Up With Extremism
The New York Times
January 6, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 894 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Body


From its very inception, Donald Trump's campaign for president has been life imitating Twitter. His candidacy is built on Twitter bursts and insults that touch hot buttons, momentarily salve anxieties and put a fist through the face of political correctness, but without any credible programs for implementation.
Where Trump has been a true innovator is in his willingness to rhetorically combine positions from the isolationist right, the far right, the center right and the center left. If I were running for president, I'd approach politics in the same way: not as a liberal, a conservative, a libertarian or a centrist. 
  I'd run as an extremist.
  The agenda that could actually make America great again would combine the best ideas of the extreme left and the extreme right. This year is probably too soon for such a radical platform, but by 2020 -- after more extreme weather, after machines replace more middle-class jobs, after more mass shootings and after much more global disorder -- voters will realize that our stale left-right parties can't produce the needed answers for our postindustrial era. Accelerations in Moore's law, the market and climate change are transforming the workplace, the environment and nation-states, leaving people feeling insecure and unmoored.
  It's time for a true nonpartisan extremist, one whose platform combines the following:
  â–  A single-payer universal health care system. If it can work for Canada, Australia and Sweden and provide generally better health outcomes at lower prices, it can work for us, and get U.S. companies out of the health care business.
  â–  Expansion of the earned-income tax credit to top-up wages for low-income workers and introduction of a negative income tax to ensure a government-guaranteed income floor for every American. In an age when machines are gobbling low-skilled jobs, we'll need both.
  â–  Common Core education standards as the law of the land, to raise education benchmarks across the country, so high school graduates meet the higher skill levels that good jobs will increasingly demand. But those higher standards should be phased in with funding to enable every teacher to have the professional development time to learn the new curriculum those standards require and to buy the materials needed to teach it.
  â–  Controlling low-skilled immigration while removing all limits on H-1B visas for foreign high-skilled knowledge workers and doubling the research funding for our national labs and institutes of health to drive basic research. Nothing would spin off more new good jobs and industries than that combination.
  â–  New accelerated tax incentives and elimination of all regulatory barriers to rapidly scale up deployment of superfast bandwidth for both wire line and wireless networks to ensure that next-generation Internet services are developed in America. And borrowing $100 billion at today's super-low government interest rates to upgrade our ports, airports and grids and to create jobs.
  â–  Bans on the manufacture and sale of all semiautomatic and other military-style guns and government offers to buy back any rifle or pistol in circulation. It won't solve the problem, but Australia proved that such programs can help reduce gun deaths.
  â–  To pay for all this, a phased-in innovation and tax agenda that incentivizes start-ups and hiring. That means: Slash all corporate taxes, income taxes, personal deductions and corporate subsidies and replace them with a carbon tax, a value-added consumption tax (except on groceries and other necessities), a tax on bullets and a tax on all sugary drinks -- with offsets for the lowest-income earners.
  We need a tax system that shrinks what we don't want -- carbon, sugar and bullets -- and incentivizes what we need. If we slash corporate taxes, many more companies will want to locate here, and the ones domiciled here will have the incentive to bring home foreign profits and plow them into research and new business lines.
  â–  An independent commission appointed to review Dodd-Frank and Sarbanes-Oxley to determine which, if any, of their provisions are needlessly making it harder for entrepreneurs to raise capital or start businesses. We need to be sure we're preventing recklessness -- not risk-taking.
  â–  Copy Britain: Strictly limit national political campaign spending and the length of the campaign to a period of a few months. It makes it much harder for billionaires to buy candidates.
  â–  Increased military spending and ensuring that our intelligence services have all the legally monitored latitude they need to confront today's cyberenabled terrorists -- because if there's one more 9/11, many voters will be ready to throw out all civil liberties. And with the world cleaving into zones of ''order'' and ''disorder,'' we'll need to project more power to protect the former and stabilize the latter.
  In sum, our slow growth, inequality and national security challenges require radical solutions: strengthening safety nets, curbing the bad environmental and health behaviors that are bankrupting us and paying for it all by sharply incentivizing risk-taking, innovation, investment and hiring.
  That calls for a nonpartisan extremist for president who's ready to go far left and far right -- simultaneously. That's my 2020 vision, and in four years the country just might be ready for it.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/opinion/up-with-extremism.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FAR RIGHT POLITICS (90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); POLITICAL EXTREMISM (90%); POLITICS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%); TAX LAW (87%); GOVERNMENT RESEARCH FUNDING (86%); TAX BREAKS (86%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); FAR LEFT POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (78%); MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN MOVEMENT (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CENTRISM (77%); CONSERVATISM (77%); CLIMATOLOGY (73%); POLITICAL CORRECTNESS (73%); CORE CURRICULUM (72%); CURRICULA (72%); FOREIGN LABOR (72%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (72%); LIBERALISM (72%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (71%); TAXES & TAXATION (71%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (69%); HEALTH CARE REFORM (69%); NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE (69%); WEATHER (69%); INCOME TAX (68%); SEVERE WEATHER (68%); TAX INCENTIVES (68%); ACADEMIC STANDARDS (66%); ACADEMIC STANDARDS & TESTING (66%); PRICES (66%); SCIENCE FUNDING (64%); IMMIGRATION (63%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (63%); TAX CREDITS (63%); HIGH SCHOOLS (61%); DEMERGERS & SPINOFFS (60%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (60%); MASS SHOOTINGS (53%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (50%)

Industry: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (78%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (71%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (69%); HEALTH CARE REFORM (69%); NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE (69%); HEALTH CARE (64%); WIRELESS INDUSTRY (62%); HIGH SCHOOLS (61%); INTERNET & WWW (61%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (60%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (60%); WIRELESS NETWORKS (60%); INTERNET 2 (50%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%); AUSTRALIA (79%); CANADA (79%)

Load-Date: January 6, 2016


End of Document
Craving Talent and Growth, Tech Giants Go East
The New York Times
December 14, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1324 words
Byline: By JACK NICAS and KAREN WEISE; Jack Nicas reported from San Francisco and Karen Weise from Seattle. Steve Lohr contributed reporting from New York.
Follow Jack Nicas and Karen Weise on Twitter: @jacknicas and @KYWeise.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- This generation's biggest technology companies -- including Apple, Amazon and Google -- have long been tied to their hometowns. Now these giants are increasingly outgrowing their West Coast roots.
Driven by a limited pool of skilled workers and the ballooning cost of living in their home bases of Silicon Valley and Seattle, as well as President Trump's shifting immigration policies, the companies are aggressively taking their talent hunt across the United States and elsewhere. And they are coalescing particularly around a handful of urban areas that are already winners in the new knowledge-based economy, including New York City, Washington, Boston and Austin, Tex. 
  This eastward expansion accelerated on Thursday when Apple said it would build a $1 billion campus in Austin, expanding its presence there to over 11,000 workers and becoming the area's largest private employer. The decision followed Amazon's highly publicized selection of Queens and Arlington, Va., last month for new offices that would house at least 50,000 employees. Google, too, is shopping for more real estate in New York that could enable it to more than double its work force of 7,000 in the city.
  ''They're expanding out,'' said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics. ''Tech talent is in very short supply. So if these tech companies want to grow and flourish, they need to find talent in other parts of the country.''
  The chase for tech talent has been global for decades, and Silicon Valley's older companies have had big offices all over the world for years. Intel, for example, has far more employees in Oregon than it does in California. Hewlett-Packard, which split into two companies three years ago, has had large outposts in Idaho and Oregon.
  Amazon, Apple and Google are now increasingly adopting the same strategy as they hire for growth and pursue the brightest minds in new technologies, in an effort to outmuscle one another. Over the past two years, Amazon's work force has doubled to 613,300 employees; Google's parent, Alphabet, has increased its head count by 35 percent, to 94,300; and Apple has grown nearly 14 percent, to 132,000 workers.
  Many of the companies are trying to cozy up to top engineering schools in cities like Pittsburgh, where Google recently opened an office and where Uber has had a center, or Zurich as they search for hard-to-find talent in artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. Cambridge, England, now hosts several A.I. research outposts for American tech companies, including Amazon, Microsoft and Apple.
  Like Cambridge, England, some cities in the United States have also become known for a particular area of tech expertise, in what has become a modern remake of the country's industrial era, when cities came to specialize in the production of cars, steel and coal.
  The Seattle area, home to Amazon and Microsoft, is known for experts in cloud-computing services thanks to Amazon's leadership in that field. Pittsburgh is known for A.I. because of Carnegie Mellon University's computer science program. Cambridge, Mass., is associated with robotics, thanks to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. And New York is often where cutting-edge work on financial services technology is done.
  The search for talent outside Silicon Valley and Seattle has also been prompted by issues in the companies' hometowns, which have not built enough housing to keep up with their growing work forces. San Francisco, San Jose, Oakland and Seattle are the four most expensive major cities in the country based on home values, according to data from Zillow. The median home in San Francisco is valued at almost $1.4 million and more than $733,000 in Seattle. Questions also abound over the quality and funding of the areas' public school systems.
  ''Every day as a C.E.O., you have employees coming to you saying, 'I don't make enough to buy a house for my family,' and you already feel like you are paying through the nose,'' said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, the real estate site based in Seattle. ''Almost everyone is looking at other affordable places where you can open an office.''
  Some economists said the Trump administration's tougher immigration policies could also restrict the tech giants from importing skilled workers from abroad to their West Coast headquarters. The Trump administration has increased the red tape in applying for H-1B visas for highly skilled workers and has denied petitions more often. Over a five-day window this April, employers submitted petitions for more than 190,000 specialized work visas, but only 85,000 can be granted annually.
  That has helped push some tech companies into building major outposts in Canada, particularly in Toronto and Vancouver. Edward Glaeser, a Harvard economics professor, said that even if H-1B workers were to come through in abundance, it would still make sense to put them in cheaper cities, like Austin. He said, ''$100,000 goes a lot further in Austin than in Silicon Valley.''
  Yet even as the tech companies move beyond the West Coast, their choices to converge on cities or towns that are already highly educated, wealthy and well employed do not spread the wealth.
  More than 44 percent of all digital-service jobs in the United States were located in just 10 metro areas last year, including Seattle, San Francisco and San Jose, as well as New York, Washington, Los Angeles and Boston, according to research by Mark Muro, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. From 2015 to 2017, only nine metro areas increased their share of the nation's tech work force, including the West Coast tech hubs, as well as Austin and Denver.
  ''The tech industry concentrates in very few markets,'' said Amy Liu, director of the Metropolitan Policy Program at the Brookings Institution. ''Our biggest concern is how do we make sure more cities, particularly midsized cities in the middle of the country, can be players in the tech economy?''
  Amazon, which has about 45,000 people at its Seattle headquarters, has also opened 16 tech hubs in the United States. About 85 percent of those satellite employees are in six booming, highly educated urban areas -- the Bay Area, Washington region, New York, Boston, Los Angeles and Austin. Each has at least 1,000 workers.
  (The bulk of Amazon's North American work force is made up of the more than 250,000 people who are dispersed in the company's roughly 110 warehouses around Canada and the United States and who make less money than their white-collar colleagues.)
  Apple, which has been criticized by President Trump for not creating more domestic jobs, said on Thursday that its plans for Austin included a new 133-acre campus that will initially have 5,000 workers in engineering, research and development, operations and other functions. It will ultimately be able to accommodate up to 15,000 workers.
  Apple already has about 6,000 workers in Austin. The company said it applied for a $25 million grant from Texas, payable over 15 years, as well as property-tax rebates from Williamson County.
  A person familiar with Apple's decision to expand outside Cupertino, Calif., where it just opened a new $5 billion headquarters, said the move into Austin was partly driven by the extreme housing prices in the Bay Area, as well as its aim to find more talent and add more diversity and military veterans to its work force.
  The company added that it also planned to open 1,000-worker operations in Seattle, San Diego, and Culver City, Calif., and to add hundreds of employees in Pittsburgh, Boston, New York and Boulder, Colo., over the next three years.
  Some economists said what was most remarkable was that it took the tech giants this long to aggressively expand beyond the West Coast.
  ''In a sense, what we're seeing is tech becoming a normal industry,'' Mr. Glaeser said, ''an industry that's not located in one incredibly expensive place.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/13/technology/tech-talent-apple-tech-giants-west-coast.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The current Apple campus in Austin, Tex. The company is planning a new $1 billion, 133-acre campus there, expanding its presence to over 11,000 workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TAMIR KALIFA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (89%); LABOR FORCE (89%); COST OF LIVING (78%); EMERGING TECHNOLOGY (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); CITIES (75%); DATA ANALYTICS (75%); ECONOMICS (75%); NEW ECONOMY (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (71%); URBAN SCHOOLS (70%); IMMIGRATION (56%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (56%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (86%);  APPLE INC (85%);  INTEL CORP (58%);  MOODY'S ANALYTICS INC (55%);  HP INC (53%)

Organization: NEW YORK GIANTS (84%); SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS (84%)

Ticker: AAPL (NASDAQ) (85%); INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); HPQ (NYSE) (53%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (86%); NAICS423430 COMPUTER & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE MERCHANT WHOLESALERS (85%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS334112 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICE MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (85%); SIC5045 COMPUTERS & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE (85%); SIC3674 SEMICONDUCTORS & RELATED DEVICES (85%); SIC3577 COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT, NEC (85%); SIC3572 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICES (85%); SIC3571 ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (85%); NAICS522390 OTHER ACTIVITIES RELATED TO CREDIT INTERMEDIATION (55%); SIC6099 FUNCTIONS RELATED TO DEPOSITORY BANKING, NEC (55%); NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (53%); BIG TECH (90%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); REAL ESTATE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); DATA ANALYTICS (75%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (73%); URBAN SCHOOLS (70%); AUTOMOTIVE MFG (50%)

Geographic: AUSTIN, TX, USA (92%); CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); IDAHO, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); ENGLAND (87%)

Load-Date: December 14, 2018


End of Document
TECHNOLOGY; Special Visa's Use forTech Workers Is Challenged
 The New York Times
May 30, 2003 Friday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1389 words
Byline:  By KATIE HAFNER and DANIEL PREYSMAN  
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO, May 29  
Body


With the economy in a slump, a growing number of American technology workers say their jobs are going not only to lower-cost foreign workers abroad, but also increasingly to workers who enter the United States under a little-known visa category known as L-1. 
     In the nearly three years since the technology bubble burst, the use of L-1 visas to bring in workers -- with a large percentage from India -- has become a popular strategy among firms seeking to cut labor costs. The number of these temporary visas granted rose nearly 40 percent to 57,700 in 2002 from 41,739 in 1999. 
 The visas are intended to allow companies to transfer employees from a foreign branch or subsidiary to company offices in the United States. But they are now routinely used by companies based in India and elsewhere to bring their workers into the United States and then contract them out to American companies -- in many instances to be replacements for American workers. The number of Americans who have been replaced by foreign contract workers is unknown. American companies that use contract workers have said that the decision to do so is based on factors like skills, and not on cost alone. 
Some immigration experts are questioning the legality of this use of the visa. Officials at the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services, or B.C.I.S., a division of the Department of Homeland Security that oversees the granting of L-1 and other work visas, say the bureau is conducting an assessment of the L-1 visa to determine whether there is misuse. 
"If this is a company offering the services of their employee to go work for another company, it sounds dubious," said Bill Strassberger, a spokesman for B.C.I.S.
"To bring someone in ostensibly as an intracompany transfer and then put him to work for somebody else and then to say that we're paying him still, that just sounds like someone's trying to really stretch the envelope on that visa category," Mr. Strassberger said. 
The legal questions, however, remain murky. Steve Yale-Loehr, who teaches immigration law at Cornell, said that strictly speaking, what these companies are doing is legal, though perhaps not what Congress intended. However, Mr. Yale-Loehr added, "If Congress is upset about this, then Congress will act on it."
In response to the controversy, Rep. John L. Mica, a Republican from Florida, introduced a bill this month to prevent companies from hiring foreigners with L-1 visas.
"When you have people using this to bring in lower-cost labor to displace Americans, it's something we need to address," Mr. Mica said in a telephone interview.
During the boom years, the technology industries successfully lobbied Congress to expand the number of foreign software engineers who could be permitted to fill programming needs in the United States. In 2000, Congress increased the annual cap on more restrictive temporary visas -- known as H-1B visas -- for highly skilled foreign workers to 195,000 from 115,000. That quota will drop automatically to 65,000 on Oct. 1 unless Congress approves an extension, a move that is considered unlikely.
In the last two years, the trend in the use of H-1B visas has declined sharply. Many experts say the use of L-1 visas will grow. 
Unlike the H-1B visa, the L-1 does not require employers to pay workers prevailing wages. In addition, there is no cap on the number of L-1 visas. 
This has ignited an outcry among technology workers who have lost jobs and say that foreign contract workers are paid substantially less than prevailing wages in the industry. 
Over the last three years, William O'Neill has seen his small computer consulting firm in East Granby, Conn., dwindle from six contract workers to none. The work itself has not disappeared, said Mr. O'Neill, but his clients, most of them large insurance companies in Connecticut and western Massachusetts, are turning to foreign companies, some with workers who are in the United States on temporary visas. Satyam Computer Services, a consulting firm based in India, for example, now has a contract with the Cigna Corporation that has around 100 Satyam employees working on computer applications management in Cigna offices. 
And as others have claimed, Mr. O'Neill said that in many cases, existing technology employees are asked to train their replacements. The L-1 visa requires that the foreign workers possess specialized knowledge of the work to be done. 
Mr. O'Neill said that the people he knows who are currently training their replacements will not talk about their situation for fear of losing what is left of their jobs. "They're scared to death they're going to lose their jobs instantly versus six or eight or nine months down the road," he said.
Once the replacement workers are trained, Mr. O'Neill said, the foreign workers are often sent back to India to do programming and computer work there for the American companies. 
Wipro, InfoSys and Tata Consultancy Services, all of them based in India, are other companies that are using L-1 visas to get workers into the United States.
Girish Surendran, a human resources manager who oversees immigration issues at Tata, said his company "is committed in letter and spirit to all the requirements and regulations of all visa categories." He added: "If workers are replaced, it's not that T.C.S. comes in and employees get let go." Mr. Surendran said he could not comment on a company's reason for laying workers off. 
Wipro plans to lobby against Mr. Mica's bill. If it becomes law, said Sridhar Ramasubbu, investor relations manager at Wipro, the company will simply turn back to H1-B visas. "We will not be affected financially because our compensation is the same whether somebody comes in under an H-1 or an L-1," Mr. Ramasubbu said. 
But trade groups representing American workers say the foreign workers are paid considerably less. "I have friends that were told in the last three months that they must take a $30,000 pay cut to keep their job," said John Bauman, president of the Organization for the Rights of American Workers, a nonprofit group based in Meriden, Conn.
Gary Burns, the legislative director for Mr. Mica, said there were about 325,000 L-1 visa holders in the United States. Those who stay in this country can remain for up to five or seven years, depending on the category of L-1 they hold. 
Some experts say that the use of L-1 visas for contract workers is not widespread and that fears of losing jobs to foreign workers are exaggerated. 
"Even if this brouhaha is about a real problem, I think when you look at the number of workers involved, it is a totally insignificant drop in a massive labor market," said Daryl Buffenstein, a immigration lawyer in Atlanta who has corporate clients and is general counsel for the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
Mr. Buffenstein said that those who oppose the L-1 visa do not understand how important it is for American industry. "It will hurt employment in the United States if we impede the ability of legitimate users to transfer managers and specialists between different affiliates of international organizations," said Mr. Buffenstein, a lawyer who advised legislators on the law governing L-1 visas.
Mr. Buffenstein said he was also worried that public overreaction would result in measures like the Mica bill, which he contended would go too far in restricting international companies from using L-1 visa holders to do on-site client work. 
Controversy over the visa, which has been in existence for 33 years, is not entirely new. Three years ago, the General Accounting Office reported that the the Immigration and Naturalization Services, the precursor to B.C.I.S., had found a high incidence of fraudulent use of L-1 visas and had called abuse of the visas "the new wave in alien smuggling."
But protest over the use of temporary foreign workers has become more vocal in a rocky economy. One 57-year-old computer consultant in Avon, Conn., who has been out of work for five months said, "This isn't just an I.T. issue," referring to the information technology industry.
"It's a big issue with multiple professions, and has a serious effect on the economy," said the consultant, who asked that his name not be used for fear of jeopardizing his chances to find work. "A lot of this is about the economy and the L-1 issue is just exacerbating the problem."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: A flier from the Organization for the Rights of American Workers, which wants to restrict visas that allow companies to transfer workers to the United States. (Richard L. Harbus for The New York Times)(pg. C1); John Bauman, president of The Organization for the Rights of American Workers, which opposes a visa loophole for foreign technology workers. (Richard L. Harbus for The New York Times)(pg. C5) Chart: "Alternative Labor"The economic slowdown has reduced the use of H-1B temporary visas, a favorite of the technology industry. But demand for the lesser-known, less restrictive L-1 visa is growing. Graph tracks visas issued, fiscal years ended September, from 1995 through first six months of 2002 and 2003. (Source: State Department, Consular Affairs Bureau)(pg. C1)      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); ECONOMIC BUBBLE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (74%); ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (73%); LOBBYING (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (59%); COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES (%);  VISAS (%);  LABOR (%);  FOREIGN LABOR (%);  WAGES AND SALARIES (%);  RELOCATION OF PERSONNEL (%);  LAW AND LEGISLATION (%);  LOBBYING AND LOBBYISTS  (%)

Company:  VISA INC (58%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (82%); HOMELAND SECURITY DEPARTMENT; WIPRO LTD; INFOSYS TECHNOLOGIES LTD; TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES; SATYAM COMPUTER SERVICES INC; ORGANIZATION FOR THE RIGHTS OF AMERICAN WORKERS 

Ticker: V (NYSE) (58%)

Industry: NAICS522320 FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS PROCESSING, RESERVE & CLEARINGHOUSE ACTIVITIES (58%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (73%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (58%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (50%)

Person: JOHN L MICA (89%); ;MICA, JOHN L (REP); BAUMAN, JOHN; HAFNER, KATIE; PREYSMAN, DANIEL 

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (93%); INDIA;  UNITED STATES

Load-Date: May 30, 2003


End of Document
Suits Claim That Disney Broke Law on Visa Use
The New York Times
January 26, 2016 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1115 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Even after Leo Perrero was laid off a year ago from his technology job at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla. -- and spent his final months there training a temporary immigrant from India to do his work -- he still hoped to find a new position in the vast entertainment company.
But Mr. Perrero discovered that despite his high performance ratings, he and most of the other 250 tech workers Disney dismissed would not be rehired for at least a year, and probably never. 
  Now he and Dena Moore, another American laid off by Disney at that time, have filed lawsuits in federal court in Tampa, Fla., against Disney and two global consulting companies, HCL and Cognizant, which brought in foreign workers who replaced them. They claim the companies colluded to break the law by using temporary H-1B visas to bring in immigrant workers, knowing that Americans would be displaced.
  ''I don't have to be angry or cause drama,'' said Ms. Moore, 53, who had worked at Disney for 10 years. ''But they are just doing things to save a buck, and it's making Americans poor.''
  Ms. Moore had also trained her replacement. After she was laid off, she applied for more than 150 other jobs at Disney. She did not get one.
  The lawsuits by Mr. Perrero and Ms. Moore, who each filed a separate but similar complaint on Monday seeking class-action status, represent the first time Americans have gone to federal court to sue both outsourcing companies that imported immigrants and the American company that contracted with those businesses, claiming that they collaborated intentionally to supplant Americans with H-1B workers.
  A furor over the layoffs in Orlando last January brought to light many other episodes in which American workers, mainly in technology but also in accounting and administration, said they had lost jobs to foreigners on H-1B visas, and had to train replacements as a condition of their severance. The foreign workers, mostly from India, were provided by outsourcing companies, including the two named in the lawsuits, which have dominated the H-1B visa system, packing the application process to win an outsize share of the quota set by Congress of 85,000 visas each year.
  The Labor Department opened investigations of the outsourcing companies -- the direct employers of the temporary immigrants -- at Disney and at Southern California Edison, a utility that laid off hundreds of American workers in 2014. The investigations are continuing. At least 30 former Disney workers also filed complaints with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, claiming that they faced discrimination as American citizens.
  The lawsuits by Mr. Perrero and Ms. Moore are based on the rules for H-1B visas, which Congress designed to bring foreign workers with special skills into the country. Employers are required to declare to the Department of Labor that hiring foreigners on the visas ''will not adversely affect the working conditions of U.S. workers similarly employed.''
  ''Was I negatively affected?'' Ms. Moore asked. ''Yeah, I was. I lost my job.''
  Sara Blackwell, a lawyer in Sarasota, Fla., representing the former Disney employees, said the suits charged that the companies had lied under oath when they said no Americans would lose their jobs.
  Disney, in a statement on Monday, said, ''These lawsuits are based on an unsustainable legal theory and are a wholesale misrepresentation of the facts.'' The company said more than 100 of the workers who were laid off in Orlando had been rehired.
  HCL has said it complies carefully with United States laws. Cognizant, in a statement on Monday, said that it would not comment on the lawsuit, but that it ''fully complies with all U.S. regulations regarding H-1B visas.''
  The company said an internal compliance team ''ensures our practices are not merely compliant with existing laws in letter and spirit, but also adhere to best practices.'' Cognizant said it employed ''many thousands of U.S. citizens and residents in addition to employees on lawful H-1B visas.''
  Responding to the frustration of American workers, Congress in December renewed and increased a fee on outsourcing companies that it had allowed to lapse. Larger companies employing many H-1B workers in the United States will pay an extra fee of $4,000 for each new H-1B visa -- up from $2,000 -- and another $4,000 to move an H-1B immigrant who is already in the country to a new employer.
  Senator Bill Nelson of Florida, a Democrat who has been openly critical of Disney's layoffs, offered a bill to reduce the H-1B quota by 15,000 visas a year to 70,000. The issue came up in the presidential race, as Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, a Republican candidate, introduced a bill with Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a Republican hard-liner on immigration, to sharply increase the minimum wage for H-1B workers to $110,000 a year, to discourage outsourcing companies from using the workers to lower wages.
  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, an international association of tech workers, posted an online petition to encourage Americans who were displaced to file complaints with the Justice Department. In a letter to the group in December, Alberto Ruisanchez, a Justice Department lawyer in charge of prosecuting immigration abuses, confirmed that it would be a violation of anti-discrimination laws for an employer, or a contracting firm, to fire workers or hire replacements ''because of citizenship or immigration status.''
  Mr. Perrero, like many Americans who have lost their jobs, said he was long reluctant to speak out publicly against his former employer. At 42 and with a family to support, he worried that he would not find another job in Orlando, where Disney rules as the largest employer by far. He spoke with The New York Times anonymously in an article in June about the humiliation of training his foreign replacement.
  But local recruiters told him that despite the company's statements, Disney managers said they would avoid rehiring workers who had been laid off. Mr. Perrero said he knew of only two workers from the close-knit group of more than 200 who were dismissed who went back to tech jobs at Disney.
  Mr. Perrero said he was ''part Italian, part English, part Swedish.'' He said, ''I wholeheartedly believe our country needs to have amazing people come here to build a long-term foundation.'' But he said the H-1B program had been abused.
  Ms. Moore said that even with strong programming credentials, it was hard for her to start over in her 50s with another company. She has 13 grandchildren, and she confessed that one of the difficult losses was a pass that allowed her to take them to Disney World at no cost.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/us/lawsuit-claims-disney-colluded-to-replace-us-workers-with-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, who were laid off from technology jobs at Walt Disney World, filed federal lawsuits on Monday. Their claims are based on rules for H-1B visas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY BRIAN BLANCO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); LITIGATION (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LAYOFFS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); BUSINESS INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CLASS ACTIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); DISCRIMINATION (77%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (76%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (74%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (64%)

Company:  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (58%);  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (51%)

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (58%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (58%); NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (51%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (51%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (78%); CONSULTING SERVICES (72%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (92%); TAMPA, FL, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: January 26, 2016


End of Document
President Signs Order to Help U.S. Manufacturers and ‘Trump People’
The New York Times 
January 31, 2019 Thursday 10:24 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 788 words
Byline: Katie Rogers
Highlight: The order is meant to be a shot in the arm for “blue-collar Trump people,” one official said, even as they face shaky economic prospects from disputes such as a trade war with China.
Body


WASHINGTON — President Trump signed an executive order on Thursday that will push for federal dollars spent on infrastructure projects to be put toward American companies and bolster workers his top trade adviser described as “blue-collar Trump people” the administration has focused on helping.
That description, given to reporters by Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, was a small but telling glimpse at how the administration has sought to carry out the president’s “America First” policy. The executive order is meant to be an economic shot in the arm for workers held up as symbols of the president’s tough-on-trade stance, even as some have faced shaky economic prospects over the administration’s decisions to impose high tariffs on imported goods and to start several global disputes, including a damaging trade war with China.
Flanked by officials including Mr. Navarro and Labor Secretary Alexander Acosta in his first public appearance since the government reopened on Friday, Mr. Trump said during a 40-minute session with reporters that the reasoning behind the order was that “we don’t get treated great by many countries in terms of our trade deals.” The president added that he wanted infrastructure projects to be built with “American steel,” “American iron” and “American hands.”
The executive order, “Strengthening Buy-American Preferences for Infrastructure Projects,” will recommend but not outright require that what the administration said was $700 billion in federal financial assistance doled out by some 30 agencies each year go toward American-manufactured products, including aluminum, steel, concrete and iron. The order will also seek to tamp down on waivers that agencies have used to bypass American products in favor of foreign-made ones.
The order is a continuation of the “Buy American” strategy that Mr. Trump unveiled within his first few months in office. In April 2017, the president signed an executive order that would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the H-1B visa program for foreign technical workers, a move that led Democrats to say that the administration would curb the hiring of qualified foreign workers, particularly in the technology industry.
He has since used the H-1B program as a target in his campaign rallies, often highlighting the stories of laid-off workers who were told to train their replacements. In early January, Mr. Trump promised again that changes to the program were coming, but did not offer a concrete timeline.
The administration has framed both executive orders as “strong presidential guidance” that expects government agencies to examine ways in which American resources can be directed toward American products and people. Mr. Navarro said federal spending on foreign goods was at its lowest point in 10 years, and spending on American-made products had increased by $24 billion.
“That’s pure Donald J. Trump,” Mr. Navarro said.
The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on where it had gotten those figures.
But the move comes amid uncertainty posed by the administration’s tariff policies and the trade war with China. Attempts to break an impasse are underway in Washington between American and Chinese officials, but so far there is little optimism that either side will concede. In the 10 months since the Trump administration imposed 25 percent tariffs on steel imports, prices in the United States have now fallen back to levels last seen before the            tariffs were announced on March 1.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, called the executive order another empty promise to American workers.
The order also comes one day after Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics company, said it was rethinking its plans to build a $10 billion Wisconsin plant to make flat-screen televisions, citing what it said were new economic and manufacturing obstacles in the United States since the agreement was made in July 2017. Some economists were long skeptical that the project, which has promised 13,000 jobs, would ever come to fruition.
Mr. Navarro, who declined to answer questions on any uncertainties raised by the administration’s tariff policy, later changed his comment about the administration’s policies benefiting “Trump people.”
He said that “every American is a Trump person” but added that the bulk of manufacturing jobs go to people without college degrees and “exactly the type of people that the Trump administration has so much focus on: American men and women who work with their hands.”
PHOTO: President Trump signed an executive order with American manufacturing workers on Thursday at the White House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tom Brenner for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); TRADE DISPUTES (90%); CONSTRUCTION SPENDING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (74%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (73%); IMPORT TRADE (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (73%); TAXES & TAXATION (70%); TECHNOLOGY (50%); Trump, Donald J (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Factories and Manufacturing (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Infrastructure (Public Works) (%); International Trade and World Market (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: CONSTRUCTION SPENDING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); MANUFACTURING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); ALEXANDER ACOSTA (74%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: February 2, 2019


End of Document
Cap on U.S. Work Visas Puts Companies in India in a Bind 
 The New York Times
October 1, 2003 Wednesday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section W; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 850 words
Byline:  By SARITHA RAI 
Dateline: BANGALORE, India, Sept. 30  
Body


Prasad Tadiparti, global general manager of human resources at MindTree Consulting, is working his way around what he calls "a logistical nightmare."
     He is trying to anticipate what skills his clients in the United States may need in the next few years and match them with the profiles of his approximately 1,000 software engineers and others. All this while factoring in how many are willing to travel, how many hold valid visas to work in the United States, and for how long. 
 The "nightmare" is a sharp drop -- to 65,000 from 195,000 -- in the number of H-1B visas granted for skilled foreign professionals. The change, effective Wednesday, is making the business environment tougher for Indian software services companies like MindTree.
MindTree, which counts Franklin Templeton and Avis among its clients, will be competing with others in the industry for the tighter number of visas. If the visas are exhausted in the next few months, as some expect, services companies say that their clients' delivery schedules and new projects will be delayed.
H-1B visas are given each year to foreign workers whose specialized skills are sought by American companies. During the technology boom, the H-1B visa program, which allows foreigners to work in the United States for up to six years, provided a gateway for thousands of Indians who came to work in the United States, especially in Silicon Valley.
More recently, the number of visa applications has dropped. Last year, petitions for H-1B visas dropped by 75 percent, to 26,659, according to the American Electronics Association, a trade group that represents technology companies. The lighter use of the visas reflected the downturn in the dot-com sector and the elimination of technology jobs.
But critics now point to another visa, the L-1, that is used to bring in cheaper foreign workers who may be replaced once they are trained. Congress is also looking at the L-1, which has no quotas. The L-1 visa has grown in use, rising nearly 40 percent, to 57,700, last year from 1999, and some say technology employers are switching to this type of visa. 
According to an estimate by the American Immigration Lawyers' Association, there are some 900,000 H-1B employees in the United States, 35 percent to 45 percent of them from India.
The H-1B program became an issue as the United States economy softened and employment slumped. Critics of the program argue that American corporations are replacing employees with less-expensive foreign workers from places like India and the Philippines.
Some have even called for scrapping the H-1B visa program altogether, a move seen as part of a reaction against the increasing trend of sending technology and back-office jobs abroad.
Despite this antipathy and public outcry, American companies argue that the program is essential to help maintain competitiveness in the global economy.
In recent Congressional testimony, the chairwoman of the immigration subcommittee of the United States Chamber of Commerce, Elizabeth Dickson of Ingersoll-Rand, said the visa limit delayed the hiring of needed professionals. "We cannot afford to let arbitrary caps dictate U.S. business immigration policy," Ms. Dickson said.
But with Congress keeping the cap at 65,000, Indian services companies are scrambling to build teams of visa-ready people, said Laxman Badiga, chief staffing officer at India's third-largest software exporter, Wipro. Over 3,000 Wipro employees hold H-1B visas.
As Indian software services companies grapple with the vastly reduced quota ofvisas, American companies will have to figure out ways to collaborate with them to help manage a supply imbalance that is expected to emerge as the economy improves, said Atul Vashistha, chief executive of neoIT, an outsourcing advisory company based in Santa Clara, Calif. "We are already advising our clients on how to manage this risk scenario," he said.
For the Indian subsidiaries of multinationals like Intel, however, the impact of the reduced limit is expected to be minimal. "We see this as a bump in the road rather than something which will have a huge impact in the long term," said Ketan Sampat, president of Intel India.
But Mr. Vashistha's firm is urging clients like Cardinal Health and Exult to look at increasing the number of expatriates to help bridge the gap. "If foreign resources cannot be brought here, then take resources from here to the offshore location," he said.
The reduced visa limit may gradually diminish the United States' ability to attract the most talented workers, industry leaders contend. "With U.S. baby boomers retiring, and the number of tech grads declining, there will be an acute shortage of skilled talent in the coming years," said Kumar Mahadeva, the chief executive of Cognizant Technology Solutions, a software services company based in Teaneck, N.J.
As the economy recovers, industry executives envision an even more acute shortage of skilled workers. "If there are no visas to bring talent to the U.S.," Mr. Badiga of Wipro said, "American companies will eventually say, 'Let's go to India where the resources are."' 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); WHITE COLLAR WORKERS (78%); BUSINESS CLIMATE & CONDITIONS (77%); TRENDS (74%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (73%); ELECTRONICS TRADE (73%); TECHNOLOGY TRENDS (73%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (72%); BACK OFFICE OPERATIONS (64%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (50%); COMPUTERS AND THE INTERNET (%);  FOREIGN LABOR (%);  LABOR (%);  VISAS (%);  IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES (%);  COMPUTER SOFTWARE  (%)

Company:  MINDTREE LTD (74%);  AMERICAN ELECTRONIC ASSOCIATION CREDIT UNION (53%)

Organization: AMERICAN IMMIGRATION LAWYERS ASSOCIATION (59%); AMERICAN IMMIGRATION LAWYERS ASSN; MINDTREE CONSULTING 

Ticker: MINDTREE (NSE) (74%)

Industry: NAICS541690 OTHER SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL CONSULTING SERVICES (74%); NAICS541519 OTHER COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES (74%); NAICS522130 CREDIT UNIONS (53%); SIC6062 CREDIT UNIONS, NOT FEDERALLY CHARTERED (53%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); ELECTRONICS (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (73%); ELECTRONICS TRADE (73%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (73%)

Person: TADIPARTI, PRASAD; RAI, SARITHA 

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (94%); PHILIPPINES (79%); INDIA

Load-Date: October 1, 2003


End of Document
CUNY Will Court Foreign Entrepreneurs
The New York Times
February 18, 2016 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 726 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


The next Elon Musk may soon be working at a City University of New York campus in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, perhaps joined by the next Sergey Brin in Flushing, Queens. And they could be creating hundreds of jobs.
At least that is the hope of the New York City Economic Development Corporation, which with CUNY will announce on Thursday a new visa program intended for immigrant entrepreneurs. The plan, called IN2NYC, is to have 80 entrepreneurs set up shop on CUNY campuses, advising professors and students while working to build companies -- in exchange for a special temporary work visa that is exempt from the quotas. New York is the first city in the country to offer such a program. 
  The entrepreneurs will qualify for a skilled-worker visa, known as an H-1B. Applicants need an employer to sponsor them for the visas, which are extremely limited: The visas are capped at 65,000 a year, with another 20,000 available for foreign students who have earned graduate degrees in the United States. Last year, 233,000 people entered the lottery for the visas, with about two-thirds of them losing out.
  But people working with nonprofits and institutions of higher education are exempt from the caps, and IN2NYC will use its partnerships with CUNY to help the entrepreneurs get the visas.
  Kevin Ryan, an entrepreneur who founded Gilt Groupe, an online shopping company, and MongoDB, a database company, among half a dozen start-ups, hailed the program as a way to increase the number of visas available to foreign talent in the city. ''Normally the city says we can't do anything about it,'' Mr. Ryan said, referring to immigration reform. ''So with this, they found a loophole here, which is going to add potential entrepreneurs and engineers.''
  Mr. Ryan said many New York companies had to hire employees abroad, so being able to keep talent in the city was a priority. ''It's not as impactful as opening up the number of H-1B visas,'' he said, ''but it's a great step forward.''
  Maria Torres-Springer, the president of the development corporation, said the program would build on New York's history of being a welcoming place to immigrants. ''We're seeing innovation hubs really beginning to blossom all over the city,'' she said, mentioning a clean-technology incubator she recently visited in Brooklyn, made up mostly of immigrant workers.
  ''The program builds on the momentum, in a way where international entrepreneurs who want to relocate in the city now have a pathway to do that, as opposed to navigating what is currently a complex system.''
  IN2NYC will work with seven campuses: Baruch College, City College, the College of Staten Island, LaGuardia Community College, Lehman College, Medgar Evers College and Queens College.
  Entrepreneurs will form a board of directors, most of whom will be American citizens or permanent residents, to establish the employer-employee relationship that an H-1B visa requires. Since entrepreneurs will be employed at a college for more than half their time, collaborating with professors and students, they will be exempt from the H-1B visa caps.
  ''The impact of an immigration lawyer to help the next Elon Musk with no visa or a college student with no status has never been more significant,'' said Peter F. Asaad, the managing legal partner of Immigration Solutions Group, an immigration law firm in Washington that is providing counsel to New York City.
  Mr. Musk, the founder of SpaceX and the co-founder of Tesla Motors, was born in South Africa and came to the United States as a college student. Mr. Brin, the co-founder of Google, was born in Russia.
  Mr. Asaad has advised New York City on previous immigration programs involving entrepreneurs, and he thinks there will be a large pool of applicants who will already have ''substantial amounts of angel investors and other sources believing in their company.''
  The development corporation expects that each entrepreneur will initially employ at least three people. Applications will be accepted in late spring, with the program scheduled to start in autumn.
  Mr. Ryan sees only an upside.
  ''Even if there are only a certain number who take advantage of this,'' he said, ''one of them will end up starting a really successful company, and that company will employ 500 people and create huge tax dollars. So this will pay off for New York City.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/18/nyregion/cuny-schools-to-lure-foreign-entrepreneurs-with-new-visa-program.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (91%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); JOB CREATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (77%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (76%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (71%); INTERNET RETAILING (70%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (69%); ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY (50%)

Company:  MONGODB INC (54%)

Ticker: MDB (NASDAQ) (54%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (54%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (54%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); INTERNET RETAILING (70%)

Person: ELON MUSK (79%); KEVIN P RYAN (79%); SERGEY BRIN (79%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: February 18, 2016


End of Document
President Signs Executive Order to Help U.S. Manufacturers and 'Trump People'
The New York Times
February 1, 2019 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 765 words
Byline: By KATIE ROGERS
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Trump signed an executive order on Thursday that will push for federal dollars spent on infrastructure projects to be put toward American companies and bolster workers his top trade adviser described as ''blue-collar Trump people'' the administration has focused on helping.
That description, given to reporters by Peter Navarro, the White House trade adviser, was a small but telling glimpse at how the administration has sought to carry out the president's ''America First'' policy. The executive order is meant to be an economic shot in the arm for workers held up as symbols of the president's tough-on-trade stance, even as some have faced shaky economic prospects over the administration's decisions to impose high tariffs on imported goods and to start several global disputes, including a damaging trade war with China. 
  Flanked by officials including Mr. Navarro and Labor Secretary Alexander Acosta in his first public appearance since the government reopened on Friday, Mr. Trump said during a 40-minute session with reporters that the reasoning behind the order was that ''we don't get treated great by many countries in terms of our trade deals.'' The president added that he wanted infrastructure projects to be built with ''American steel,'' ''American iron'' and ''American hands.''
  The executive order, ''Strengthening Buy-American Preferences for Infrastructure Projects,'' will recommend but not outright require that what the administration said was $700 billion in federal financial assistance doled out by some 30 agencies each year go toward American-manufactured products, including aluminum, steel, concrete and iron. The order will also seek to tamp down on waivers that agencies have used to bypass American products in favor of foreign-made ones.
  The order is a continuation of the ''Buy American'' strategy that Mr. Trump unveiled within his first few months in office. In April 2017, the president signed an executive order that would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the H-1B visa program for foreign technical workers, a move that led Democrats to say that the administration would curb the hiring of qualified foreign workers, particularly in the technology industry.
  He has since used the H-1B program as a target in his campaign rallies, often highlighting the stories of laid-off workers who were told to train their replacements. In early January, Mr. Trump promised again that changes to the program were coming, but did not offer a concrete timeline.
  The administration has framed both executive orders as ''strong presidential guidance'' that expects government agencies to examine ways in which American resources can be directed toward American products and people. Mr. Navarro said federal spending on foreign goods was at its lowest point in 10 years, and spending on American-made products had increased by $24 billion.
  ''That's pure Donald J. Trump,'' Mr. Navarro said.
  The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on where it had gotten those figures.
  But the move comes amid uncertainty posed by the administration's tariff policies and the trade war with China. Attempts to break an impasse are underway in Washington between American and Chinese officials, but so far there is little optimism that either side will concede. In the 10 months since the Trump administration imposed 25 percent tariffs on steel imports, prices in the United States have now fallen back to levels last seen before the tariffs were announced on March 1.
  Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, called the executive order another empty promise to American workers.
  The order also comes one day after Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics company, said it was rethinking its plans to build a $10 billion Wisconsin plant to make flat-screen televisions, citing what it said were new economic and manufacturing obstacles in the United States since the agreement was made in July 2017. Some economists were long skeptical that the project, which has promised 13,000 jobs, would ever come to fruition.
  Mr. Navarro, who declined to answer questions on any uncertainties raised by the administration's tariff policy, later changed his comment about the administration's policies benefiting ''Trump people.''
  He said that ''every American is a Trump person'' but added that the bulk of manufacturing jobs go to people without college degrees and ''exactly the type of people that the Trump administration has so much focus on: American men and women who work with their hands.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/31/us/politics/trump-executive-order-manufacturing.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The order requires agencies to favor American-made products, including steel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID J. PHILLIP/ASSOCIATED PRESS)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); CONSTRUCTION SPENDING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (77%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (77%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (73%); TRADE DISPUTES (73%); IMPORT TRADE (72%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); PUBLIC FINANCE (72%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (72%); TAXES & TAXATION (70%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (68%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (61%); TECHNOLOGY (50%)

Industry: CONSTRUCTION SPENDING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); MANUFACTURING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (61%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); ALEXANDER ACOSTA (58%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: February 1, 2019


End of Document
New Jersey Masala 
 The New York Times
December 14, 2003 Sunday
 Late Edition - Final 


Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 674 words
Byline:  By John S. Major; John S. Major is a co-author of "Caravan to America: Living Arts of the Silk Road."
Body


     SUBURBAN SAHIBS
Three Immigrant Families
and Their Passage
From India to America.
By S. Mitra Kalita.
170 pp. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press. $23.95.
 VIKRAM CHANDRA, Jhumpa Lahiri and other celebrated writers of the South Asian diaspora have given us some of the most exciting new fiction in English of recent years. To a growing shelf of fictional portraits of the Indian expatriate experience, S. Mitra Kalita now adds a work of nonfiction that stands up well in their company. Modest in scope, but as shapely as fiction and as timely as this morning's newspaper, this book is an informative one to read for pleasure.
A staff writer for The Washington Post and the daughter of Indian immigrants, Kalita profiles three Indian-American families pursuing their sometimes elusive dreams in the New World. The Kotharis, the Patels and the Sarmas are in many ways quite different, but together they exemplify a vibrant new force in American life, the growth of ethnic enclaves in America's suburbs, in this case, Edison, Woodbridge and a few other communities in Middlesex County, N.J. Thirty years ago there were hardly any Indians at all in Edison; now they make up some 20 percent of the population.
Pradip and Nandini Kothari are old-timers, having left India in the 1970's. They are stereotypically successful immigrant strivers. Pradip, often known outside the community as Peter, is an entrepreneur, an organizer, a budding politician. Motivated seemingly in equal measure by a compulsion to serve and by a very large ego, he relishes the spotlight. Nandini, a hospital administrator, stands by her man but prefers to avoid the glare. Their college-age daughters, straddling two cultures, effortlessly navigate the complexities of desi (expatriate Indian) society.
The Gujarati surname Patel is synonymous with motel ownership all across America, but Harish and Kapila Patel are not small-business proprietors. Caught in a series of low-wage, dead-end jobs, they struggle against downward mobility. Their eldest daughter married a Sikh taxi driver, shattering the family (though a baby too cute for any grandparent to ignore has begun to heal the breach). Even their studious, conservative younger daughter has begun to doubt the wisdom of obeying her parents in all things. Bad luck? Thick accent? Wrong skills? Hard to say; but immigrant life is difficult, and success is not guaranteed.
Sankumani and Shravani Sarma almost have a guarantee, though. Holders of coveted H-1B ("special skills") visas, these young Assamese software engineers typify the highly educated, internationally minded skilled technicians that India now exports by the tens of thousands. They are secure enough in America for Sanku to devote himself increasingly to his real vocation of performing Indian classical music.
As we learn about India-in-Middlesex, some themes are depressingly predictable: the stupidity and nastiness of the casual racists, rock throwers and slogan scrawlers who make life miserable; visa problems; bad working conditions and below-minimum-wage jobs. Others are heartening: Old World divisions overcome in New World solidarity; communities learning to flex their political muscles; a new generation negotiating the challenges of growing up hyphenated.
Although Kalita does not choose to generalize, many readers will make the mental leap from Middlesex County to other suburban communities of new ethnic Americans -- the Koreans of Palisades Park, the Bosnians of Utica or dozens of other thriving groups and towns. "Suburban Sahibs" presents us with a series of vivid snapshots of the immigrant dynamism that powers America's greatness. The book has a few rough spots. That Oak Tree Road is the Indian commercial strip in Edison and Iselin is explained a couple of times too often. The A.B.C.D. ("American Born Confused Desi") tag wears thin. No matter. Mitra Kalita's book is engrossing; I was sorry when it ended.
Published by a university press, "Suburban Sahibs" may be hard to find. Persevere; this is a book well worth reading. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH 

Document-Type: Review

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WRITERS (90%); CELEBRITIES (89%); FAMILY (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); SMALL BUSINESS (78%); SIKHS & SIKHISM (73%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (72%); WAGES & SALARIES (69%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (66%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (61%); CLASSICAL MUSIC (60%); ENGINEERING (60%); NEGATIVE NEWS (60%); Books and Literature (%); Reviews   (%)

Company:  GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (57%)

Organization: RUTGERS UNIVERSITY (84%)

Ticker: GHC (NYSE) (57%)

Industry: NAICS517311 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (57%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (57%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (57%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (57%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WRITERS (90%); CELEBRITIES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (61%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (60%); ENGINEERING (60%); HOTELS & MOTELS (50%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (50%)

Person: John S Major; S Mitra Kalita

Geographic: NEW JERSEY, USA (91%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (94%); ASIA (79%)

Load-Date: December 14, 2003


End of Document
Transcript of the Republican Presidential Debate in Detroit
The New York Times
March 4, 2016 Friday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 
Length: 20199 words
Body


Following is a transcript of the Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.
KELLY: Good evening, and welcome to the fabulous FOX Theatre in downtown Detroit, the site of the 11th Republican presidential debate of the 2016 campaign. 
  KELLY: I'm Megyn Kelly, along with my co-moderators, Bret Baier and Chris Wallace.
  BAIER: 59 Republican delegates are at stake here in the state of Michigan during next Tuesday's Republican primary, the biggest prize out of four states holding contests that day. For tonight's debate we're partnering with Facebook. The conversation about this election has been intense, as the crowd is here.
  Since January 1st, 53 million people in the U.S. have been talking about the election on Facebook.
  WALLACE: Tonight there are just four candidates on this stage. Their position has been determined by their standing in an average of the five most recent national polls as recognized by FOX News, and conducted and released by March 1st. Here they are.
  Businessman, Donald Trump.
  (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)
  Texas Senator, Ted Cruz.
  (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)
  Florida Senator, Marco Rubio.
  (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)
  And, Ohio Governor, John Kasich.
  (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Tonight's rules are simple. Up to 60 seconds for each answer, 30 seconds for each follow-up response, and if a candidate goes over the allotted time, you will hear this.
  (BELL RINGING)
  BAIER: So pleasant.
  KELLY: Really.
  BAIER: We have a big crowd here, and while we expect the audience to be enthusiastic and responsive at times... (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: ... they may have already been -- we also expect them to be respectful, and we want the candidates to get their full time. So, somewhere between a library and a Red Wings game.
  (LAUGHTER) (CHEERING)
  BAIER: Am I right? Is that OK?
  Let's get started.
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, as you may have heard, the 2012 Republican nominee for President, Mitt Romney, had some things to say about you today.
  He said your domestic policy will lead to recession, he's said your foreign policy will make us less safe, and then he listed what he said are your personal qualities. Quoting now Romney on Trump, quote, ''the bullying, the greed, the showing off, the misogyny, the absurd, third-grade theatrics''.
  (CHEERING)
  He challenged you to answer with substance, not insults. How do you answer Mitt Romney, sir?
  TRUMP: Well look, he was a failed candidate, he should have beaten president Obama very easy.
  He failed miserably, and it was an embarrassment to everybody, including the Republican party. It looked like he went away on a vacation the last month. So, I don't take that, and I guess, obviously, he wants to be relevant. He wants to be back in the game.
  As far as domestic policy and trade which is killing our country, he said free trade and I believe in free trade also. But, if you look at China, and you look Japan, and if you look at Mexico, both at the border, by the way, where they're killing us.
  Both at the border, and with trade -- and every other country we do business with we are getting absolutely crushed on trade. And, he said free trade, I say free trade great. But, not when they're beating us so badly.
  With China we're going to lose $505 billion dollars in terms of trades. You just can't do it.
  Mexico, $58 billion dollars.
  Japan, probably about, they don't know it yet, but about $109 billion dollars.
  Every country we lose money with. As far as I'm concerned, we've got to reduce -- we have to redo our trade deals 100 percent. I have the greatest business people in the world lined up to do it. We will make...
  (BELL RINGING)
  TRUMP: ... great trade deals.
  (CHEERING)
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, Romney also talked about your position on race, and the controversy over your failure to denounce David Duke on Sunday. You have repeatedly disavowed him since then, but I'd like to go deeper than that. What are your views on the Klu Klux Klan, and white supremacists?
  TRUMP: I totally disavow the Klu Klux Klan. I totally disavow David Duke. I've been doing it now for two weeks, this is your -- you're probably about the 18th person that's asked me the question. It was very clear, that question was also talked about in the form of groups. Groups, I want to know which groups are you talking about? You have to tell me which groups?
  Ultimately, he got to the Klu Klux Klan, which obviously I'm going to disavow. And, by the way, if you look on my Twitter account, almost immediately after the program they were disavowed again.
  You know, it's amazing. When I do something on Twitter, everybody picks it up, goes all over the place. But, when I did this one nobody ever picks it up. Take a look at my Twitter account.
  WALLACE: Thank you, sir.
  TRUMP: Thank you. Thanks.(APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Senator Rubio, three weeks ago you said, quote: ''I don't do the personal attacks, primarily because it's not who I am, because I think it's beneath the office that I'm seeking but also because I don't want to embarrass my kids.''
  But in the past week you've mocked Mr. Trump's tan. You've made fun of his spelling. You called him a con artist. You suggested he wet himself backstage at the last debate, along with other vulgar jokes and jabs. So what happened?
  RUBIO: Yes, you know, Bret, let me say something. This campaign for the last year Donald Trump has basically mocked everybody with personal attacks. He has done so to people that are sitting on the stage today. He has done so about people that are disabled. He has done it about every candidate in this race.
  So if there is anyone who has ever deserved to be attacked that way, it has been Donald Trump, for the way he has treated people in the campaign.
  Now that said, I would much prefer to have a policy debate. I hope that's what we will have here tonight. Let's have a policy debate...
  TRUMP: And we will.
  RUBIO: ... let's talk about Donald Trump's strategy and my strategy and Ted's strategy and John Kasich's strategy when it comes to ISIS. And on health care and on the important issues facing this country.
  But let's be honest too about all this. The media has given these personal attacks that Donald Trump has made an incredible amount of coverage. Let's start talking again about the issues that matter to this country. I'm ready to do that starting right here right now tonight.
  BAIER: Mr. Trump, your response?
  TRUMP: Well, I also happened to call him a lightweight, OK? And I have said that. So I would like to take that back. He is really not that much of a lightweight. And as far as -- and I have to say this, I have to say this. He hit my hands. Nobody has ever hit my hands. I have never heard of this. Look at those hands. Are they small hands?
  (LAUGHTER)
  TRUMP: And he referred to my hands, if they are small, something else must be small. I guarantee you there is no problem. I guarantee.
  BAIER: OK. Moving on.
  KELLY: OK, Senator Cruz, you say that you are the true conservative in this race. But 15 states have voted now, and you have won only four of them. You have lost repeatedly with what is supposed to be your core voter groups, including evangelicals and conservatives.
  Hasn't your brand of conservatism been rejected by an electorate that appears to be more taken with Mr. Trump's populist message?
  CRUZ: Well, Megyn, you know, at the end of the day for the folks at home, this is not about the insults back and forth between the candidates. This is not about what attacks we can throw at each other. This is the people at home who are struggling through seven years of Barack Obama.
  This is the single moms who are working two and three jobs, 28, 29 hours a week because their hours have been forcibly reduced because of Obamacare. This is the truck drivers and the steel workers and the mechanics with calluses on their hands who have seen their wages not grow year after year after year while the cost of living goes up.
  This is all the young people coming out of school with student loans up to their eyeballs that aren't able to find a job.
  And I don't think the people of America are interested in a bunch of bickering school children. They are interested in solutions, not slogans. It's easy to say, make things better, make things great. You can even print it and put it on a baseball cap.
  But the question is, do you understand the principles that made America great in the first place? As president, I will repeal every word of Obamacare. I will pull back the regulators that are killing small businesses.
  And we will pass a simple flat tax and abolish the IRS. And what that's going to do, Megyn, is small businesses are going to explode. We are going to see millions of high-paying jobs. We are going to see wages going up. We are going to see opportunity.
  That's where our focus needs to be. That's where my focus is. And that is why our campaign is the only campaign that over and over again has beaten Donald Trump to date, and it's why we are the one campaign that going forward can and will beat Donald Trump in this election.
  KELLY: Go ahead, Mr. Trump. TRUMP: I have heard Ted say that over and over again on television, that he is the only one that can beat me. Just, for the record, I have won 10. He has won three or four. Last week, in fact, on Tuesday, I was a half a million votes higher than him. I was a million votes higher than Marco, 1 million votes. That's a lot of votes. And was by far in first place.
  So I keep hearing that he is the only one that can beat me but he is getting beaten very, very badly. So where does this come from? Where does it come from?
  KELLY: Go ahead, Senator Rubio.
  RUBIO: Yes, I would just say a couple of things. There is no doubt that Donald has done well in these elections. There is no doubt about that. The numbers are there.
  Here is what the numbers also say. Two-thirds of the people who have cast a vote in a Republican primary or caucus have voted against you. They do not want you to be our nominee.RUBIO: And, the reason why is because we are not going to turn over the conservative movement, or the party of Lincoln or Reagan, for example, to someone whose positions are not conservative. To someone who last week defended Planned Parenthood for 30 seconds a debate stage. To someone, for example, that has no ideas on foreign -- someone who thinks the nuclear triad is a rock band from the 1980's.
  TRUMP: Oh yeah, you're...
  RUBIO: ... To someone who time and again on issue after issue has not proven that he has the principals...
  (BELL RINGING)
  RUBIO: ... That outline what the conservative movement has been about. And, as Ted said, the things that made America great.
  America is great because of the conservative principles of limited government and free enterprise, and a strong national defense...
  KELLY: ... OK...
  RUBIO: ... And, our nominee needs to be someone that stands by those things...
  KELLY: ... Alright...
  RUBIO: ... Donald has not demonstrated that.
  KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump, and then we're going to have to go to Governor Kasich.
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: Very nice words, but happens to be wrong. CNN just came out with a poll two days ago that...
  RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)
  TRUMP: ... That national poll -- excuse me...
  RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)
  TRUMP: ... The national poll -- a national poll where he's at 15, he's at 14... RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)...
  TRUMP: ... And, I'm at 49, so when he says 75 percent, that would mean that 80 percent of the people don't dig you, and I'm back down to 50...
  RUBIO: ... Of all the people on this stage, he performs the worst against Hillary Clinton.
  TRUMP: Wrong...
  RUBIO: ... If you're our nominee, we will lose...
  TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton. I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls...
  RUBIO: ... You lose by (INAUDIBLE) points (ph). She will wipe you out.
  TRUMP: I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls...
  RUBIO: If you're our nominee (INAUDIBLE)...
  KELLY: ... Hold on, Senator, hold on...
  TRUMP: ... I think I'm talking...
  RUBIO: ... Oh, excuse me (INAUDIBLE)...
  TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton...
  KELLY: ... Hold on, hold on, hold on...
  TRUMP: ... I hope you think (INAUDIBLE)...
  KELLY: ... The audience cannot understand when you're talking over each other. Finish your point, Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls. The Cue (ph) poll just came out. I beat Hillary Clinton in a recent Fox poll, I beat Hillary Clinton in USA Today, I beat her today in a poll in Ohio. I beat -- I'm the only one that beats Hillary Clinton.
  I beat -- and I have not started on Hillary yet. Believe me, I will...
  (CHEERING)
  TRUMP: ... start soon. I haven't even started.
  KELLY: OK.
  BAIER: Governor Kasich, today you admitted that you have a narrow path to the nomination through a contested convention. Today also Mitt Romney proposed that Republicans should vote for Senator Rubio in Florida. They should vote for you in Ohio. They should vote for Senator Cruz in states that he can beat Mr. Trump to prevent Mr. Trump from getting the nomination.
  So, do you buy Romney's blueprint, and can you say tonight to your Florida supporters that they should vote for Senator Rubio to get a contested convention?
  KASICH: You know, this so much about process. It frankly is boring to me. I would like it clear though, since we're talking about polls, I beat Hillary Clinton by more than 11 points, and the reason it happens...
  (CHEERING)
  TRUMP: ... In one poll...
  KASICH: ... The reason it happens...
  TRUMP: ... In one poll...
  KASICH: ... You know, the reason is because, as the Democrats tell me all the time, I can get the crossover votes. You see, because throughout this campaign I've talked about issues, I have never tried to go and get into these scrums that we're seeing here on the stage. And, people say everywhere I go, ''you seem to be the adult on the stage.''
  (APPLAUSE)
  In terms of -- you know, Mitt Romney's a great guy, but he doesn't determine my strategy. The fact of the matter is I'm running for president because I worked hard to fix this country when I was in Washington as the Chairman of the Budget Committee where we had some of the most significant job growth after we balanced the budget.
  We had wages going up, it was very successful in Ohio. Our wages grow faster than the national average. We're up over 400,000 jobs. We paid down, back in the old days, they paid down half a trillion dollars of the national debt. It's a formula that works. And, I believe that formula will work when I return to Washington as the president.
  And, by the way, I won't need on the job training because I know how to do all of this, and within the first 100 days I will have a plan that will pass the Congress because...
  (BELL RINGING)
  KASICH: ... It is reasonable, and I can bring both sides together...
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: ... But Governor, this is all about process. For voters, they need to see a path to get to the nomination if they're going to support you.
  On Super Tuesday you finished in single digits in nine out of 11 states. So, you can see that your path is through a contested convention. How do you...
  KASICH: ... Well, Bret, I think we're all really there. I mean, the simple fact is that, you know, you all wrote me off. You wrote me off before I even got to New Hampshire, then when I finished in New Hampshire you wrote me off in the South, then you wrote me off in Super Tuesday.
  I split delegates in Vermont with Donald Trump, I finished second in Massachusetts, and we won delegates in Virginia. But, guess what? It's now March Madness and we're heading up North to the place -- to my turf, OK?
  (CHEERING)
  KASICH: And, let me just tell you this, I will win Ohio, and I am going to move all across this country, and over time as people begin to finally hear my message -- you know what people say, Bret, to me all the time?
  Why don't they give you any time on the debate stage? Why is that?(CHEERING)
  KASICH: So now all of a sudden, I'm starting to get it, and what I want the people to know is, I know how to bring people together, Republicans and Democrats. I have successfully, both at the federal level and the state level brought economic growth, wage growth, and economic security to this country.
  And I want to go back and do it again, and I'm going to keep talking about my message of bringing people together and motivating people in the neighborhoods that realize they don't need somebody from Washington galloping in. There are many things they can do where they live, because the strength of our country is in our neighborhoods and our families. And I'm going to keep doing this.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Thank you.
  WALLACE: Well, then, we want to focus now on the economy, which is one of the top issues on Facebook, with 6.6 million people discussing it online. A lot of that conversation is happening here in Detroit, where the unemployment rate is 10.9 percent. That's more than double the national average.
  Senator Rubio, you have taken to calling Mr. Trump a con artist who portrays himself as a hero to working people while he's really been, in your words, ''sticking it'' to the American workers for 40 years. But he has built a big company that employs thousands of people. Question. How many jobs have you created?
  RUBIO: Well, first of all, government doesn't...
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  First of all, Chris, my point is exactly right. He has spent a career of convincing Americans that he's something that he's not in exchange for their money. Now he's trying to do the same in exchange for their country. This is a fact. He talks about these great businesses that he's built. He inherited over $100 million.
  TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.
  RUBIO: And with that money, he lost more money than he made.
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, it's not your turn. You'll get your turn, sir.
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: He can start tonight by announcing that all the Donald Trump clothing will no longer be made in China and in Mexico, but will be made here in the United States.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And on the issue of job creation, I find this interesting. The private sector creates jobs. The jobs of those of us in public service are to put in place policies that allow the economy to grow.
  That's the problem with the Democratic Party. They think government is what creates jobs. Government does not create jobs.
  Now, the way you create jobs is you make America the easiest and the best place in the world to start a business or to expand an existing business. If you go on my website, marcorubio.com, you will see a real plan to fix our taxes, to roll back regulations, to repeal and replace Obamacare, not just lines around the states. Serious policies and proposals.
  WALLACE: Sir? Mr. Trump, I'd like you to respond. You have 30 seconds to respond. But as part of that, could you respond to his specific assertion about Trump Collection clothes, which you say some of it is made in Mexico?
  TRUMP: This little guy has lied so much...
  RUBIO: Here we go.
  TRUMP: ... about my record.
  RUBIO: Here we go. It's personal.
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: He has lied so much about my record.
  WALLACE: Mr. Rubio -- Senator Rubio, why don't you let him finish?
  TRUMP: And I will tell you this. First of all, I got a call from my sister and brother tonight, and they said we had no idea Dad gave you $200 million. Believe me, I started off with $1 million. I built a company that's worth more than $10 billion. And I say it not in a bragging way, but that's the kind of thinking we need.
  Very low debt, tremendous cash flow. My financials are all -- they're all in there with the federal elections. You've seen them. Everybody has seen them. I say it only because that's the kind of thinking this country needs with $19 trillion in debit. Believe me.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: But wait one second. Specifically and quickly on the question, will you promise that you will -- and how soon will you move your clothing collection, the clothes that are made in China and Mexico?
  TRUMP: They devalue their currencies. I will do that. And by the way, I have been doing it more and more. But they devalue their currencies, in particular China. Mexico is doing a big number now, also. Japan is unbelievable what they're doing.
  They devalue their currencies, and they make it impossible for clothing-makers in this country to do clothing in this country. And if you look at what's happened on Seventh Avenue, and you look at what's happened in New York with the garment industry, so much of the clothing now comes out from Vietnam, China, and other places. And it's all because of devaluation.
  By the way, the Trans-Pacific, if you look at the TPP, a total disaster, which, by the way, Marco is in favor of, they need -- it is a disaster for our country. It's trying to be approved by various people, including President Obama. And I'll tell you something. The biggest problem with that is: They don't take into concurrence the devaluation. They're devaluing their currency.
  WALLACE: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Trump. Senator Rubio?
  TRUMP: And they're killing -- they're going to...
  (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: Wait, wait, Senator Rubio.
  RUBIO: The answer is, he's not going to do it. And you know why? Because there are plenty of clothing makers in America.
  (APPLAUSE)
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: If you go on my website, marcorubio.com, everything we have on there is made in America. The reason why he makes it in China or Mexico is because he can make more money on it. That's why he's doing it.
  And the second point, you see what happens, again, when you challenge him on a policy issue. You asked him about the economy, and the first thing he does is launch an attack about some little guy thing. Because he doesn't have answers.
  TRUMP: No, no. I have very good answers.
  RUBIO: And he's asking us to make him the president of the United States of America.
  (CROSSTALK) (APPLAUSE)
  RUBIO: This is not a game.
  TRUMP: I know what's happening with the economy. You don't know a thing.
  RUBIO: Well, then answer the economy question.
  TRUMP: You haven't employed in your life one person.
  RUBIO: But he doesn't answer the employment question.TRUMP: I have employed tens of thousands of people.
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: You haven't employed one person.
  RUBIO: You ever heard of Trump Steaks? You ever heard of Trump Vodka?
  TRUMP: Oh, you know what? You know what? Take a look at Trump Steaks.
  RUBIO: All of these companies he has ruined.
  TRUMP: By the way, that's the other thing...
  RUBIO: Trump Steaks is gone. You have ruined these companies.
  TRUMP: Mitt Romney...
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: ... false, totally false. And now the funny thing is he didn't talk about the hundreds of really successful jobs, the buildings all over the world that have made a fortune.
  (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: I have a policy question for you, sir.
  RUBIO: Let's see if he answers it.
  TRUMP: I will. Don't worry about it, Marco. Don't worry about it. Don't worry about it little Marco, I will.
  RUBIO: All right, well, let's hear it big Donald.
  TRUMP: Don't worry about it, little Marco.
  (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: Gentlemen. Gentlemen.
  (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: You have got to do better than this. TRUMP: This guy has a number one -- the number one absentee record in the United States...
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I would like to ask you a policy question.
  TRUMP: He doesn't show up to vote.
  WALLACE: Your proposed tax cut...
  TRUMP: That's why the people in Florida do not like him.
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your proposed tax cut would add $10 trillion to the nation's debt over 10 years, even if the economy grows the way that you say it will. You insist that you could make up for a good deal of that, you say, by cutting waste, fraud, and abuse.
  TRUMP: Correct.
  WALLACE: Like what? And please be specific.
  TRUMP: Department of Education. We're cutting Common Core. We're getting rid of Common Core. We're bringing education locally. Department of Environmental Protection. We are going to get rid are of it in almost every form. We're going to have little tidbits left but we're going to take a tremendous amount out.
  We have various other things. If you look at the IRS, if you look at every single agency, we can cut it down, and I mean really cut it down and save. The waste, fraud, and abuse is massive.
  Larry Kudlow, great guy, everybody respects him, said my plan for taxes and tax cutting is the best by far of everybody.
  WALLACE: But, Mr. Trump, Mr. Trump, your numbers don't add up. Please put up full screen number four. The Education Department, you talk about cutting, the total budget for the education department is $78 billion.
  And that includes Pell grants for low-income students and aid to states for special education. I assume you wouldn't cut those things. The entire budget for the EPA, the Environmental Protection Agency, $8 billion.
  TRUMO: OK.
  WALLACE: The deficit this year is $544 billion. That's more than a half trillion dollars. Your numbers don't add up, sir.
  TRUMP: Let me explain something. Because of the fact that the pharmaceutical companies -- because of the fact that the pharmaceutical companies are not mandated to bid properly, they have hundreds of billions of dollars in waste.
  We don't bid properly. We don't have proper bidding procedures. The reason we don't is because they take care of all of the senators, all of the congressman, and they don't bid. They don't go out to bid. WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
  TRUMP: Take a look -- excuse me. You are talking about hundreds of billions of dollars...
  WALLACE: No, you are not.
  TRUMP: ... if we went out to the proper bid. Of course you are.
  WALLACE: No, you're not, sir. Let's put up full screen number 2.
  You say that Medicare could save $300 billion a year negotiating lower drug prices. But Medicare total only spends $78 billion a year on drugs. Sir, that's the facts. You are talking about saving more money on Medicare prescription drugs...
  TRUMP: I'm saying saving through negotiation throughout the economy, you will save $300 billion a year.
  WALLACE: But that doesn't really cut the federal deficit.
  TRUMP: And that's a huge -- of course it is. We are going to buy things for less money. Of course it is. That works out...
  WALLACE: That's the only money that we buy -- the only drugs that we pay for is through Medicare.
  TRUMP: I'm not only talking about drugs, I'm talking about other things. We will save $300 billion a year if we properly negotiate. We don't do that. We don't negotiate. We don't negotiate anything.
  KASICH: Can I...
  WALLACE: No. I promise I will get to you in a moment, sir.
  Senator Cruz, one of centerpieces of your campaign, in fact, you mentioned it again tonight, is that you will abolish the IRS. Question though, who will collect the taxes that you are still calling for? Who will oversee to make sure that people pay the taxes that they rightfully owe? And who will check on the various tax deductions and tax credits that you still want?
  CRUZ: So my simple flat tax I have rolled out in precise detail how it will operate where every American can fill out our taxes on a postcard. And if you want to actually see the postcard, see all the details, you can find them on our Web site. It's tedcruz.org.
  When he we get rid of all the corporate welfare, all the subsidies, all the carve-outs in the IRS code, it dramatically simplifies it. And under Obama, the IRS has become so corrupt and so politicized we need to abolish it all together.
  Now, at the end of that there will still be an office in the Treasury Department to receive the postcards but it will be dramatically simpler. CRUZ: And let me take a moment, Chris, to go back to go back to this exchange that was going on.
  In between all of the insults, let me point out the specificity that was lacking. It's very easy to say, ''Let's cut waste, fraud, and abuse.'' I've rolled out a detailed plan to cut $500 billion in federal spending, specifying exactly what I would cut.
  (APPLAUSE)
  It's easy to say it, but one of the great disconnects to all the people, all of the voters, I understand the folks who are supporting Donald right now. You're angry. You're angry at Washington, and he uses angry rhetoric.
  But for 40 years, Donald has been part of the corruption in Washington that you're angry about.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And you're not going to stop the corruption in Washington by supporting someone who has supported liberal Democrats for four decades, from Jimmy Carter to John Kerry to Hillary Clinton. You're not going to stop the corruption and the cronyism by supporting someone who has used government power for private gain. Instead, we need a president who stands with the American people.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: Governor Kasich, I promise I will get to you. But you do get 30 seconds to respond, Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: Well, all of a sudden, I hear for 40 years I've been involved in Washington. I have been supporting people for many years. And these people have been politicians, and they've been on both sides, Democrats, Republicans, liberals, conservatives. I've supported everybody, because, until recently, I wasn't a politician, and I hope maybe you don't all consider me a politician right now. I hate the term politician.
  But I've been supporting politicians. A recent article somewhere said Donald Trump is a world-class businessman who goes out and he does get along with everybody. I've supported Democrats, and I've supported Republicans. And as a businessman, I owed that to my company, to my family, to my workers, to everybody to get along.
  Part of the problem we have in Washington, Chris...
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
  TRUMP: ... is it's total gridlock. Nobody gets along. We need people to get along. We need to be able to get things done.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: Governor Kasich, Democrats, as you know, will make income inequality a big issue in the general election. You support raising the minimum wage, although you say not to the $15 an hour that Democrats are talking about. Mr. Trump opposes any increase because he says it will price American workers out of the world market. Is he wrong about that? No increase in the minimum wage?
  KASICH: Well, well, wait a minute, first of all, I didn't say I was for an increase in the federal minimum wage. I said in Ohio we increased it modestly every single year. So I'm not for a federal minimum wage increase.
  WALLACE: But you did talk about states doing it.
  KASICH: Well, states -- if states want to do it, they ought to sit down with businesspeople and the lawmakers and figure out what will work. But hold on a second here with everything else.
  I'm the only person on this stage who actually was the chief architect of balancing the federal budget. It's not a theory for me. It's not -- it's not some -- you have to know how to put everything together. And you know, I spent 10 years of my life to get there, and I did not do that because I'm worshiping at some balanced budget shrine.
  The reason I did it is when you have commonsense regulations, lower taxes on individuals and businesses, and you have a fiscal plan that makes sense, the job creators will expand employment. And what happened? When I was there, the jobs were exploding. Bill Clinton's tried to take credit for it. When I went to Ohio, we're up 400,000 jobs. It's the same formula.
  But it isn't easy. I fought the entire Washington establishment and won, because when you balance a budget, you must affect every single thing. Everything in the federal government specifically. You cannot get there with theories or broad statements, and you have to be willing to take the heat. In fact, I fought a Republican president, who I thought was not offering constructive proposals to fix this economy.
  So when we talk about all this, there's one person on this stage and one person who's been a candidate for president in either party that restored economic strength, growth, a balanced budget, paid down debt, cut taxes, the things that people in this country want. No theories. Reality.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: Thank you, Governor.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: All right. Let's talk immigration for a little bit. Senator Cruz, let's start with you. You have repeatedly touted how you have stood shoulder to shoulder with Senator Jeff Sessions to fight illegal immigration and amnesty. But Senator Sessions just endorsed Donald Trump. If voters want Jeff Sessions-style immigration policies, isn't their choice rather clear?
  CRUZ: Yes, their choice is very clear. If you look to the actual record -- you know, Donald mentioned a moment ago that he was just doing business when he was writing checks to liberal Democrats. But that's not, in fact, the checks he was writing.
  Listen, we could all understand if you write a check to a city commission because you're looking for a zoning waiver on building a building. That may be corrupt, but you could understand real estate developers doing that.CRUZ: That's not what Donald Trump did. Donald Trump supported Jimmy Carter over Ronald Reagan. Donald supported John Kerry over George W. Bush. If you don't like Obamacare, Donald Trump funded Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi taking over Congress to pass Obamacare.
  On immigration, if you don't like amnesty, if you don't like the Gang of Eight, Donald Trump funded five of the eight members of the Gang of Eight $50,000.
  And let's talk about this election. The choice Republican primary voters are making is who is best prepared to stand up to Hillary Clinton and beat Hillary Clinton. Donald Trump has written checks to Hillary Clinton not once, not twice, not three times. Ten times. And four of those checks were not to her Senate campaign. It wasn't that she was the New York senator and it was a cost of doing business. It was to her presidential campaign.
  Donald Trump in 2008 wrote four checks to elect Hillary Clinton as president.
  KELLY: OK.
  CRUZ: So I'd like to ask Donald, why did you write checks to Hillary Clinton to be president in 2008? It wasn't for business. And how can you stand on a debate stage now with her and say you don't think she should be president?
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: Actually, it was for business. It was. It was. It was for business. I pride myself, including outside of the United States. I'm doing almost 120 deals outside of the -- which I hope to be able to stop very soon and let my children handle it -- but we're doing many, many deals outside of the United States.
  I support politicians. In 2008, I supported Hillary Clinton. I supported many other people, by the way. And that was because of the fact that I'm in business. I did support very heavily Ronald Reagan. I also supported George Bush, by the way.
  KELLY: All right. Mr. Trump...
  CRUZ: But what would you say...
  KELLY: Well, stand by -- stand by, Senator Cruz.
  CRUZ: ... to Hillary Clinton on the debate stage when you wrote her a check in 2008, wrote her four checks to be president?
  TRUMP: Let me tell you, something, Ted. The last person that Hillary Clinton wants to face is Donald Trump. That I can...
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Let's move on. And with all due respect, we have -- we have questions. We have questions.
  TRUMP: That I can tell you.
  (CROSSTALK)
  KELLY: No, no, no. Hold on. Hold on. We can do more of this later. Mr. Trump, hi.
  TRUMP: Hello.
  KELLY: How are you doing?
  TRUMP: Nice to be with you, Megyn.
  KELLY: Great to have you here.
  TRUMP: You're looking well. You're looking well.
  KELLY: As are you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  Back in January, you gave an off-the-record interview to the New York Times. It was apparently audiotaped. Now, a recent report in Buzzfeed citing sources at the Times reports that in that interview you expressed flexibility when it comes to your immigration policy, specifically with respect to your promise to deport the 11 million people who are now living here illegally. You have suggested that you may have expressed some flexibility when it comes to the size of the wall that you want to build. But did you tell them, specifically, that you are flexible when it comes to your deportation plan?
  TRUMP: I don't know exactly what -- when you talk about off the record. First of all, Buzzfeed? They were the ones that said under no circumstances will I run for president. And were they wrong. But a lot of people said that.
  Then, I did have a meeting with the editorial board of the New York Times, a very nice meeting. Many of those things were off the record, I think at their suggestion and my suggestion. And I think being off the record is a very important thing. I think it's a very, very powerful thing.
  And I will say this. These three gentlemen have gone off the record many times with reporters. And I think they want to honor it, and I would always honor that.
  I will say, though, in terms of immigration -- and almost anything else -- there always has to be some, you know, tug and pull and deal. And, you know, when I watch Ted stand on the Senate floor, I had great respect for what he did. He stood there for a day-and-a- half or something. In the meantime, what came of it? Nothing. You have to be able to have some flexibility, some negotiation.
  Now, sometimes you ask for more than you want and you negotiate down to the point. I may have discussed something like that with the New York Times, but I would never release off-the-record conversations. I don't think it's fair, frankly, to do that to anybody.
  KELLY: How flexible are you on this issue?
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  TRUMP: Not very flexible. No, not very flexible. I give the example -- I'm going to build a wall. I'm the one that wants the wall. I'm the one that can build the wall.
  (APPLAUSE)
  It's going to get built. And by the way, Mexico is going to pay for the wall. I can tell you that. Mexico is going to pay for the wall.
  (APPLAUSE)
  But -- and I used an example. And this isn't necessarily what was said, but whatever was said, the wall's 50 feet high. Is it going to be 45 feet or 40 feet? That could very well be. That could very well -- he wants it to be higher.
  (LAUGHTER)
  That could very well be. But there's always give and take. There's always negotiation. And the best negotiator that knows what he's doing will make a great deal. But we need give and take in government. If you don't have give and take, you're never going to agree on anything.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Senator Rubio, you not only supported the failed immigration reform effort through the Gang of Eight, but you're still on record as favoring an eventual path to citizenship for those who are here illegally. And in addition...
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  ... you favored in-state tuition for Florida illegal immigrants. You've been hitting Mr. Trump hard on this flexibility discussion with the New York Times, but his supporters might say at least his opening stance was tough.
  RUBIO: Well, first of all, let me say that on the issue of the off-the-record, that's not up to the New York Times. That's up to you, Donald. If tonight you tell the New York Times to release the audio, they will do it, and we can exactly see what your true views are on immigration...
  TRUMP: Fine (ph).
  RUBIO: ... because it is a major issue, in your campaign that you've made a center issue. Now, as far as my record on it is concerned, I absolutely want to solve this issue. And I did the best we could in a Senate that was controlled by liberal Democrats and Harry Reid in the hopes that the House, made up of conservatives, would take it up and make it even stronger. And I said that repeatedly at the time.
  I'm not just saying that now; I said it throughout that process. We do need to do with this issue. (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  RUBIO: When I'm president it will not be dealt with the way it was done in the Senate.
  It will be done first and foremost by bringing illegal immigration under control and proving it to the American people. And only after that is done can anything else happen.
  And it will be something the American people support. We'll see what they are willing to support. It's not going to be an executive order and we're not going to ram it down their throats.
  KELLY: Mr. Trump, we will let respond, but will you release the tapes? Will you authorize of The Times to release the tapes?
  TRUMP: I will say one thing, what Marco said is -- I understand it. He is talking about a little give and take and a little negotiation. And you know what? That's OK. That's not the worst thing in the world.
  There is nothing wrong with that. I happen to be much stronger on illegal immigration. Sheriff Joe Arpaio endorsed me. And if he endorses you, believe me, you are the strongest, from Arizona.
  But give and take is OK. And I thought what he said is OK. We may differ on the degree. But what he said to me is OK.
  KELLY: Will you release the tapes?
  TRUMP: No. I never do that. I would not do that. I don't think -- I have too much respect -- if I deal with you off the record, if I deal with Bret or Chris off the record, I have too much respect for that process to say, just release everything. I would not do that.
  KELLY: OK. Stand by. We're going to continue this right after the break. We have more.
  BAIER: Coming up, more with Megyn on immigration, plus questions on other top issues, including the war on terror. The ''FOX News Republican Presidential Debate Live from Detroit'' continues after a quick break.(COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  KELLY: Welcome back everybody to the FOX News Republican presidential debate, live from the FOX theater here in Detroit. Let's get back now to the questions.
  Mr. Trump, your campaign website to this day argues that more visas for highly skilled workers would, quote, ''decimate American workers''. However, at the CNBC debate, you spoke enthusiastically in favor of these visas. So, which is it?
  TRUMP: I'm changing. I'm changing. We need highly skilled people in this country, and if we can't do it, we'll get them in. But, and we do need in Silicon Valley, we absolutely have to have.
  So, we do need highly skilled, and one of the biggest problems we have is people go to the best colleges. They'll go to Harvard, they'll go to Stanford, they'll go to Wharton, as soon as they're finished they'll get shoved out. They want to stay in this country. They want to stay here desperately, they're not able to stay here. For that purpose, we absolutely have to be able to keep the brain power in this country.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: So you abandoning the position on your website...
  TRUMP: ... I'm changing it, and I'm softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.
  KELLY: And you're not releasing the discussion with the New York Times behind closed doors...
  TRUMP: ... That is correct.
  KELLY: Which will have some asking whether, on your immigration policies, you're really just playing to people's fantasies, which is a tactic...
  TRUMP: ... No, I'm not playing.
  KELLY: ... you praised in your book, The Art of the Deal.
  TRUMP: I'm not playing to anybody's fantasies, I'm playing to the fact that our country is in trouble, that we have a tremendous problem with crime. The border is a disaster, it's like a piece of Swiss cheese. We're going to stop it, we're going to stop people from coming into our country illegally. We're going to stop it.
  (APPLAUSE) (CHEERING)
  KELLY: Senator Cruz, not long ago you propose quintupling the number of these foreign worker visas. After you announced for president, you reversed yourself, citing reports that the program was being abused. But, that abuse had been around long before your 180. In fact, it was so bad that just a few months earlier that a bipartisan group of senators called for an investigation and you declined to join them.
  Isn't it a good thing that the American public didn't trust Ted on that one?
  CRUZ: Well, the abuse of the H1-B program has been rampant. On the face of that H1-B abuse, I have proposed, and promised as president that I will impose a 180 day moratorium on the H1B program to implement a comprehensive investigation and audit because you got U.S. companies that are firing American workers, bringing in foreign workers, and forcing them to train their replacements.
  And, I would note that is not dissimilar to what we discovered at the last debate concerning the hotel that Donald owns down in Florida. Down in Florida that hotel has brought in hundreds of foreign workers, and afterwards it was really striking.
  I watched the CNN interview Donald did where he explained, he said, well the problem is you can't find Americans who are qualified, or who want to work as waiters and waitresses. Now, let me ask the people here, how many people have worked as a waiter or waitress?
  (APPLAUSE)
  CRUZ: Millions across this country. That is an astonishing statement. You know, Marco's Dad started as a bartender. My Dad started washing dishes, and yet, you know how many Americans wanted those jobs?
  (BELL RINGING)
  CRUZ: Roughly 300 applied, Donald hired 17. And, that's why this New York Times tape is so troubling because what's been reported is that Donald told the Editorial Board of the New York Times what I'm saying on immigration, I don't believe. I'm not going to build a wall, I'm not going to deport people, this is all just rhetoric for the voters.
  Now, if he didn't say that, he has an easy solution. Simply release the tape.
  But, for everyone at home who's mad at politicians that lied to us, Donald's record right now as he standing here...
  KELLY: ... OK.
  CRUZ: ... His record right now is one of repeatedly hiring illegal aliens...
  KELLY: ... Times up, sir...
  CRUZ: ... abusing (ph) American workers...
  KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: First of all I've had tens of thousands of people working for me, most of which are -- 98, 97, 98 percent of the people in this country, from this country. I'm very proud of it. You have a club in Palm Beach, Florida called the Mar-a-Lago Club, it's a very, very successful club. It has a very short season, it's called, the Season, and it goes from November until March.
  It's a few months, five months at the most. People don't want a short-term job. They don't want -- so, we will bring people in, and we will send the people out. All done legally, all done with the process that's...
  (BELL RINGING)
  TRUMP: ... Approved by government in Palm Beach, or West Palm Beach. We bring people in, we bring them out. We want to hire as many Americans as we can, but they don't want part-time, very short part-time jobs.
  KELLY: Understood. Thank you.
  RUBIO: That's not accurate. I'm sorry, Megyn, that's not accurate. That's my -- there were at least 300 Americans that applied last year, none of them were hired. Some of them...
  TRUMP: ... Wrong...
  RUBIO: ... have been interviewed...
  TRUMP: ... That's wrong.
  RUBIO: ... They were not hired...
  TRUMP: ... Wrong...
  RUBIO: ... And, here's why he does it this way, let me explain why he (INAUDIBLE) H2-B...
  TRUMP: ... Wrong...
  RUBIO: ... Because when you bring them in this way, when you bring someone in on one of these visas they can't go work for anybody else. They either work for you or they have to go back home. You basically have them captive, so you don't have to worry about competing for higher wages with another hotel down the street. And, that's why you bring workers from abroad.
  You argue that you're here to fight on behalf of the American worker, but when you have chances to help the American worker... (BELL RINGING)...
  RUBIO: ... but when you have chances to help the American workers, you're making your clothes overseas and you're hiring your workers from overseas.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Go ahead, sir.
  TRUMP: The -- the -- the other hotels during the season, they do the same thing. They take in a lot of people, because you can't get them. They take in a lot of people. Long-term employees, we don't do that, but short-term employees, we have no choice but to do it, and other hotels in that very, very hot area. It is a very hot area.
  RUBIO: There were Americans in that hot area.
  TRUMP: It's very, very hard to get people. But other hotels do the exact same thing. And just so you understand, just again, this is a legal process. This is a procedure. It's part of the law. I take advantage of that. There's nothing wrong with it. We have no choice.
  KELLY: All right.
  CRUZ: Donald, you could resolve this issue very quickly by simply...
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  ... releasing the New York Times tape. Because, listen, maybe it's right.
  TRUMP: This wasn't on the subject.
  CRUZ: ... that you didn't tell them you're misleading the American people. If that's the case...
  TRUMP: Tapes were not on the subject, but that's...
  CRUZ: If you didn't tell them that, the tapes will prove you're innocent.
  KELLY: OK.
  CRUZ: But if, in fact, you went to Manhattan and said I'm lying to the American people, then the voters have a right to know.
  TRUMP: No, no. You're the liar. You're the lying guy up here.
  (CROSSTALK)
  CRUZ: Because we've been lied to too many times.
  TRUMP: You're the -- you're the one. You're the one.
  CRUZ: Why don't you release the tapes? Release the tapes.
  TRUMP: You're the one. Now, let me just tell you. Let me just tell you.
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: Excuse me. Excuse me. I've given my answer, Lyin' Ted. I've given my answer.
  KELLY: All right. Let's leave it at that.
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  Let's leave it at that. We have more to get to.
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  BAIER: Gentlemen, the next topic to discuss is terrorism. Senator Rubio, ISIS is a big topic of conversation on Facebook. We have a map that shows the conservation about ISIS around the country. You proposed sending a larger number of American ground troops to help defeat ISIS in Syria and Iraq...
  RUBIO: That's correct, and Libya.
  BAIER: ... but military commanders say the biggest ISIS threat to Europe in particular now is coming from Libya, not Syria.
  RUBIO: Correct.
  BAIER: So just to be clear, if you're for putting more U.S. ground troops in Iraq and Syria, are you also ready to send U.S. ground troops on the ground in Libya?
  RUBIO: Well, Bret, what I've argued from the very beginning is ISIS -- in order to defeat ISIS, you must deny them operating spaces. This is how ISIS or any radical group, for that matter, can grow. It's how Al Qaida was able to carry out 9/11, is that the Taliban gave them an operating space in Afghanistan.
  Today that operating space has largely been based in Iraq and Syria, but I've been warning about the Libyan presence for the better part of two years. So they need to be targeted wherever they have an operating space. They do need to be defeated on the ground by a ground force made up primarily of Sunni Arabs themselves. This is a radical Sunni movement. They can only be defeated if they are driven out and the territory is held by Sunni Arabs. But it will require a specific number of American special operators, in combination with an increase in air strikes. And that will include, if necessary, operating spaces in Libya, which, in fact, they are using to project into the Sinai against Egypt and ultimately into Europe, as well.
  BAIER: Governor Kasich, would you put ground troops in Libya?
  KASICH: Well, first of all, just to be clear, not only did I serve for 18 years on the Defense Committee, more than anybody on this stage, but, secondly, I was called into the Pentagon after 9/11 to help Secretary Rumsfeld with some of his difficulties.
  I will say, look, let me tell you what happened with Libya. And I pointed out in the last debate -- Hillary Clinton worked aggressively to depose Moammar Gadhafi. We had no business doing it. He was working with us. He was cooperating with us. He denuclearized. And now they pushed him out, and now we have a fertile ground for ISIS.
  Fortunately in Libya, there's only a few cities on the coast, because most of Libya is a desert. The fact of the matter is, we absolutely have to be -- and not just with special forces. I mean, that's not going to work. Come on. You've got to go back to the invasion when we pushed Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait. We have to be there on the ground in significant numbers. We do have to include our Muslim Arab friends to work with us on that. And we have to be in the air.
  And we -- it should be a broad coalition, made up of the kinds of people that were involved when we defeated Saddam. Now, you've got to be on the ground and in the air both in Syria and Iraq. And at some point, we will have to deal with Libya. I am very concerned about ISIS getting their hands on the oilfields in Libya and being able to fund their operations. The fact is cool, calm, deliberate, effective, take care of the job, and then come home. That's what we need to do with our military foreign policy.(APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Mr. Trump, just yesterday, almost 100 foreign policy experts signed on to an open letter refusing to support you, saying your embracing expansive use of torture is inexcusable. General Michael Hayden, former CIA director, NSA director, and other experts have said that when you asked the U.S. military to carry out some of your campaign promises, specifically targeting terrorists' families, and also the use of interrogation methods more extreme than waterboarding, the military will refuse because they've been trained to turn down and refuse illegal orders.
  So what would you do, as commander-in-chief, if the U.S. military refused to carry out those orders?
  TRUMP: They won't refuse. They're not going to refuse me. Believe me.
  BAIER: But they're illegal.
  TRUMP: Let me just tell you, you look at the Middle East. They're chopping off heads. They're chopping off the heads of Christians and anybody else that happens to be in the way. They're drowning people in steel cages. And he -- now we're talking about waterboarding.
  This really started with Ted, a question was asked of Ted last -- two debates ago about waterboarding. And Ted was, you know, having a hard time with that question, to be totally honest with you. They then came to me, what do you think of waterboarding? I said it's fine. And if we want to go stronger, I'd go stronger, too, because, frankly...
  (APPLAUSE)
  ... that's the way I feel. Can you imagine -- can you imagine these people, these animals over in the Middle East, that chop off heads, sitting around talking and seeing that we're having a hard problem with waterboarding? We should go for waterboarding and we should go tougher than waterboarding. That's my opinion.
  BAIER: But targeting terrorists' families?
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: And -- and -- and -- I'm a leader. I'm a leader. I've always been a leader. I've never had any problem leading people. If I say do it, they're going to do it. That's what leadership is all about.
  BAIER: Even targeting terrorists' families?
  TRUMP: Well, look, you know, when a family flies into the World Trade Center, a man flies into the World Trade Center, and his family gets sent back to where they were going -- and I think most of you know where they went -- and, by the way, it wasn't Iraq -- but they went back to a certain territory, they knew what was happening. The wife knew exactly what was happening.
  They left two days early, with respect to the World Trade Center, and they went back to where they went, and they watched their husband on television flying into the World Trade Center, flying into the Pentagon, and probably trying to fly into the White House, except we had some very, very brave souls on that third plane. All right?
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Senator Cruz, you were mentioned.
  TRUMP: I have no problem with it.
  BAIER: Senator Cruz?
  CRUZ: Bret, you know, I think the American people understand that yelling and cursing at people doesn't make you a tough guy. We need a commander-in-chief that, number one, will rebuild the military, just like Ronald Reagan did in 1981 coming out of the weak Jimmy Carter administration. He passed tax reform and regulatory reform. The economy took off. It generated millions in high-paying jobs, trillions in new revenue. He rebuilt the military, bankrupted the Soviet Union, and won the Cold War.
  As president, I will do the exact same thing with radical Islamic terrorism. We will rebuild this military so that it remains the mightiest fighting force on the face of the planet. And then, when I am commander-in-chief, every militant on the face of the Earth will understand that if they go and join ISIS, if they wage jihad against the United States of America, they are signing their death warrant.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: But, Senator Cruz, in 2013, you said you were open -- you were open to the possibility that Edward Snowden had performed a considerable public service, you said back then, in revealing certain aspects of the NSA procedures. Many of your colleagues in the Senate, including Senator Rubio, called him a traitor. It took you until January of this year to call him a traitor and say he should be tried for treason. Why the change of heart? And why did it take you so long?
  CRUZ: Well, Bret, as someone who spent much of his life in law enforcement, I believe you should start with the facts and evidence first before ending up with the verdict. When the news first broke of the United States government engaging in massive surveillance on American citizens, that was a very troubling development, and it's why the United States Congress acted to correct it.
  Now, at the same time, I said in that initial statement that if the evidence indicated that Edward Snowden violated the law, he should be prosecuted for violating the law. And, indeed, since then, the evidence is clear that not only does Snowden violate the law, but it appears he committed treason. Treason is defined under the Constitution as giving aid and comfort to the enemies of America, and what Snowden did made it easier for terrorists to avoid detection.
  And Snowden's comments afterwards, and his behavior afterwards, he fled to Russia, he fled to China. His conducts afterwards indicates that he was not a whistleblower, but instead he was undermining the ability to defend this country. But we need a president who isn't rash, who doesn't just pop off at the -- at the hip, but waits to see what the facts are and then acts to defend this country.(APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Mr. Trump, you've repeatedly deflected calls for specific national security or defense policy plans with the claim that you'll ask the best people when you become president, and take their advice.
  So who are the best people? Can you reveal two or three names that you trust for national security?
  TRUMP: I think Richard Haass is excellent. I have a lot of respect for him. I think General Keane is excellent. I think that there are -- I like Colonel Jacobs very much. I see him. I know him. I have many people that I think are really excellent but in the end it's going to be my decision.
  When you just asked the question about Snowden, I will tell you right from the beginning, I said he was a spy and we should get him back. And if Russia respected our country, they would have sent him back immediately, but he was a spy. It didn't take me a long time to figure that one out. Believe me.
  But I would get the best people, people that I'd be comfortable with. And we will do the right thing.
  KASICH: Bret, it's very interesting to note, I think it's for the good of the record here that they took a survey of foreign policy magazines, 700 foreign policy experts, who would be the best person to conduct foreign policy of all the candidates in the race?
  I received 55 percent of the vote. Jeb Bush received 30 percent of the vote. And everybody else, none of them made double digits. And that's because you have to have the experience.
  And you know, we hear about Ronald Reagan rebuilding the military. I was there when Ronald Reagan rebuilt the military. I worked with him. I was there when Ronald Reagan rebuilt the economy. I was there, and I worked with him. I knew Ronald Reagan.
  And I'll leave it right there with what comes after that. You can figure that one out.
  BAIER: Governor Kasich, thank you.
  KELLY: We're going to have more questions for the candidates right after this break. And during the commercial break, join us for a -- Facebook live on the FOX News Facebook page and tell us what you think about tonight's debate in the comment section. (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  BAIER: Welcome back to the historic Fox Theater in downtown Detroit and the Republican presidential debate. Let's get right back to the questions.
  KELLY: Mr. Trump, one of the things people love about you is they believe you tell it like it is. But time and time again in this campaign, you have actually told the voters one thing only to reverse yourself within weeks or even sometimes days. We've teed up just three examples in a videotape, similar to those we used with Senator Rubio and Senator Cruz in the last debate. The first is on whether the war in Afghanistan was a mistake. Watch.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  CUOMO: What about in Afghanistan? Do you believe that American boots should stay on the ground in Afghanistan to stabilize the situation?
  TRUMP: We've made a terrible mistake getting involved there in the first place. That thing will collapse about two seconds after they leave. Just as I said that Iraq was going to collapse after we leave.
  (UNKNOWN): About Afghanistan, you said we made a terrible mistake getting involved there in the first place.
  TRUMP: We made a mistake going into Iraq. I've never said we made a mistake...
  (UNKNOWN): Our question was about Afghanistan. That day on October...
  TRUMP: Well, OK, I never said that.
  (UNKNOWN): ... was on Afghanistan.
  TRUMP: OK. Wouldn't matter. I never said it.
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  KELLY: Next, on whether we should accept...
  TRUMP: Should I respond to that first?
  KELLY: Two more, and then you'll have the floor. Next on whether we should accept the Syrian refugees...
  TRUMP: You'll be here a long time.
  KELLY: On whether we should accept the Syrian refugees.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  O'REILLY: Do you object to migrants who are getting out of the Middle East and North Africa? Do you object to them coming to the USA?
  TRUMP: I hate the concept of it, but on a humanitarian basis, with what's happening, you have to. It's living in Hell in Syria; there's no question about it. They're living in Hell.
  HANNITY: Are you saying absolutely people from Syria, the Middle East, should we allow any of them into this country?
  TRUMP: Look, from a humanitarian standpoint, I'd love to help, but we have our own problems. We have so many problems that we have to solve.
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  KELLY: Most recently, on whether President George W. Bush lied to get us into the Iraq war.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  TRUMP: They lied. They said there were weapons of mass destruction; there were none. And they knew there were none.
  I don't know if he lied or not. He could have lied. Maybe he did. Maybe he didn't. I guess you'd have to ask him.
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  KELLY: And there are many other examples. So how is any of this ''telling it like it is''?
  TRUMP: Well, on Afghanistan, I did mean Iraq. I think you have to stay in Afghanistan for a while, because of the fact that you're right next to Pakistan, which has nuclear weapons, and we have to protect that. Nuclear weapons change the game.
  And I was always against going into Iraq. In fact, I -- believe me, I was always against it. There was some cases where I sort of -- in one interview with a great friend of mine, and yours, Howard Stern -- said that -- said that...
  (LAUGHTER)
  I said very meekly, long before we went in, I said very meekly, well, maybe, maybe, I don't know. By the time it got to that point, I was always against Iraq. But Afghanistan, I felt -- and in that one, if you notice, I corrected it the second day. OK? Second question? KELLY: There are several examples, Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: No, no. But...
  KELLY: We went through the Afghanistan being a mistake. Within one day, you reversed yourself on Syrian refugees.
  TRUMP: Now on -- let me explain that. You're right. Let me explain. First time the question had been put to me, it was very early on. The migration had just started. And I had heard that the number was a very, very small number.
  By the second day, two or three days later, I heard the number was going to be thousands and thousands of people. You know, when they originally heard about it, they were talking about bringing very, very small numbers in.
  And I said, begrudgingly, well, I guess maybe that's OK. It was not like, ''Let's bring them in,'' because I think we should build a safe zone in -- we should really -- what we should be doing is building safe zones so they can stay in their own country and not go all over, and at least this way we're not going to have the problem. That's what we have to do.
  (APPLAUSE)
  But just -- just to set -- because I fully understand what you're asking. When I first heard the question, first time the question was ever asked to me, first time I really had known about the question, the migration had just started. I was very much like, OK, by the time I went back and studied it, and they were talking about bringing thousands and thousands, I changed my tune. And I don't think there's anything wrong with that.
  KELLY: But the point I'm going for is you change your tune on so many things, and that has some people saying, what is his core?
  TRUMP: Megyn, I have a very strong core.
  (APPLAUSE)
  I have a very strong core. But I've never seen a successful person who wasn't flexible, who didn't have a certain degree of flexibility. You have to have a certain degree of flexibility.
  (APPLAUSE)
  You can't -- for instance, let's say, on -- on the second question, you can't say it's OK, and then you find out it's not OK, and you don't want to do anything. You have to be flexible, because you learn. I mean, before I knew the question was asked by Bill, and the next day, or the couple of days later, the question was asked by, by -- you know -- I was asked by a number of people, actually. I was asked by Sean, but I was asked by a number of people. But by that time, the number had increased significantly.
  KELLY: Sean was the next day after Bill.
  TRUMP: The next day. But I had learned. I mean, nobody had ever asked me the question. This was brand new. But -- and I really mean it. You have to show a degree of flexibility. If you're going to be one way and you think it's wrong, does that mean the rest of your life you have to go in the wrong direction because you don't want to change? (APPLAUSE)
  KASICH: Megyn.
  TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE)
  KELLY: Go ahead, Governor.
  KASICH: I did 200 meetings in New Hampshire, I don't know how many in Michigan now. In these townhalls people come in and they're very emotional meetings. And, you know what they really want to know? If somebody tells them something, can they believe it?
  And, the reason why people are so upset in this country is because politicians all the time tell them what they want to hear. And, they go to Washington, or they go to the state capital, wherever, and they don't deliver on those promises.
  You know, when I ran for Governor of Ohio, I said not only would we balance the budget, but we would cut taxes. People said that can't be done. I wouldn't have said it if I didn't believe it.
  We cut taxes in Ohio more than any governor in the country, and $5 billion dollars worth of tax cuts -- we're not running a surplus in Ohio. But, you see, what's getting in the hearts and souls of the people is they want change, and they keep putting outsiders in to bring about the change, then the change doesn't come. Then they put more outsiders in because we're putting people in that don't understand compromise. They don't understand policy...
  (BELL RINGING)
  (APPLAUSE)
  KASICH: ... They're getting more and more frustrated with the system which is why we must pick somebody that has a record of achievement, not just talk.
  KELLY: OK.
  KASICH: Not just talk, but a record of achievement. That's how we'll restore credibility..
  RUBIO: ... This isn't just about flexibility.
  KELLY: Go ahead, Senator. RUBIO: There's a difference between flexibility and telling people whatever you think you need to say to get them to do what you want them to do.
  (CHEERING)
  RUBIO: And, that's what Donald has done throughout his career.
  TRUMP: (INAUDIBLE)
  RUBIO: Well, he did, and that's why Trump University...
  TRUMP: ... That's not right...
  RUBIO: ... Is so relevant here. I saw this video last week where he's sitting in front of a camera saying we're going to hire the best people, and I'm going to hand pick them. There are going to be hand picked and instructors, the best instructors in the world. One of them, but the way, was the manager at a Buffalo Wild Wing. And, that's who they hired to do this, and people borrowed money, and they signed up for this fake university.
  And, these people owe all this money now, and they got nothing in return for it, but you are willing to say whatever you had to say...
  (BELL RINGING)
  RUBIO: ... To get them to give you their money...
  KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump...
  TRUMP: ... We'll find out when we have the (INAUDIBLE)...
  RUBIO: ... And, we're not going to do that to our country...
  TRUMP: ... And, by the way, just so you understand...
  (APPLAUSE)
  TRUMP: ... This is a case I could have settled very easily, but I don't settle cases very easily when I'm right. Ninety-eight percent approval rating, we have an ''A'' from the Better Business Bureau...
  RUBIO: ... That's false...
  TRUMP: ... We have a 98 percent approval rating from the people who took the course. We have an ''A'' from the Better Business Bureau. And, people like it. Now, he's saying they didn't learn.
  We have many, many people that will be witnesses. Again, I don't settle cases. I don't do it because that's why I don't get sued very often, because I don't settle, unlike a lot of other people.
  We have a situation where we will win in court...
  (BELL RINGING) TRUMP: But, many of the people that are witnesses did tremendously well, and made a lot of money...
  RUBIO: ... That's false...
  TRUMP: ... By taking the course.
  KELLY: Go ahead, Senator.
  TRUMP: You're going to see, you don't know...
  RUBIO: ... The Better Business Bureau gave it a ''D'' minus.
  TRUMP: You're going to see, you're going to see.
  KELLY: ... It's Senator Rubio's turn...
  TRUMP: ... No, no. Before they had the information...
  RUBIO: ... Go on my website, Marco Rubio.com...
  TRUMP: ... Before they had the information...
  KELLY: ... Senator Rubio, standby, let him finish his point, and then I'll give you the floor...
  TRUMP: ... Before they had the information it got -- it is right now an ''A'', once they had the information...
  RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE) this anymore.
  TRUMP: ... The only reason that is was a ''D'' was because we didn't care -- we didn't give them the information...
  RUBIO: ... A third of the people (INAUDIBLE)...
  TRUMP: ... When they got the information it became an ''A''...
  KELLY: ... With respect -- wait. With respect...
  TRUMP: ... Marco you don't know (INAUDIBLE)...
  KELLY: ... With respect, we went back and looked at this...
  TRUMP: ... Yes.
  KELLY: The rating from the Better Business Bureau was a ''D'' minus...
  (CHEERING) (APPLAUSE) TRUMP: ... (INAUDIBLE)
  KELLY: ... that's the last publicly available rating in 2010, and it was the result of a number of complaints they had...
  TRUMP: ... But it was elevated to an ''A''...
  UNIDENTIFIABLE MALE: (INAUDIBLE)
  KELLY: ... That's never been publicly available.
  TRUMP: ... I can give it to you. I can give it to you tomorrow..
  KELLY: ... Let's just bring the viewers up to speed, let's just bring the viewers up to speed.
  TRUMP: ... It was elevated to an ''A''.
  KELLY: Let me just set the record, and then you guys can have at it. There was Trump University, which was a business that you started, and it was marketed...
  TRUMP: ... Small business...
  KELLY: ... to many people, and now there is a class-action of over 5,000 plaintiffs against you, Mr. Trump...
  TRUMP: ... Right...
  KELLY: ... And, it involves veterans, and it involves teachers, and it involves so-called little guys, working class, and lower- working class and middle class who say that they were fleeced, who say that it was as scam. The class has been certified, and in that case you counter-sued the lead plaintiff alleging that you were being defamed.
  That case was thrown out against her...
  TRUMP: ... The lead plaintiff is now getting out of the case because it's so bad for her...
  KELLY: ... But, what happened was...
  TRUMP: ... Excuse me, the lead plaintiff signed a letter saying how great it was, and it on tape saying how great it was.
  KELLY: OK, no, but -- standby. But, what happened in that case was you counter-sued her. The court threw out your counter-suit, and made you pay almost $800,000 dollars in legal fees of hers, and you made the same argument about 98 percent of the people being happy with Trump University. And, that woman in particular signing a survey saying she liked it while someone was standing over her shoulder...
  TRUMP: ... She's trying to get out of the case. She's trying to get out of the case...
  KELLY: ... And this is what -- standby, this is what the Court of Appeals found. They said that the plaintiffs against you are like the Madoff victims...
  TRUMP: Oh, give me a break... KELLy: ... This is what the Court of Appeals said.
  TRUMP: Give me a break.KELLY: This is what the court of appeals said.
  TRUMP: Give me a break.
  KELLY: They found that victims of con artists often sing the praises of their victimizers until they realize they have been fleeced.
  TRUMP: You know what, let's see what happens in court. This is a civil case. Very easy to have settled. Could settle it now. Very easy to have settled. Let's see what happens at the end of a couple years when this case is over, OK?
  KELLY: It has been going for five years.
  TRUMP: Yes, it has been going for a long time.
  KELLY: Go ahead, Senator.
  RUBIO: I spoke to one of the victims yesterday.
  TRUMP: We'll win the case.
  RUBIO: I spoke to one of the victims yesterday.
  TRUMP: One, one of the victims.
  RUBIO: No, there are several. Obviously there are so many, I can't talk to them every day. I spoke to one of them, he told me exactly what happened. They signed up for this course because they believed Mr. Trump was this fantastic businessman, that Donald is going to teach them the tricks of the trade.
  They signed up. They paid $15,000 for this course. They were asked for additional money for this course. If they really wanted the real secrets of success, they had to pay even more money, and so they did.
  And you know what they got in these courses? Stuff you can pull off of Zillow. When they finally realized what a scam it was, they asked for their money back.
  And you refused to give them their money back. Why don't you tonight...
  TRUMP: I gave many people their money back. RUBIO: Then why don't you tonight say you're going to give the money back to everybody who wants...
  TRUMP: Let me just...
  (CROSSTALK)
  KELLY: OK. Senator Rubio, let him answer.
  (CROSSTALK)
  KELLY: Let him answer.
  Go ahead, Mr. Trump.
  TRUMP: We will see who's right at the end of a few years. But all of the -- almost all of the people, many, many people signed what's called the report card at the end, did you like the course, how did you like it.
  Almost all of them said it was terrific, OK? With letters, with this. Some of them are on tape saying it was terrific. Let's see what happens at the end of three years.
  KELLY: With respect, Mr. Trump, one-third of the plaintiffs in that case demanded refunds. So it's not the case that 98 percent were...
  TRUMP: I gave some refunds to people because if they asked for the refunds in a certain period of time, and we gave refunds to people.
  KELLY: OK.
  TRUMP: But let's see what happens at the end of three years. Let's see who's right.
  KELLY: Still a pending litigation.
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: It's called pending litigation.
  RUBIO: Megyn, this is why this is relevant to this election.
  KELLY: All right. Senator Rubio then Senator Cruz. Go ahead.
  RUBIO: This is why, because he's trying to do to the American voter what he did to the people that signed up for this course. He's making promises he has no intention of keeping. And it won't just be $36,000 that they lose, it's our country that's at stake here.
  The future of the United States and the most important election in a generation, and he's trying to con people into giving them their vote just like he conned these people into giving him their money. TRUMP: Let me tell you the real con artist. Excuse me. Excuse me. The real con artist is Senator Marco Rubio who was elected in Florida and who has the worst voting record in the United States Senate.
  He doesn't go to vote. He's absent. He doesn't go. Now, the people of Florida can't stand him. He couldn't get elected dogcatcher. The people of Florida -- the people of Florida -- and by the way, I know he's going to spend $25 million on ads. Without that he wouldn't have a chance. He's 20 points south.
  The people in Florida wouldn't elect him dogcatcher. He couldn't get any -- he's right now 21 points down to me. And, you know...
  KELLY: OK.
  TRUMP: ... again, there will be a lot of advertising. It's the only thing that might save him. But I doubt it.
  RUBIO: Notice that's not an answer.
  KELLY: I'm coming to you next. But go ahead.
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: He scammed the people of Florida. He scammed people. He doesn't vote. He doesn't show up for the U.S. Senate. He doesn't vote. He scammed the people. He defrauded the people of Florida.
  KELLY: With respect, you've made that point.
  Go ahead.
  RUBIO: There's no -- as you can see in his answer, it's always the same thing.
  TRUMP: You defrauded the people of Florida, little Marco.
  RUBIO: He has defrauding people out of things, and not just -- and not just, by the way, on the issue of Trump University. He had another development in Mexico that he had nothing to do with except his name on the building. People put money into that building.
  TRUMP: That was licensing.
  RUBIO: They lost their money. Yes, licensing, but you told them you owned the building. So they gave him his money. They lost their money. Time and again...
  KELLY: All right. Stand by. I will come back to you. Senator Cruz wants to weigh in. You're coming back.
  Go ahead.
  CRUZ: Megyn, let me ask the voters at home, is this the debate you want playing out in the general election? The stakes in this election are too high. For seven years, millions of Americans, we've been struggling, wages have been stagnating, people are hurting, our constitutional rights are under assault.
  And if we nominate Donald, we're going to spend the spring, the fall, and the summer with the Republican nominee facing a fraud trial...
  TRUMP: Oh, stop it.
  CRUZ: ... with Hillary Clinton saying...
  TRUMP: It's just a minor case. It's a minor case.
  CRUZ: ... why did you give my campaign and my foundation $100,000?
  TRUMP: It's a minor civil case.
  CRUZ: And with Hillary Clinton...
  TRUMP: Give me a break.
  CRUZ: ... pointing out that he supported her four times in her presidential race.
  TRUMP: It's a minor civil case.
  CRUZ: Donald, learn not to interrupt. It's not complicated.
  TRUMP: There are many, many civil cases.
  CRUZ: Count to 10, Donald. Count to 10.
  TRUMP: Give me a break.
  CRUZ: Count to 10. The stakes are too high and if you are one of the 65 to 70 percent of Republicans who recognize that nominating Donald would be a disaster, then I ask you to come join us. If you're supporting other candidates, come join us.
  We welcome you to our team because we've demonstrated not once, not twice, not three times, but five separate times we have beat Donald. And if you don't want him to be the nominee, then I ask you to stand with us as a broad coalition of people who believe in the Constitution, believe in freedom, and want to turn this country around.
  KELLY: Go ahead, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: I don't believe these politicians. All talk, no action. I'm standing here listening to -- I'm hearing him say about a percentage. CNN, he gets 15. That means 85 percent, based on what you're saying, of the people don't dig you, number one, number one. Is that a correct statement? How do you get -- are you at 15 in the new CNN poll? Do you believe in CNN? I mean, I know we're with FOX. But CNN spent -- CNN...
  CRUZ: All right, I'll respond...
  (CROSSTALK)
  TRUMP: CNN spent a lot of money on a poll, just came out. I'm at 49. He's at 15. He tells me about 65 percent of the people. It's not 65 percent of the people. If you go by that, 85 percent of the people.
  Then he goes, we have five. And -- well, excuse me, I won 10. I won 10 states. If you listen to him, it's like -- I won 10 states. Everybody knows that on Super Tuesday Trump was the winner. There wasn't one person that didn't say that. Even the two people on your left and right said we did a great job. So how does he take -- how does he take five and say it's better than 10?
  KELLY: Go ahead, Senator.
  TRUMP: I am by far the leader. But if you listen to a politician, he'll try and convince you otherwise.
  KELLY: Senator Cruz, go.
  CRUZ: All right, well, Donald lives by the polls every day. He tweets about the polls.
  TRUMP: No, I don't. No, I don't.
  CRUZ: He's told us to look to the CNN poll. Well, that's a very good poll to look to, because that CNN poll showed that head to head Donald Trump loses to Hillary Clinton by 8 points. He doesn't just lose close; he loses by 8 points. That same poll he told you to look at shows me beating Hillary Clinton.
  (APPLAUSE)
  We cannot mess this up. And, by the way, the last four polls in a row, when you nominate a candidate who literally has been on every side of every issue, and in the course of this debate may be on two other sides before we're done, that's not how you win. And the stakes are too high. (CROSSTALK)
  KELLY: All right. I'm going to let Mr. Trump -- I'm going to let -- let me just...
  TRUMP: According to your poll...
  (CROSSTALK)
  KELLY: I'm going to let you respond to that, Mr. Trump. I'm going to then go to you, Governor. You're up next.
  TRUMP: ... I know, but your recent polls have me beating Hillary Clinton, and very, very easily.
  KELLY: OK. Do you want to weigh in?
  KASICH: All right, look, honestly, when I see people at these meetings, these town halls, where we take massive questions, and I get to spend time with them. Last night, there was a woman that came to tell me about the loss of her 15-year-old son, who took his own life.
  See, there's people in this country -- and Ted's right -- their wages haven't gone up for so long, they see the rich get richer, they believe, and they're not moving. And they put their money in the bank, and they got no interest on their money. They receive none. And their sons or daughters are living in the basement because they can't get a good job after they rang up so much college debt.
  What people are hungry for is, who can fix this? People want to know who -- what can you do to solve the problems in Washington, to make sure that we have stronger job growth and better wages? But you know what else they're yearning for? They want to believe that they have the power to fix things where they live, and they want the power back, so they can begin to do things in their community.
  Now, listen, this has been going on for a long time here. And I appreciate the discussion back and forth. But there are a lot of people out there yearning for somebody who's going to bring America back, both at the leadership level and in the neighborhood, where we can begin to reignite the spirit of the United States of America. And let's stop fighting.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Governor, thank you. Gentlemen, thank you.
  WALLACE: Much more to come live from the Fox Theater, including where the candidates stand on the social issues facing the country. The Republican presidential debate continues in a moment.(COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  KELLY: Welcome back, everybody, to the Fox News Republican presidential debate. We want to get right back to the questions.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: We are here in Detroit. The top issues in Michigan, according to Facebook, are displayed in a word cloud you're taking a look at. The second biggest issue is clean water. That, of course, is directly tied with the situation in Flint.
  Senator Rubio, Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton have both been to Flint. They are both running ads in this state focusing on that, focusing on supporting Flint and fixing the problems, showing images of people in Flint thankful that they're there.
  Without getting into the political blame game here, where are the national Republicans' plans on infrastructure and solving problems like this? If you talk to people in this state, they are really concerned about Flint on both sides of the aisle. So why haven't GOP candidates done more or talked more about this?
  RUBIO: Well, I know I've talked about it, and others in our campaign have talked about it, and other candidates have talked about it, as well. What happened in Flint was a terrible thing. It was systemic breakdown at every level of government, at both the federal and partially the -- both the state and partially at the federal level, as well.
  And by the way, the politicizing of it I think is unfair, because I don't think that someone woke up one morning and said, ''Let's figure out how to poison the water system to hurt someone.''
  (APPLAUSE)
  But accountability is important. I will say, I give the governor credit. He took responsibility for what happened. And he's talked about people being held accountable...
  (APPLAUSE)
  ... and the need for change, with Governor Snyder. But here's the point. This should not be a partisan issue. The way the Democrats have tried to turn this into a partisan issue, that somehow Republicans woke up in the morning and decided, ''Oh, it's a good idea to poison some kids with lead.'' It's absurd. It's outrageous. It isn't true.
  (APPLAUSE)
  All of us are outraged by what happened. And we should work together to solve it. And there is a proper role for the government to play at the federal level, in helping local communities to respond to a catastrophe of this kind, not just to deal with the people that have been impacted by it, but to ensure that something like this never happens again.
  BAIER: Thank you, Senator.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Governor Kasich, the city of Detroit has long suffered with urban blight, broken street lights, dilapidated and vacant houses, and so on. In 2013, Detroit actually declared bankruptcy, which helped, but the schools here remain a big problem. They're $3.5 billion in debt and are some of the most troubled and poorly testing in the country. The kids too often go to classrooms that are unsafe, falling apart, infested with rodents and insects. Experts say the schools could go bankrupt by next month.
  Question to you. If the federal government bailed out the auto industry here in Detroit, should it also bail out the Detroit schools?
  KASICH: Well, look, first of all, I think the mayor now is controlling the schools. This is not much different than what happened in Cleveland, Ohio, where the African-American Democrat mayor, the union, and business leaders came to see me and said, ''Would you help us to pass legislation to really create a CEO environment so that we can take control of the schools?''
  We even invested in a buyout plan, where we bought out the teachers who had been there a long time, because there were so many young teachers who had been laid off who were so enthusiastic to get back in the schools. It worked beautifully. Cleveland's coming back. The Cleveland schools are coming back because of a major overhaul.
  It's the same thing that has to happen in all of our urban schools. And, frankly, look, if I were president, I'd take 104 federal programs, bundle them into four buckets, and send it to the states, because fixing schools rests at the state and the local level, and particularly at the school board level. (APPLAUSE)
  KASICH: Now, I also believe -- I also believe that you need to introduce vocational education in those schools. You need mentoring in those schools. And you need to have a situation where people can have an alternative forum to get a degree. And you need school choice, both vouchers and charter schools. All of those things can come together to help, Megyn.
  But here's the bottom line. And I'll go quickly. We as adults have to fight in our neighborhoods, in our communities, for our children's education. Put the politics aside, and everyone in this room can play a role in lifting their schools and lifting the students who are in those schools, because too much politics gets in the middle of it, and where we focus as adults, and put children first, we see tremendous results. And the people of this town are going to rise. And they need to be involved. Thank you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: For -- for half a century, as you all know, Detroit was the symbol of America's industrial might: 300,000 manufacturing jobs in this city. At last count, there are now fewer than 30,000 manufacturing jobs here, and the unemployment rate in this city is 11 percent, twice the national average.
  Senator Cruz, I know that you have general plans for tax reform, but what specifically would you do to bring manufacturing jobs back to America and train residents of cities like Detroit to do those jobs?
  CRUZ: Well, Chris, thank you for that question. Let me start by observing that Detroit is a great city with a magnificent legacy that has been utterly decimated by 60 years of failed left-wing policy.
  (APPLAUSE)
  You know, Henry Ford revolutionized automobile manufacturing and brought automobiles to the middle class. During World War II, Detroit provided -- funded the arsenals of democracy to help us win World War II. In -- in the 1960s, Detroit was the Silicon Valley of America. It had a population of 2 million people, had the highest per capita income in the country.
  And then, for 50 years, left-wing Democrats have pursued destructive tax policies, weak crime policies, and have driven the citizens out. (APPLAUSE)
  This city now has just 700,000 citizens. There are vacant homes, one after the other after the other. Crime has been rampant, and it is an outrage. And let me say to folks in the media: That is a story that the media ought to be telling over and over again, the destruction of left-wing policies and the millions who have hurt because of it.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: Well, I was going to say, I'll give you 30 seconds to try to answer my question. What specifically would you do to bring manufacturing jobs back to Detroit and to train the residents here to do those jobs?
  CRUZ: The way you bring manufacturing back to America is, number one, you lift the regulations. As president, I will repeal Obamacare, the biggest job-killer in America.
  I will pull back the federal regulators, the EPA and all the regulators that are killing small businesses and manufacturing.
  And my tax plan, which is a very, very detailed plan on the website, tedcruz.org, is what's called border adjustable. We get rid of all the taxes. We get rid of the corporate income tax and the death tax and the Obamacare taxes and the payroll tax. And we replace it with a 16 percent business flat tax that is border adjustable, which means all exports are entirely tax-free and all imports pay the 16 percent business flat tax. That's a 32 percent differential.
  What that will do, Chris, is bring millions of manufacturing jobs back to this country, bring the steel industry back to this country, create an environment where when we compete on a fair and level playing field, American ingenuity can beat anyone. But right now, the federal government isn't giving us a level playing field.
  WALLACE: Thank you, Senator.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Gentlemen, the next series of questions will be on social issues. Governor Kasich, the last debate, you were asked a question about religious liberty, in a hypothetical situation where a same-sex couple approaches a cupcake maker to do their wedding. Here's what you said.(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  KASICH: If you're in the business of selling things, if you're not going to sell to somebody you don't agree with, today I'm not going to sell to somebody who's gay, then tomorrow maybe I won't sell to somebody who's divorced.
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  BAIER: Governor, some faith leaders got nervous about that answer. Do gay marriage dissenters have rights?
  KASICH: Well, look, first of all, I try to be a man of faith every day as best as I can, and I try to focus in my faith on the dos and I think the don'ts will take care of themselves once I get the dos right, which is humility, and loving my enemy, and caring for my neighbor.
  But secondly, look, you're in the commerce business, you want to sell somebody a cupcake, great. OK? But now if they ask you to participate in something you really don't like, that's a whole 'nother issue, OK? Another issue.
  Here's what I'd like to see happen. The Supreme Court ruled, I don't agree with the ruling. I'm of favor of marriage between -- you know, traditional marriage, a man and a woman. What I hope was going to happen after the Supreme Court ruling is things would settle down.
  If you go to a photographer to take pictures at your wedding, and he says, I'd rather not do it, find another photographer, don't sue them in court. You know what, the problem is in our country -- in our country, we need to learn to respect each other and be a little bit more tolerant for one another.
  And at the end of the day, don't go to court. Can't we have common sense in America? That's the way it used to be. And there was a book written called ''The Death of Common Sense.'' We need to bring it back.
  But at the end of the day, if somebody is being pressured to participate in something that is against their deeply-held religious beliefs, then we're going to have to think about dealing with the law.
  But you know what, I'd rather people figure this out without having to put another law on the books and have more arguments in this country. Why don't we come together as a country, respect one another, love one another and lift this country? I think that's what people want.
  So thanks for asking.
  BAIER: Senator Cruz, the U.S. Supreme Court obviously declared same-sex marriage legal in all 50 states, a decision you have criticized. Given the current status of the law, do you believe a gay couple should be able to adopt?
  CRUZ: Well, listen, adoption is decided at the state level and I am a believer in the 10th Amendment in the Constitution, I would leave the question of marriage to the states, I would leave the question of adoption to the states.
  That's the way it has been for two centuries of our nation's history until five unelected judges in an illegitimate and wrong decision decided to seize the authority over marriage and wrongfully tear down the marriage laws of all 50 states.
  Now, interconnected to this is the question of religious liberty. And at the last debate, one of my colleagues on this stage said on the question of religious liberty and Supreme Court nominees that he'd be willing to compromise and negotiate.
  I can tell you, for me, there are areas that we should compromise on. Marginal tax rates, we can reach a middle ground on. But when it comes to core principles and convictions, when it comes to the Constitution and Bill of Rights, I can tell the men and women at home I will never compromise away your religious liberty.
  And for me, Bret, religious liberty has been a lifelong passion. I've spent two decades defending religious liberty, including defending the Ten Commandments before the U.S. Supreme Court and winning. Defending the Pledge of Allegiance before the Supreme Court and winning.
  And defending the Mojave Desert Veterans Memorial, a lone white Latin cross that was erected to honor the men and women who gave their lives in World War I. I represented 3 million veterans for free defending that memorial and we won 5-4 before the Supreme Court.
  BAIER: Senator, thank you.
  Senator Cruz definitely avoided saying your name, Mr. Trump, but I think he was referring to you and your religious liberty answer. Would you like to respond?
  TRUMP: I have nothing to say. I mean, generally speaking, agree with what he said. I would have certainly have rather left it to the states. I was always in favor -- I was very surprised when they came up with that decision.
  I would have certainly -- I would have preferred had it been left to the states and I think most people would have preferred that.
  BAIER: Senator Rubio, the late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, a conservative icon, obviously, pointed out, in the United States versus Heller, that like most rights, the Second Amendment right is not unlimited.
  Just like the First Amendment doesn't allow you to go into a theater and yell fire, he said the Second Amendment leaves room to regulate guns. So do you agree with Justice Scalia? And if so, what limits would you draw around the Second Amendment?
  RUBIO: As few as possible. The Second Amendment, as I've said before, is not a suggestion. It is the constitutional right of every American to protect themselves and their families. It is a right that -- it is the Second Amendment for a reason.
  It is right after the defense of the freedom of speech for a reason, for clearly the founders of our nation understood and the framers of the Constitution understood that you cannot have life and you cannot have liberty and cannot pursue happiness if you are not safe.RUBIO: And the Second Amendment -- when people talk about gun laws, what they need to realize is, criminals don't follow gun laws. They're criminals. By definition, they ignore the law.
  (APPLAUSE)
  But the gun rights of Americans, if you are talking to a law- abiding citizen and a gun-owner like myself, if you pass a law, I will follow whatever the law is. A criminal will not do it. They will continue to pursue these guns on the black market, where they then go out and commit crimes and they steal guns from each other.
  Gun laws are not effective. They simply do not provide for safety. But they do, however, ensure that law-abiding people don't have access to weapons to protect themselves and guns to protect themselves, but criminals always will be well armed. They don't care about the law; they don't follow the law. We will protect the Second Amendment when I'm president of the United States.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Mr. Trump, you were once a supporter of an assault weapons ban. So do you think there should be any restrictions on the Second Amendment?
  TRUMP: No, I'm a big defender of the Second Amendment. And if you look at what's happened, whether it's in California, where you had the 14 people killed, whether it's in Paris -- which, by the way, has the toughest gun laws in the world and 130 people killed. Many, many people in the hospital gravely injured. They will be dying. Many people will be dying in addition.
  If we had guns, or if they had guns on the other side of the room, with the bullets going in the opposite direction, you would not have had 130 people killed. That I can tell you right now.
  (APPLAUSE)
  So I'm a very, very big supporter of the Second Amendment.
  BAIER: But in 2000, you wrote in your book, ''I generally oppose gun control, but I support the ban on assault weapons.''
  TRUMP: I don't support it anymore. I do not support the ban on assault.
  (AUDIENCE BOOS)
  BAIER: Senator Cruz? Any limits to the Second Amendment?
  CRUZ: Well, listen, unlike Donald, I would not support banning firearms. In that instance, Bill Clinton banned many of the most popular firearms in America. And by the way, the study showed that ban did nothing to reduce violent crime. It just took away the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens.
  (APPLAUSE)
  And let me point out, you know, it is easy for political candidates to have rhetoric and say, ''I support the Second Amendment.'' But you cannot say that and at the same time say what Donald just said, which is that on the question of Supreme Court nominees he wants to compromise and reach a middle ground with Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer. That's what he said in the last debate.
  TRUMP: I -- I did not say that. I did not say that.
  CRUZ: And any justice that Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer sign off on...
  TRUMP: I did not say that.
  CRUZ: And I would point out, Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer are both Democrats that Mr. Trump has written checks to repeatedly. Any justice that those two sign off on is going to be a left-wing judicial activist who will undermine religious liberty, and we are one vote away from the Heller decision being overturned, which would effectively erase the Second Amendment from the Bill of Rights.
  If you care about the Second Amendment, then you need to ask who on this stage do you know will appoint principled constitutionalists to the court and not cut a deal with your Second Amendment rights?
  BAIER: Mr. Trump...
  TRUMP: So we're listening to the all-talk, no-action politician, and he was the primary supporter of John Roberts, who gave us Obamacare.
  CRUZ: That's flat-out wrong.
  TRUMP: No, it's not. You take a look. He was the primary supporter. He pushed John Roberts, and pushed him, and pushed him, and Bush ultimately appointed him. He got appointed. And when it came his time to raise his hand and kill Obamacare, not once, but twice, he let us down, and he did the wrong thing.
  This is the man that was the primary supporter. And you can read law journal, you can read whatever you want to read -- I've read plenty of it. There was no stronger supporter of John Roberts than him. And it was a very, very big mistake.
  BAIER: Quickly, Senator Cruz. CRUZ: You know, Donald has a tenuous relationship with the truth.
  (LAUGHTER)
  I wrote one op-ed supporting President Bush's nomination after he made it. I would not have made that nomination. But let me point out...
  TRUMP: Not what you say in the op-ed.
  CRUZ: ... if Donald actually cared about...
  TRUMP: That is not what you said in the op-ed.
  CRUZ: But, Donald, please, I know it's hard not to interrupt. But try.
  TRUMP: Yeah, I know it is. But it's not what you said in the op-ed.
  CRUZ: Breathe, breathe, breathe.
  TRUMP: Lyin' Ted.
  CRUZ: You can do it. You can breathe. I know it's hard. I know it's hard. But just...
  RUBIO: When they're done with the yoga, can I answer a question?
  CRUZ: You cannot.
  (LAUGHTER)
  RUBIO: Unbelievable.
  CRUZ: I really hope that we don't -- we don't see yoga on this stage.
  RUBIO: Well, he's very flexible, so you never know.
  (APPLAUSE)
  CRUZ: But you cannot, in fact, care about conservative Supreme Court justices and support Jimmy Carter for president. You cannot care about conservative Supreme Court justices and support John Kerry for president, as Donald did. You cannot care about conservative Supreme Court justices and support Harry Reid for Senate majority leader.
  And you cannot care about conservative Supreme Court justices and write four checks to Hillary Clinton for her to be president if you care at all about the Second Amendment or religious liberty or anything else.
  BAIER: Gentlemen, gentlemen, we're going to move on. Thank you very much. We want to talk about some more policy questions coming up.
  WALLACE: And coming up, the candidates tackle foreign policy. But first, during the commercial break, join us for a Facebook live on the Fox News Facebook page and tell us what you think about tonight's debate in the comments section. Stay with us. More to come. (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  KELLY: Welcome back, everybody. We're going it get right back to the questions.
  WALLACE: And gentlemen, we're going to focus for a bit now on foreign policy.
  Senator Rubio, you like to take a shot at Mr. Trump on the campaign trail saying that negotiating a hotel deal in a foreign country is not foreign policy. The other day you even compared him to Kim Jong-un, the North Korean leader, as lunatics trying to get a hold of nuclear weapons.
  Please tell Mr. Trump why he's unprepared to be commander-in- chief.
  RUBIO: Well, first of all, I think, as we've seen throughout this campaign, Donald has not shown a seriousness about the issues of foreign policy. He just simply hasn't.
  Whether it was the structure of our military, even today he was asked a question about the issue of commanders not following his lead on killing the family of terrorists. And his answer basically was, if I tell them to do it, they're going to do it. Now that's just not true.
  Foreign policy is not only consequential, I think much of our future now depends on it. You know, I see a lot of young people at my events around the country. I feel great when they come.
  And I always them that despite the hardships of the moment, I honestly believe that today's Millennials have a chance to be the greatest generation we've had in 100 years. I really do.
  Because the world today has hundreds of millions of people that can afford to be their clients, their customers, their partners, people they collaborate with. But that won't happen if the world is dangerous and it's unstable.
  And that will require strong American leadership. The next president of the United States is going to have eight years of a mess of a foreign policy to clean up. That's why it can't be Hillary Clinton.
  And quite frankly, that's why it can't be someone who simply has not shown the intellectual curiosity or the interest in learning about these very complicated issues. And Donald simply hasn't.
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your response.
  TRUMP: Well, let me just say this. I've gotten to know Marco over a period of time, believe me, he is not a leader. Believe me.
  RUBIO: But that doesn't answer the question. (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: He didn't interrupt you. Let him talk.
  TRUMP: He didn't answer -- he's not a leader. And, frankly, when I say they'll do as I tell them, they'll do as I tell them. And that's very -- it's very simple. It's very simple.
  We are in a very dangerous place. We have a depleted military. Totally depleted. We have -- by the way, our vets are treated horribly. We're going to take care of our vets. We're going to start taking care of our vets, properly, like we should.
  (APPLAUSE)
  But we're going to build up our military, and we're going to get the equipment we want, not the equipment that's sold to us by somebody that gave him and him and not the governor campaign contributions. OK? We're going to get the equipment that the generals and the soldiers want.
  I will prove to be a great leader. And, you know, it's very interesting, we talk about the polls. Every single poll when it comes to ISIS and the military and the border say, by far, Trump is the best.
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, your time is up.
  RUBIO: Yeah, I just want to -- a couple points. Once again, he was pressed on a policy issue to show his understanding of the foreign policy, and his reaction was just to attack somebody else with a name.
  Here's the bottom line. And I'm going to repeat it again. The world today is as complicated and as complex as it has been certainly in a very -- certainly in the lifetime of anybody here today. You indeed do have a lunatic in North Korea with nuclear weapons. You indeed do have the Chinese government taking over the most important shipping lane in the world. And Vladimir Putin, who you've expressed admiration for, Donald...
  TRUMP: Wrong. Wrong.
  RUBIO: You've expressed admiration for him.
  TRUMP: Wrong.
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: Donald, you said he's a strong leader.
  TRUMP: Wrong.
  RUBIO: He is now dividing Europe up...
  TRUMP: He said very good things about me, and I said...
  (CROSSTALK)
  RUBIO: All right, I'm going to finish my statement here.
  TRUMP: Yeah, finish.
  RUBIO: And he's also sowing instability in the Middle East. You have Iran who's going to get $100 billion of sanctions relief. You have radical jihadists spreading all over the world. This is a time for seriousness on these issues. You have yet to answer a single serious question about any of this. Will you give us a detailed answer about foreign policy any time you're asked on it?
  TRUMP: Let me just tell you, first of all, I've been hearing this man so long talking about Putin. Putin said about me -- I didn't say about Putin -- Putin said very nice things about me. And I say very nicely, wouldn't it be nice if actually we could get along with Russia, we could get along with foreign countries, instead of spending trillions and trillions of dollars?
  You're talking about Flint, Michigan. You're talking about places -- we need to rebuild the infrastructure of our country. Wouldn't it be nice if we got along with the world, and maybe Russia could help us in our quest to get rid of ISIS, et cetera, et cetera?
  (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: Gentlemen, you both have had a chance to talk. You both have had a chance to talk a couple of times. I'd like to move on to Senator Cruz. Senator, we have some breaking news tonight. North Korea's dictator, Kim Jong-un, has ordered that country's nuclear weapons to be made ready at a moment's notice.
  CRUZ: Yes. Yes.
  WALLACE: And this comes just hours after the U.N. Security Council announced that -- approved the toughest sanctions in two decades against that country. Assume you're President Cruz tonight. What do you do?
  CRUZ: Well, you're right, the news is very disturbing that Kim Jong-un has put their nuclear weapons on ready state. I'm glad that we're sending another carrier group to the South China Sea. I'm glad that Congress passed sanctions on North Korea.
  But this is all the result of the failures of the Clinton administration two decades ago that negotiated a deal with North Korea lifting the sanctions, allowing billions of dollars to flow in, and they used that money to develop nuclear weapons in the first place.
  What we -- now we're in a much harder position. When you have a lunatic with nuclear weapons, to some extent, it constrains your options. We need to be moving the carrier -- carrier group to the South China Seas. We -- we need to be putting in place missile defense, such as the THAAD missile defense system in South Korea.
  We need to be pursuing space-based missile defense. One of the advantages of space-based missile defense is that if you have a missile launch in North Korea or you have a missile launch in Iran, a space-based missile defense can take out one or two or three missiles before it can cross over and do damage.
  And we also need to be putting pressure on China, because North Korea is effectively a -- a client state of China. All of that will happen with a strong commander-in-chief that is devoted to keeping this country safe.
  WALLACE: Thank you, Senator.
  Governor Kasich, I want to move back to the debate that we heard earlier about Vladimir Putin. In December, after Vladimir Putin had some nice thing to say about Donald Trump, calling him bright and talented, your campaign ran a video suggesting that Trump might name the Russian president as his running mate. Here's a clip.
  KASICH: I'll have to see this.
  (BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
  (UNKNOWN): If elected, Trump promised that the dictatorial duo would, quote, ''make tyranny great again.''
  TRUMP: I think I'd get along very well with Vladimir Putin. I just think so.
  (END VIDEO CLIP)
  (LAUGHTER)
  WALLACE: That was your campaign video, sir.
  KASICH: That was a pretty good one.
  WALLACE: Well, OK.
  KASICH: No, I...
  (CROSSTALK)
  WALLACE: If I may -- sir, if I may ask my question...
  KASICH: Of course.
  WALLACE: I think you were kidding...WALLACE: But it was your video and the serious question is, because the suggestion is, do you think that Donald Trump is naive about the threat that Vladimir Putin represents?
  KASICH: I'm not biting. Let me take you around the world, OK? Let me -- look, I'm going to take you very quickly.
  In Russia, we need to tell them we're going to arm the Ukrainians with defensive lethal weapons. And we're going to tell Putin if you attack anybody in Eastern Europe in NATO, you attack Finland and Sweden, which is not in NATO, consider it an attack on us. And he will understand that.
  Secondly, I would tell the Chinese you don't own the South China Sea. Stop hacking us. And we're going to beef up our cyber command. And we're going to be in a position to be able to take out your systems if you continue to do this.
  Now let's move over into the Middle East. The Egyptians, they know they're on their last legs there because of the attack from ISIS. The Jordanians are -- really have been our friends. They know that they are at risk. So do the Saudis. So do the Gulf states.
  They are our allies, really, or have similar aims, we need to bring them closer to us. Turkey a critical avenue to the Middle East. We have to bring them towards the West, and not towards the East.
  WALLACE: Governor...
  KASICH: And we have a joint, good human intelligence. That is called a semi-trip around the world. And if you gave me more time, I'd finish the trip.
  WALLACE: Governor, thank you.
  KASICH: Thank you.
  BAIER: Coming up, a final question and closing statements. And take a look at this. The volume of conversation on Facebook surrounding the remaining candidates over the last month. Whether that conversation is good or bad, Donald Trump clearly dominates the field.
  We'll be back with more of the Republican presidential debate live from Detroit. (COMMERCIAL BREAK)
  BAIER: Welcome back to the Republican presidential debate. Let's get back at it.
  Gentlemen, this is the last question of the night. It has been a long time since our first debate, seven months ago in Cleveland. A lot has transpired since then, obviously, including an RNC pledge that all of you signed agreeing to support the party's nominee and not to launch an independent run. Tonight, in 30 seconds, can you definitively say you will support the Republican nominee, even if that nominee is Donald J. Trump?
  Senator Rubio, yes or no?
  RUBIO: I'll support the Republican nominee.
  BAIER: Mr. Trump? Yes or no?
  RUBIO: I'll support Donald if he's the Republican nominee, and let me tell you why. Because the Democrats have two people left in the race. One of them is a socialist. America doesn't want to be a socialist country. If you want to be a socialist country, then move to a socialist country.
  The other one is under FBI investigation. And not only is she under FBI investigation, she lied to the families of the victims of Benghazi, and anyone who lies to the families of victims who lost their lives in the service of our country can never be the commander- in-chief of the United States.
  BAIER: Senator...
  RUBIO: We must defeat Hillary Clinton.
  BAIER: Senator Cruz, yes or no, you will support Donald Trump is he's the nominee?
  CRUZ: Yes, because I gave my word that I would. And what I have endeavored to do every day in the Senate is do what I said I would do. You know, just on Tuesday, we saw an overwhelming victory in the state of Texas where I won Texas by 17 percent.
  And I will say it was a powerful affirmation that the people who know me best, the people who I campaigned, who made promises that if you elect me, I'll lead the fight against Obamacare, I'll lead the fight against amnesty, I'll lead the fight against our debt, and I will fight for the Bill of Rights and your rights every day, that the people of Texas said you have kept your word, and that's what I'll do as president.
  BAIER: Governor Kasich, yes or no, would you support Donald Trump as the Republican nominee?
  KASICH: Yeah. But -- and I kind of think that, before it's all said and done, I'll be the nominee. But let me also say...
  (APPLAUSE)
  But let me also say, remember...
  BAIER: But your answer is yes?
  KASICH: But I'm the little engine that can. And, yeah, look, when you're in the arena, and we're in the arena. And the people out here watching -- we're in the arena, we're traveling, we're working, we spend time away from our family, when you're in the arena, you enter a special circle. And you want to respect the people that you're in the arena with. So if he ends up as the nominee -- sometimes, he makes it a little bit hard -- but, you know, I will support whoever is the Republican nominee for president.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: Mr. Trump, I'm going to ask you a version of the same question. As we saw today with Mitt Romney, the #NeverTrump movement is gaining steam. Some people are talking about contributing millions of dollars to try to stop you. Again today, you raised the possibility that you might run as an independent if you feel you're treated unfairly by the Republican Party.
  So I'm going to phrase the question that the other three people on this stage just got. Can you definitively say tonight that you will definitely support the Republican nominee for president, even if it's not you?
  TRUMP: Even if it's not me?
  (LAUGHTER)
  Let me just start off by saying...
  WALLACE: Thirty seconds, sir.
  TRUMP: ... OK -- that I'm very, very proud of -- millions and millions of people have come to the Republican Party over the last little while. They've come to the Republican Party. And by the way, the Democrats are losing people. This is a trend that's taking place. It's the biggest thing happening in politics, and I'm very proud to be a part of it. And I'm going to give them some credit, too, even though they don't deserve it. But the answer is: Yes, I will.
  WALLACE: Yes, you will support the nominee of the party? TRUMP: Yes, I will. Yes. I will.
  KELLY: Candidates, it's now time for your closing statements. Governor Kasich, we'll start with you.
  KASICH: Well, ladies and gentlemen, I love being here in Michigan, and I want to say to all of you here that I have a record of being able to solve some of the biggest problems. It's not just talk, and it's not theory.
  I did it in Washington by helping people get into a healthier economic situation. I've done it in Ohio. And as we've made progress in Ohio, we've left no one behind. We've not left behind the mentally ill, the drug addicted, the working poor, the developmental disabled, and we have raised our minority community.
  And as president of the United States, I will go back to Washington, I will take the formulas that I used, and I will -- I will fix the problems in Washington, and you'll work with me as I send you power to fix your -- your communities, your neighborhoods, your state, and together, we'll restore the spirit of America. And I know you want that. Thank you.
  (APPLAUSE)
  WALLACE: Senator Rubio, 30 seconds, closing statement.
  RUBIO: Well, I know this has been an unusual election cycle, as it continues, and there's a lot of problems in America, and people are truly hurting. But this election is not just about confronting our problems; it's also about embracing our opportunities.
  I believe the 21st century holds the potential to be the greatest era in the history of the United States, if we get this election right and if we act now. If we do, if we do what needs to be done, we can leave our children as the freest and most prosperous Americans that have ever lived, and the 21st century can be the greatest era in the amazing story of America. So I ask everyone to vote for me and join our effort at marcorubio.com.
  (APPLAUSE)
  BAIER: Senator Cruz, your closing statement?
  CRUZ: I want to talk to every soldier and sailor and airman and Marine. I want to talk to every mom and dad and sister and brother and son and daughter of someone fighting for this country. For seven years, you've had a commander-in-chief that doesn't believe in you, that sends you into combat with rules of engagement that tie your arms behind your back. That is wrong. It is immoral. And in January 2017, it will end.
  I want to also talk to all the police officers and firefighters and first responders who have been left behind with this president. Starting in January 2017, I will have your back.
  (APPLAUSE)
  KELLY: Mr. Trump, your closing statement.
  TRUMP: Thank you. I am going to bring jobs back to the United States like nobody else can. We're going to fix our very depleted military. We're going to take care of our vets. We're going to strengthen our borders. And you're going to be very, very proud of this country in just a few years if I'm elected president. Thank you.
  KELLY: Thank you, sir.
  And that will do it for the 11th Republican primary debate of the 2016 presidential race. But the night is not over yet.
  WALLACE: Not by a long shot. A special edition of ''The O'Reilly Factor'' is next. And remember, Fox News has the race for the White House covered, all the way to the conventions and onto the general election.
  BAIER: Our thanks to Detroit and the crowd here. Thank you again for joining us. Have a great evening.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/04/us/politics/transcript-of-the-republican-presidential-debate-in-detroit.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Text

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: POLITICAL DEBATES (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TRANSCRIPTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%); POLLS & SURVEYS (54%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (50%); MISOGYNY (50%)

Company:  FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (84%);  FACEBOOK INC (57%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (84%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (84%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%)

Person: MITT ROMNEY (89%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); MEGYN KELLY (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); JOHN KASICH (58%); MARCO RUBIO (58%)

Geographic: DETROIT, MI, USA (92%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 4, 2016


End of Document
DealBook Briefing: How to Really Tax the Rich
The New York Times
February 26, 2019 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk
Length: 1961 words
Body


Good Monday. (Want this by email? Sign up here.)
There are other ways to tax the wealthy 
  A majority of Americans are increasingly open to raising taxes on the wealthy. Lawmakers like Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Senator Bernie Sanders have proposed revolutionary ways of reducing wealth inequality. But Andrew writes that there are other ways of bridging the gap -- ways that stand a chance of becoming law.
  Start with the estate tax. Gary Cohn, the former White House economic adviser, once said, ''Only morons pay the estate tax.'' Andrew recommends starting there, writing that no fix could work without this. One solution: taxing inherited property at its current worth to capture gains in value made over decades. According to the Congressional Budget Office, closing this loophole could raise more than $650 billion over a decade.
  Raise capital gains rates for the wealthy. Andrew suggests introducing two new tax brackets -- say, a marginal 30 percent bracket for those earning over $5 million and a 35 percent bracket for over $15 million -- so the U.S. could raise money without discouraging investment.
  Close the carried-interest loophole. Current tax law allows executives at investment firms to have bonuses taxed as capital gains, not ordinary income. Scrapping that -- an idea that President Trump has supported -- has clear appeal to Americans' basic sense of fairness.
  Reconsider breaks for charitable giving. At a minimum, Andrew writes, ''we ought to consider whether the wealthy should be allowed to take deductions when they move money to their own foundations, or whether they should only take a deduction when the money is spent.''
   Support the I.R.S. ''The agency is so underfunded that the chance an individual gets audited is minuscule,'' Andrew writes.
  Deadline extension doesn't end the trade war
  President Trump has delayed his own March 1 deadline to raise tariffs on Chinese goods, Ana Swanson and Alan Rappeport of the NYT report:
   Mr. Trump cited ''substantial progress'' in trade talks between American and Chinese officials.
   He said that negotiators had forged a compromise on key issues, including intellectual property and the trade of agriculture and energy products.
   The president also expects to meet with President Xi Jinping of China to finalize a deal.
  ''The extension will prevent the United States from increasing tariffs on $200 billion of Chinese exports to 25 percent from 10 percent on March 2,'' Ms. Swanson and Mr. Rappeport write. ''The delay, which Mr. Trump had dangled as a possibility in recent weeks, is likely to calm volatile financial markets and reassure business owners who depend on China.''
  But there is still uncertainty. ''In a hint of how fluid the talks remain, the two sides did not sign an official agreement and the White House did not release details on any agreements,'' Ms. Swanson and Mr. Rappeport write. The Chinese state news agency Xinhua says that ''new uncertainties'' could emerge, and analysts think trade tensions won't go away.
  Tensions are reportedly high inside the White House.  Mr. Trump and his top trade negotiator, Robert Lighthizer, ''have grown increasingly frustrated with each other,'' Bloomberg reports, citing unidentified sources. Mr. Trump was apparently embarrassed when Mr. Lightizer corrected him in front of the Chinese delegation, while Mr. Lightizer ''has been growing irritated with Mr. Trump's interventions.''
  Theresa May delayed a crucial Brexit vote
  The British prime minister announced yesterday that a final vote on her Brexit deal that had been scheduled for this week will now take place by March 12 -- just 17 days before Britain is scheduled to leave the E.U.
  She is trying to buy time, so that she can secure tweaks to the agreement that will make it palatable to British lawmakers. ''We still have it within our grasp to leave the European Union with a deal on the 29th of March,'' she told reporters. The Confederation of British Industry accused her of ''running down the clock.''
  Parliament could undermine her game plan. Mrs. May is trying to keep the prospect of a no-deal Brexit on the table, hoping that will convince lawmakers to support her deal. Yet a proposal that will go to vote in Parliament this week ''would force the government to hand power to Parliament if no U.K.-E.U. withdrawal deal has been approved by March 13,'' the FT notes.
  The E.U. is reportedly considering a delay. ''The European Union is considering telling Theresa May that if she can't get her Brexit deal through Parliament and wants to delay the departure date, the country will have to stay in the bloc until 2021,'' Bloomberg reports.
  How the dollar has kept its crown
  The U.S. economy looks precarious, thanks to an enormous public debt and turbulent politics. But as Peter Goodman of the NYT points out, the dollar remains the world's haven, at least when it comes to currencies.
   ''Because banks cannot risk jeopardizing their access to the plumbing of the dollar-based global financial network, they have taken pains to steer clear of nations and companies deemed pariahs in Washington.''
   ''In a clear indication that the American currency has been gaining power, dollar-denominated lending to borrowers outside the United States, excluding banks, soared between late 2007 and early 2018, according to the Bank for International Settlements.''
   ''The Chinese government's restrictions on taking money out of the country and its alarming detentions of foreigners -- often in parallel with geopolitical scrapes -- have tested the appeal of holding money embossed with the image of Chairman Mao.''
   ''A series of crises within the 19 countries that share the euro has provoked more animosity than unity, revealing a foundational defect: The euro is a common currency lacking a common political structure that can guarantee a robust response when trouble arises.''
   '''There is no alternative to the dollar,' said Mark Blyth, an international political economist at Brown University.''
  What to expect from the world's biggest mobile show
  Mobile World Congress, the world's largest mobile technology event, takes place in Barcelona this week. Here's what will be grabbing headlines:
   So much 5G. The next-generation wireless standard has been making political as well as technological headlines recently. Carriers will announce their plans, while countries continue to weigh the security implications of using Huawei hardware in their networks.
   Folding phones. Samsung was first with its Galaxy Fold. Now Huawei has unveiled its own folding phone, the Mate X, and other manufacturers are expected to follow suit.
   Eye-watering prices. The $1,000 iPhone X seemed expensive initially. But experimental smartphones like the Galaxy Fold and Mate X cost twice as much. (Don't worry: Tim Culpan of Bloomberg Opinion argues that you aren't expected to buy one just yet.)
  Hacking attacks escalate at financial services firms
  Britain's Financial Conduct Authority says that financial services companies in the country experienced a fivefold rise in data breaches last year, the FT reports:
   ''Companies reported 145 breaches to the F.C.A. last year, up from 25 in 2017, with investment banks reporting the highest number of incidents at 34, up from just three the previous year.''
   ''Last year's jump in reported attacks can partly be explained by the introduction of the E.U.'s General Data Protection Regulation last May, which requires businesses to identify and report cyber attacks within 72 hours or face penalties.''
   ''But executives at major banks and payments companies said they were now under almost constant fire from attackers. A chief information officer at one U.K. bank said: 'We are seeing a lot more threat actors knocking at the front door.'''
  How long until Netflix wins a best picture Oscar?
  The big winner of last night's Academy Awards was ''Green Book,'' which took the best picture trophy. Commentators regarded the decision as a deliberate snub of Netflix, which had pushed aggressively for ''Roma.''.
  Netflix didn't play by the rules. The company spent millions promoting ''Roma,'' but refused to let it run exclusively in movie theaters for an industry-standard three months. (It ran for three weeks before being streamed.) Netflix also refused to release box-office data.
  That annoyed Hollywood traditionalists. Several theater chains refused to show ''Roma.'' Steven Spielberg is among those who think Netflix films shouldn't contend for an Oscar: ''Once you commit to a television format, you're a TV movie,'' he has said. ''You certainly, if it's a good show, deserve an Emmy -- but not an Oscar.''
  The reluctance will be tested. ''That debate is only going to grow more contentious as Netflix commissions more and more films from A-list filmmakers,'' Gregg Kilday of The Hollywood Reporter writes.
  Revolving door
  Ev Williams, one of Twitter's co-founders, is stepping down from its board after 12 years.
  AutoNation hired Carl Liebert as its new C.E.O., succeeding Mike Jackson.
  Tony Nicely stepped down as C.E.O. of Berkshire Hathaway's Geico insurer last year, Warren Buffett disclosed on Saturday.
  Caesars Entertainment reportedly offered to let Carl Icahn help pick its next C.E.O.
  The White House nominated Kelly Kraft, the U.S. ambassador to Canada, as its pick for U.S. ambassador to the U.N.
  The British insurer Legal & General named Michelle Scrimgeour as chief of its investment management unit.
  The speed read
  Deals
   Barrick Gold unveiled a $17.8 billion unsolicited takeover bid for Newmont Mining. (Barrick)
   Roche said it planned to buy Spark, a gene therapy company, for $4.3 billion. (Reuters)
   The Chinese insurer Ping An reportedly plans to stage an I.P.O. for its cloud-computing unit at an $8 billion valuation. (Bloomberg)
   KKR is reportedly considering buying Walmart's Asda grocery unit. (Sunday Times)
   The exercise equipment maker Peloton has reportedly picked Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase to lead its I.P.O. (Bloomberg)
  Politics and policy
   Before a meeting with Kim Jong-un this week, President Trump said North Korea could enjoy fast economic growth if it gives up its nuclear weapons program. The U.S. may declare an end to the Korean War as part of the talks. (Bloomberg, NYT)
   The Trump administration is denying more H-1B visa applications. (WSJ)
   A sentencing memo from the special counsel's office argued that Paul Manafort ''repeatedly and brazenly'' broke the law. (NYT)
   Meet Karl Racine, the official quietly coordinating states' legal challenges to Trump administration policies. (Politico)
  Tech
   After an investigation revealed that popular apps were sharing personal user data with Facebook, many of the companies involved have curtailed that flow of information. (WSJ)
   Why investors can't ignore the tech battle between China and America. (Barron's)
   Bitcoin saved Carlos Hernández's family. Could it save Venezuela? (NYT Op-Ed)
   How one NYT writer tried to overcome his reliance on a smartphone. (NYT)
   Inside the rise and fall of a multimillion-dollar Airbnb scheme. (NYT)
  Best of the rest
   Bad news: Over three-quarters of business economists expect a U.S. recession by the end of 2021. (Bloomberg)
   Good news: The Fed says that the U.S. financial system is ''substantially'' safer than before the 2008 financial crisis. (WSJ)
   How America learned to love deficits and debt. (Upshot)
   Chinese entrepreneurs are becoming increasingly wary of Beijing. (NYT)
   ICYMI: Here's what Warren Buffett said in his annual letter to Berkshire Hathaway shareholders. (DealBook)
  Thanks for reading! We'll see you tomorrow.
  We'd love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to business@nytimes.com

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/25/business/dealbook/tax-the-rich.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TAXES & TAXATION (91%); CAPITAL GAINS TAX (90%); ESTATE TAX (90%); TAX LAW (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (88%); AGREEMENTS (78%); ECONOMIC INEQUALITY (78%); FUNDRAISING (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); FINANCIAL MARKETS & INVESTING (75%); INCOME TAX (74%); CHARITIES (73%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (73%); ECONOMICS (72%); INHERITANCE (72%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (70%); CHARITABLE GIVING (68%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (66%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); TRADE DISPUTES (61%)

Organization:  CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE (56%)

Industry: ESTATE TAX (90%); BUDGETS (78%); FINANCIAL MARKETS & INVESTING (75%); BANKING & FINANCE (71%); ESTATE PLANNING (71%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (66%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ (73%); XI JINPING (73%); BERNIE SANDERS (72%)

Geographic: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: February 26, 2019


End of Document
When a Job Calls And No One Answers
The New York Times
May 9, 2004 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 5; SundayBusiness; Pg. 4; ECONOMIC VIEW
Length: 885 words
Byline: By DUARDO PORTER
Body


THINK it's tough finding a plumber when you need one? Ask Clinton C. Kershaw, the owner of Mr. Rooter Plumbing in Pleasant Valley, N.Y., about 90 miles north of New York City. His business, fixing toilets for $90 or septic systems for $7,000, is doing so well that its 15 plumbers are having a hard time keeping up with the work. 
 Mr. Kershaw is having a difficult time, too, hiring plumbers. The company has placed ads in The Poughkeepsie Journal and in The Journal News. It has offered $30 an hour with benefits, but to no avail. Mr. Kershaw said he had to forgo around $2 million worth of work last year because he didn't have enough plumbers. 
 So he looked abroad. His company found nine plumbers in South Africa and one in Venezuela, then started applying for temporary work visas for them.
 Mr. Kershaw isn't the only employer with staffing problems. More than 1.5 million jobs may have been lost across the economy over the last three years, but the job market is not slack for everyone. Last year, American businesses filed requests with the Labor Department for authorization to bring over foreign workers for seasonal jobs as varied as hotel maid, tractor-trailer driver, mail clerk, welder and baker.
 The technology boom in the late 1990's focused attention on employers importing specialized, highly skilled laborers under a visa program known as H-1B. But for the last several years, employers have also been trying to hire foreign seasonal workers of no particular skill under another visa program, called H-2B, that requires the employers to show only that they cannot find local people to do the jobs.
 The employees range from $7-an-hour Mexican workers pitching tents for traveling circuses to Japanese roe sorters, who can earn up to $7,000 a month at processing plants in Alaska. The ''season'' varies from a few summer months, say, for workers at resorts and camps, to the February-to-November period that is busiest for plumbers in the Northeast. 
 Demand is growing. In early March, the Department of Homeland Security announced that this year's limit of 66,000 H-2B visas had been reached early, prompting employers to call upon friends in Congress, from both sides of the aisle, to help. It was the first time since the seasonal visa program began 14 years ago that the annual limit had been reached.
 At least three bills to relax the limit were submitted in the House and Senate by the end of March. But their chances for passage this year are not good. Despite strong bipartisan support, opposition by a few senators is keeping legislation from coming to a floor vote, frustrating employers like Mr. Kershaw. Not everyone buys employers' arguments that they can't find local workers to fill jobs. Critics say they simply want to reduce labor costs by importing foreign workers. 
 ''Every single employer in the world would like to claim there is a labor shortage,'' said George J. Borjas, a professor of economics and social policy at Harvard who has written extensively about the drawbacks of illegal immigration. 
 Mr. Borjas argued that while it might take more than $30 an hour to find qualified plumbers, eventually, at some wage, workers in the United States would show up.
 Mark Krikorian, the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a Washington research group that favors greater restrictions on immigration, conceded that employers like Mr. Kershaw might have difficulty adjusting in the absence of foreign workers. But Mr. Krikorian added that there were other possible solutions. 
 ''Maybe go to Pittsburgh rather than Johannesburg, or go into the high schools and try to grow your own plumbers,'' he said.
 But others say that businesses face a legitimate need.
 ''I used to be ideologically, pragmatically, morally opposed to guest worker programs, but I have changed my mind,'' said Muzaffar A. Chishti, a senior analyst at the Migration Policy Institute, a research and advocacy group in Washington. ''There are large pockets of the labor market where it is now agreed by most people that American workers are unavailable, unwilling or untrained to do the job.'' 
 Unemployed Americans are usually looking for permanent jobs, with benefits, so they often shun seasonal work. And while employers agree that workers could eventually be found if the pay were high enough, some businesses might not be viable if they paid such wages.
 Moreover, labor shortages in some areas and sectors can appear even in a dismal national job market. Unemployment in the four New York counties in which Mr. Rooter does business -- Dutchess, Putnam, Rockland and Westchester -- now averages 4.4 percent -- well under the national average of 5.6 percent. 
 DEMAND for plumbing and air-conditioning contractor workers has been growing for more than two years. Mr. Kershaw bemoans how few people train to be plumbers. He adds that high housing costs in Pleasant Valley tend to scare plumbers away from the area.
 And his company's situation shows how limiting access to foreign workers can hurt American jobs, too. Frustrated by inaction in Congress, Mr. Kershaw abandoned his quest to bring in the plumbers from abroad. Instead, he fired the support staff that he had hired in anticipation of the expanded business. ''I've let go of two, and I'll probably let go of two more,'' he said.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
ChartGraph tracks petitions for H-2B visas that were approved from 2000-2003.(Source by Department of Homeland Security)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); SEASONAL WORKERS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (88%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (76%); ADMINISTRATIVE & CLERICAL WORKERS (73%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); HOTEL STAFF (66%); WORKER CATEGORIES (66%); BIPARTISANSHIP (63%); LEGISLATION (63%); NATIONAL SECURITY (50%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (50%); Terms not available from NYTimes (%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (88%); HOTELS & MOTELS (71%); HOTEL STAFF (66%); HOTEL HOUSEKEEPING (51%); CIRCUSES & CARNIVALS (50%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%); AFRICA (71%)

Load-Date: May 10, 2004


End of Document
Trump's Softened Stance on Visas Alarms Some Immigration Critics
The New York Times
March 5, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 901 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Amid the sparring and free-flying insults of Thursday night's Republican presidential debate, Donald J. Trump said he wanted to expand the number of visas available for highly skilled immigrants.
His remarks caused shock among some supporters who have seen Mr. Trump as a bulwark against an influx of foreigners taking American jobs. 
  In an immigration blueprint he released in August, in the early days of his surprising charge toward the Republican nomination, Mr. Trump said the visas for highly skilled workers were part of what he called ''disastrous'' immigration policies that had ''destroyed our middle class.'' He gave detailed proposals on fixing the visa program to protect Americans.
  But on Thursday, responding to a question from Megyn Kelly of Fox News, one of the debate moderators, Mr. Trump said: ''I'm changing. I'm changing. We need highly skilled people in this country, and if we can't do it, we'll get them in. But, and we do need in Silicon Valley, we absolutely have to have.''
  Ms. Kelly pressed him on whether he was abandoning his tough criticism of the visas, which are known as H-1B.
  ''I'm changing it,'' Mr. Trump said in the debate, ''and I'm softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.''
  ''One of the biggest problems,'' he said, is that too many foreign students graduating with technology skills from Stanford and other American universities have to leave the United States because they cannot get work visas. ''We absolutely have to keep the brain power in this country,'' Mr. Trump said.
  Alarm quickly spread among those drawn to Mr. Trump because of his early criticism of the H-1B program. American technology workers have faced widespread layoffs in recent years and have often been forced to train their own replacements, many of them from India and in the country on H-1B visas.
  Mr. Trump's campaign scrambled to bring the candidate back in line, issuing a statement hours after the debate in which he said, ''I remain totally committed to eliminating rampant, widespread H-1B abuse'' and pledged to ''end forever the use of H-1B as a cheap labor program.'' 
  Mr. Trump had promoted his flexibility and deal-making skills during the debate, but being flexible on high-skilled visas could be politically costly, even for a candidate who rarely seems to suffer any damaging blows.
  At a rally last weekend in Alabama, Mr. Trump was endorsed by Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, two former technology employees of the Walt Disney Company in Orlando, Fla. In testimony last week before the Senate, Mr. Perrero had broken down when he described the humiliation of losing his job and having to train a less-skilled H-1B worker to take over his work.
  Mr. Perrero and Ms. Moore have sued Disney and two outsourcing companies, accusing them of abusing the visa program. Disney vigorously denies any wrongdoing.
  The stories of the Disney layoffs resonated with many working- and middle-class Americans with sinking incomes and reduced job security who have flocked to Mr. Trump because of his promises to defend American jobs by deporting illegal immigrants and slashing legal immigration.
  Last week Mr. Trump also won the endorsement of Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, who is a tireless immigration hard-liner and critic of the H-1B program.
  Many technology workers were baffled by Mr. Trump's debate reversal.
  ''The generous view is that he might not fully understand the alphabet soup of visas,'' said John Miano, a lawyer who founded the Programmers Guild, a tech worker organization, and recently was an author with Michelle Malkin, a conservative commentator, of a book on high-skilled immigration.
  ''The worst case is that this is what he really believes,'' Mr. Miano said.
  In fact, Mr. Trump expressed the same views in October: In a debate on CNBC, he contradicted a moderator, Becky Quick, who noted that Mr. Trump had been critical of Mark Zuckerberg, the Facebook founder, who created an organization to lobby for more high-skilled visas.
  As Ms. Quick pointed out, Mr. Trump's own campaign website had described his rival, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, as ''Mr. Zuckerberg's personal senator.'' (The Trump website also said that Mr. Rubio's proposal to increase the number of H-1Bs would ''decimate women and minorities.'')
  But Mr. Trump told Ms. Quick he was ''not at all critical'' of Mr. Zuckerberg and was ''all in favor of keeping these talented people here so they can go to work in Silicon Valley.''
  On Friday, Mr. Perrero said he was not troubled by Mr. Trump's latest remarks. Mr. Trump, he said, was drawing a distinction between foreign workers with exceptional skills and the younger, less-skilled immigrants from India who Mr. Perrero said replaced him in his job.
  But Mr. Trump also unapologetically made a similar argument about filling labor shortages with foreigners on guest-worker visas when he parried attacks from Mr. Rubio and another rival, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, over the foreign waiters and hotel workers he has hired at his resort in Palm Beach, Fla.
  ''It's very, very hard to get people'' in the winter high season, Mr. Trump said. ''It's part of the law. We take advantage of it. There's nothing wrong with it.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/05/us/politics/donald-trumps-softened-stance-on-visas-alarms-some-immigration-critics.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); LAYOFFS (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (76%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (72%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (64%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (63%)

Company:  FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (70%);  WALT DISNEY CO (60%)

Ticker: DIS (NYSE) (60%)

Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (70%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (70%); NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (60%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (60%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (60%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (60%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (63%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); MEGYN KELLY (79%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: March 5, 2016


End of Document
Trump to Strip India of Special Tariff Status, Escalating Trade Tensions
The New York Times 
March 5, 2019 Tuesday 01:50 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 934 words
Byline: Alan Rappeport
Highlight: The decision came after a year of failed efforts by the Trump administration to compel India to lower its trade barriers and as the administration tries to ease tensions with China.
Body


WASHINGTON — President Trump has decided to strip India of a special status that exempts billions of dollars worth of Indian exports from American tariffs, raising new trade tensions with the world’s second most populous country.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative said on Monday night that India and Turkey would no longer be eligible for preferential market access to the United States. While the decision to terminate Turkey’s status stemmed from that country’s economic development, the move against India was retaliatory. It came after a year of failed efforts by the Trump administration to compel India to lower its trade barriers, including the tariffs it charges on American goods.
Mr. Trump’s decision to confront India over its trade practices ratchets up trade tensions at a moment when the administration has been trying to ease frictions with China, which have rattled global financial markets and unsettled businesses.
But India’s high tariff rates have been a major source of frustration for Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly assailed India for charging steep tariffs on American motorcycles. The president routinely criticizes India’s “unfair” trade practices and highlighted the disparity between how the United States and India treat imports in sharply worded remarks during last weekend’s Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington.
“India is a very, very high-tariff nation, and they charge tremendous, tremendous numbers,” Mr. Trump said, adding that he wanted to impose a “reciprocal tax” on India.
Mr. Trump frequently cites Harley-Davidson when complaining about India’s trade practices, criticizing the country for charging 50 percent duties on Harleys and other motorcycles. While Harley-Davidson does sell motorcycles in India, it has moved much of that production abroad to avoid tariffs and has opened a factory outside New Delhi. Most of the 3,000 Harleys sold in India last year avoided the tariffs.
Beyond motorcycles, India has angered American medical device makers with price caps on items such as cardiac stents and knee implants. New policies restricting Visa, Mastercard and American Express also kicked in last year, and Walmart and Amazon have been upset about the            new e-commerce policies recently imposed in India.
The United States and India engaged in $126.2 billion worth of trade in 2017, according to United States trade representative, with the United States running a goods and services deficit of $27.3 billion. About $5 billion of Indian exports to the United States were eligible for reduced tariffs under the Generalized System of Preferences program, or G.S.P. According to India’s Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the program has allowed for $190 million per year in duty reduction.
“It’s survivable, but painful nonetheless,” said Richard Rossow, an expert in United States-India relations at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Mr. Rossow noted that the tariffs could be enough to encourage American importers to buy some products from Mexico or Vietnam instead of India. The program covered imports of items such as automobile parts, agricultural products, jewelry and handicrafts.
For its part, India has been upset by the steel and aluminum tariffs that the United States imposed last year as well as restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers and spouses of H-1B visa holders.
The Trump administration initiated a review of India’s preferential trade status in 2018, and in recent months there have been increasing signs that negotiations were going poorly. Last year, Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, was expected to travel to India but ended up not going. In February Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, backed out of a planned trip and blamed bad weather.
Mr. Lighthizer’s office said this week that, despite “intensive engagement,” India had failed to take the necessary steps to keep its tariff exemptions. The United States has been particularly concerned about market access for dairy and medical devices.
“India has implemented a wide array of trade barriers that create serious negative effects on United States commerce,” the agency said in a statement.
India pushed back against such accusations on Tuesday, arguing that it was willing to work with the United States but that some of the demands were unreasonable.
“India was able to offer a very meaningful way forward on almost all the U.S. requests,” the Ministry of Commerce and Industry said in a statement. “In a few instances, specific U.S. requests were not found reasonable and doable at this time by the departments concerned, in light of public welfare concerns reflective of India’s developing country status and its national interest.”
The change to India’s trade status will take place in 60 days. Lawmakers and business groups expressed hope on Tuesday that a deal could still be worked out.
“The Indian government hasn’t engaged enough to address market access issues,” said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. “For the sake of the many Americans and Indians who relied on G.S.P. benefits, I hope that India will work to quickly address these legitimate concerns.”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting from Mumbai, India. 
PHOTO: President Trump with Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India. The country’s high tariff rates have been a major source of frustration for Mr. Trump. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • In U.S.-India Trade, Trump Sees Only Harley-Davidson
    • India Proposes Chinese-Style Internet Censorship
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: TAXES & TAXATION (91%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (90%); TRADE DISPUTES (90%); EXPORT TRADE (89%); IMPORT TRADE (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); MEDICAL DEVICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL STUDIES (74%); CARDIOVASCULAR DEVICES (73%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (73%); CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE (73%); FINANCIAL MARKETS & INVESTING (73%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (58%); International Trade and World Market (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Federal Taxes (US) (%); Customs (Tariff) (%); Motorcycles, Motor Bikes and Motorscooters (%); Medical Devices (%); Visas (%); E-Commerce (%); Foreign Workers (%)

Company:  VISA INC (82%);  AMERICAN EXPRESS CO (54%);  COMMERCE & INDUSTRY INSURANCE CO (50%)

Organization: OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE (58%)

Ticker: V (NYSE) (82%); AXP (NYSE) (54%)

Industry: NAICS522320 FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS PROCESSING, RESERVE & CLEARINGHOUSE ACTIVITIES (82%); NAICS522210 CREDIT CARD ISSUING (54%); SIC6141 PERSONAL CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (54%); MOTOR VEHICLES (89%); MOTORCYCLES (89%); CREDIT CARDS (87%); AUTOMOTIVE (78%); MEDICAL DEVICES (78%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%); CARDIOVASCULAR DEVICES (73%); FINANCIAL MARKETS & INVESTING (73%); MEDICAL EQUIPMENT & SUPPLIES MFG (73%); ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (58%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); INDIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: March 7, 2019


End of Document
Evidence of High-Skill Work Going Abroad
The New York Times
June 16, 2004 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 746 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Body


In the debate over high-technology work migrating abroad, there has been widespread agreement on at least one thing: the jobs requiring higher levels of skill are the least at risk. 
   Routine software programming and testing jobs, analysts agree, are the ones most susceptible to being grabbed by fast-growing Indian outsourcing companies. By contrast, the people who devise the early blueprints for projects -- the software architects -- have been regarded as far less likely to see their jobs farmed out.
   But Microsoft contract documents show that as far back as 2001 the big company had agreed to pay two Indian outsourcing companies, Infosys and Satyam, to provide skilled ''software architects'' for Microsoft projects. The documents were obtained this month by WashTech, an organization of technology workers based in Seattle, which gave copies to The New York Times.
   ''The policy prescription you hear from people again and again as the response to the global competition of outsourcing is for Americans to move to high-end work,'' said Ronil Hira, an assistant professor for public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology. ''It's important to dispel the myth that high-end work is immune to offshore outsourcing.''
   ''What is not clear,'' Mr. Hira added, ''is how much of that high-end work will go abroad.''
   A Microsoft spokeswoman, Stacy Drake, said that as a matter of policy the company did not comment on individual contracts with suppliers. But, she said, ''we often use outside companies for projects.''
   The outside contractors, Ms. Drake said, are used to bring in specialized expertise Microsoft may not have internally or to bring additional technical support to a project. 
   Still, Ms. Drake said, building the ''core intellectual property'' in Microsoft products is left to full-time company employees. 
   Though definitions vary, software architects are highly skilled workers who often earn six-figure salaries in the United States. The Microsoft contracts with Infosys and Satyam show that the work of software architects, senior software developers and software developers was being done by employees of the Indian companies working at Microsoft facilities in the United States.
   Their work did not come cheap for Microsoft, which was billed $90 an hour for software architects, or at a yearly rate of more than $180,000. Senior software developers were billed at $72 an hour and software developers $60 an hour.
   The on-site work, said Mr. Hira, an expert on offshore outsourcing, is usually done by Indian software engineers who come to the United States on H-1B visas, which allow foreign workers to be employed in the United States for up to six years.
   The Indian workers themselves are paid a fraction of what their employers collect. The top annual salaries paid by Indian outsourcing companies to Indian software experts working in the United States range up to $40,000 or so, Mr. Hira said.
   The contracts also say that for short stints of work, less than 90 days, Microsoft will pay for round-trip economy airfare for travel between India and the United States.
   The contracts also include work done in India, by project managers and by software development and testing engineers. The billing rate for this work ranges from $36 an hour to $23 an hour.
   A spokeswoman for Infosys said the company did not comment on its contracts, and a Satyam spokesman could not be reached.
   Critics of the outsourcing trend regard such agreements with Indian contractors, with work done both in the United States and in India, as a step toward shifting more and more skilled technology jobs overseas. 
   ''Microsoft has hired vendors whose whole reason for being is to transfer work offshore,'' said Marcus Courtney, president of WashTech, an affiliate of the Communications Workers of America.
   The foreign competition for work at Microsoft, Mr. Courtney said, will help the company's management put more pressure on wages for its American workers and reduce employee benefits. 
   Last month, Microsoft announced that it planned to cut costs by an estimated $80 million a year by trimming prescription drug benefits, tightening parental leave policies and making it more expensive to buy Microsoft shares through the employee stock purchase plan.
   Despite its use of foreign contract workers, Microsoft expects to add 3,000 to 3,500 full-time employees to its United States payroll of 37,000 in the fiscal year that ends in July.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft, with the directors of Infosys in Bangalore, India, in 2002. The two companies had an outsourcing agreement in 2001. (Photo by Bloomberg News)      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: OUTSOURCING (92%); AGREEMENTS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); OFFSHORING (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); TECHNICAL SUPPORT (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (74%); ENGINEERING (73%); FULL TIME EMPLOYMENT (73%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); Computers and the Internet (%); Computer Software (%); Labor (%); Foreign Labor (%); Tests and Testing (%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (90%);  INFOSYS LTD (58%)

Organization: Microsoft Corp; Infosys Technologies Ltd; Satyam Computer Services Inc

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (90%); INFY (PAR) (58%); INFY (NYSE) (58%); INFY (NSE) (58%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (90%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (90%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (58%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (58%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (90%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (90%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (89%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (74%); ENGINEERING (73%)

Person: Steve Lohr

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); India

Load-Date: June 16, 2004


End of Document
New U.S. Rule Extends Stay for Some Foreign Graduates
The New York Times
March 9, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 839 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


Shruthi Aramandla's education and her job are geared to New York City's skyline. She did not want to go back to her native India and start all over again.
Ms. Aramandla, 24, who has a master's degree from the  Tandon School of Engineering at New York University, has been waiting anxiously for the federal government to publish its new rule on a foreign-worker training program so she would know whether she could stay longer -- and perhaps one day permanently -- in the United States. 
  The federal government will publish the rule on Friday, saying that international students earning degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields in the United States will now be eligible to stay for three years of on-the-job training. This is seven months longer than under the 2008 rule it replaces for the STEM Optional Practical Training program, known as OPT. The new rule will take effect on May 10.
  Beyond offering graduates more experience in their fields, the extension serves another purpose. ''If my work visa gets denied this year, I still have two more opportunities to apply, and I can keep working within the country,'' said Ms. Aramandla, who wanted to be an engineer since she was 10, growing up in Chennai, India. She graduated from N.Y.U. in May; under the previous 29-month rule, she would have been able to stay only through October 2017.
  Ms. Aramandla will apply in April for a visa, known as an H-1B, for so-called skilled foreign workers. But Congress caps those yearly at 65,000, with an additional 20,000 slots for graduates with advanced degrees like Ms. Aramandla. The government received nearly four times as many applications for those visas as were accepted in last year's lottery.
  This rule is yet another flash point in the controversy over immigration reform. Industry leaders who say they are desperate for skilled talent and those defending the rights of American workers see the training program's extension as an end-around to stalled reform. But that is all they agree upon.
  ''It's an ongoing assault on American workers,'' said John Miano, a lawyer for a technology workers' union in Washington State, whose lawsuit last summer was what forced the government to vacate the previous rule and create a new one, this time for public comment.
  ''They are just trying to double down on what they're doing before,'' he said of the government. '''O.K., you didn't like 29 months? We'll make it 36 months.'''
  Mr. Miano says his group, the Washington Alliance of Technology Workers, is still arguing the legality of the program in an appeal. The next hearing will be in May at the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
  The government posted a similar version of the rule in the federal register in October, drawing more than 50,500 comments. (Death threats to President Obama were removed, officials said.) A large number of commenters who said they were foreign students supported the rule. But there were also comments from people who identified themselves as unemployed technology workers or concerned citizens who believed the government ''was destroying this country,'' and thought that it showed the government was ''standing with illegals.''
  ''I hope you rip it up,'' one commenter said.
  The new rule states directly that ''a STEM OPT student would not replace a full- or part-time, temporary or permanent U.S. worker,'' and that the salary offered would ''be commensurate'' to American workers.
  Officials with the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency said they tried to tighten training programs, mandate oversight of employers and make sure that the students come from accredited universities in an effort to prevent fraud.
  ''In our mind, it enhances training and puts safeguards in to make sure that if you are an employer that you are not unfairly disadvantaging U.S. workers,'' Rachel Canty, deputy director for the agency's Student and Exchange Visitor Program.
  The agency said it would provide help sessions for eligible students, employers and academic institution on its website on Friday.
  Ms. Aramandla, who works for Loring Consulting Engineers and designs heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems for schools in New York, said her training would not be applicable in India, nor would she find the same work environment there; as a woman in India, she feels she would not be as respected as she is in the United States.
  Michael DesRochers, the president of Loring, said Ms. Aramandla was an integral employee in his technical work force, which is 7 percent foreign.
  ''The labor market is tight,'' Mr. DesRochers said. ''We don't look at it as the international students are taking away American opportunities. We feel we're offering to all.''
  His company's work may intersect again with the new rule: Recently, his engineers replaced the ventilation and mechanical systems for the United States Supreme Court.
  Follow The New York Times's Metro coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the New York Today newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/09/nyregion/new-us-rule-extends-stay-for-some-foreign-graduates.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Shruthi Aramandla, 24, a native of India who received a master's degree in engineering from New York University in May, said she would be able to stay longer in the United States under the new rule. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (90%); ENGINEERING (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); STEM EDUCATION (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); EMPLOYEE TRAINING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); EMPLOYEE TRAINING & ASSISTANCE (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (78%); ON THE JOB TRAINING (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); IMMIGRATION (77%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (76%); LABOR UNIONS (71%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (71%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (71%); APPEALS (63%); IMMIGRATION LAW (63%); LAWYERS (62%); SUITS & CLAIMS (61%); LITIGATION (60%)

Industry: ENGINEERING (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); LAWYERS (62%)

Geographic: CHENNAI, TAMIL NADU, INDIA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: March 9, 2016


End of Document
Trump to Strip India of Special Tariff Status, Escalating Tensions
The New York Times
March 6, 2019 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 878 words
Byline: By ALAN RAPPEPORT; Vindu Goel contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Trump has decided to strip India of a special status that exempts billions of dollars worth of Indian exports from American tariffs, raising new trade tensions with the world's second most populous country.
The Office of the United States Trade Representative said on Monday night that  India and Turkey would no longer be eligible for preferential market access to the United States. While the decision to terminate Turkey's status stemmed from that country's economic development, the move against India was retaliatory. It came after a year of failed efforts by the Trump administration to compel India to lower its trade barriers, including the tariffs it charges on American goods. 
  Mr. Trump's decision to confront India over its trade practices ratchets up trade tensions at a moment when the administration has been trying to ease frictions with China, which have rattled global financial markets and unsettled businesses.
  But India's high tariff rates have been a major source of frustration for Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly assailed India for charging steep tariffs on American motorcycles. The president routinely criticizes India's ''unfair'' trade practices and highlighted the disparity between how the United States and India treat imports in sharply worded remarks during last weekend's Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington.
  ''India is a very, very high-tariff nation, and they charge tremendous, tremendous numbers,'' Mr. Trump said, adding that he wanted to impose a ''reciprocal tax'' on India.
  Mr. Trump frequently cites Harley-Davidson when complaining about India's trade practices, criticizing the country for charging 50 percent duties on Harleys and other motorcycles. While Harley-Davidson does sell motorcycles in India, it has moved much of that production abroad to avoid tariffs and has opened a factory outside New Delhi. Most of the 3,000 Harleys sold in India last year avoided the tariffs.
  Beyond motorcycles, India has angered American medical device makers with price caps on items such as cardiac stents and knee implants. New policies restricting Visa, Mastercard and American Express also kicked in last year, and Walmart and Amazon have been upset about the new e-commerce policies recently imposed in India.
  The United States and India engaged in $126.2 billion worth of trade in 2017, according to United States trade representative, with the United States running a goods and services deficit of $27.3 billion. About $5 billion of Indian exports to the United States were eligible for reduced tariffs under the Generalized System of Preferences program, or G.S.P. According to India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry, the program has allowed for $190 million per year in duty reduction.
  ''It's survivable, but painful nonetheless,'' said Richard Rossow, an expert in United States-India relations at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
  Mr. Rossow noted that the tariffs could be enough to encourage American importers to buy some products from Mexico or Vietnam instead of India. The program covered imports of items such as automobile parts, agricultural products, jewelry and handicrafts.
  For its part, India has been upset by the steel and aluminum tariffs that the United States imposed last year as well as restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers and spouses of H-1B visa holders.
  The Trump administration initiated a review of India's preferential trade status in 2018, and in recent months there have been increasing signs that negotiations were going poorly. Last year, Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, was expected to travel to India but ended up not going. In February Wilbur Ross, the commerce secretary, backed out of a planned trip and blamed bad weather.
  Mr. Lighthizer's office said this week that, despite ''intensive engagement,'' India had failed to take the necessary steps to keep its tariff exemptions. The United States has been particularly concerned about market access for dairy and medical devices.
  ''India has implemented a wide array of trade barriers that create serious negative effects on United States commerce,'' the agency said in a statement.
  India pushed back against such accusations on Tuesday, arguing that it was willing to work with the United States but that some of the demands were unreasonable.
  ''India was able to offer a very meaningful way forward on almost all the U.S. requests,'' the Ministry of Commerce and Industry said in a statement. ''In a few instances, specific U.S. requests were not found reasonable and doable at this time by the departments concerned, in light of public welfare concerns reflective of India's developing country status and its national interest.''
  The change to India's trade status will take place in 60 days. Lawmakers and business groups expressed hope on Tuesday that a deal could still be worked out.
  ''The Indian government hasn't engaged enough to address market access issues,'' said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. ''For the sake of the many Americans and Indians who relied on G.S.P. benefits, I hope that India will work to quickly address these legitimate concerns.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/05/us/politics/trump-us-india-tariffs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Harley-Davidson motorcycles at a mall in Mumbai, India. President Trump has criticized India for charging 50 percent duties on Harleys and other motorcycles made in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TAXES & TAXATION (92%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (90%); EXPORT TRADE (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); IMPORT TRADE (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); TRADE DISPUTES (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); CARDIOVASCULAR DEVICES (73%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (73%); CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE (73%); FINANCIAL MARKETS & INVESTING (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (70%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (70%); INTERNATIONAL STUDIES (68%); MEDICAL DEVICES (66%); ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (50%)

Company:  VISA INC (82%);  AMERICAN EXPRESS CO (54%);  COMMERCE & INDUSTRY INSURANCE CO (50%)

Organization: OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE (58%)

Ticker: V (NYSE) (82%); AXP (NYSE) (54%)

Industry: NAICS522320 FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS PROCESSING, RESERVE & CLEARINGHOUSE ACTIVITIES (82%); NAICS522210 CREDIT CARD ISSUING (54%); SIC6141 PERSONAL CREDIT INSTITUTIONS (54%); MOTOR VEHICLES (89%); MOTORCYCLES (89%); CREDIT CARDS (87%); CARDIOVASCULAR DEVICES (73%); BANKING & FINANCE (72%); FINANCIAL MARKETS & INVESTING (71%); MEDICAL DEVICES (66%); MEDICAL EQUIPMENT & SUPPLIES MFG (62%); ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); INDIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: March 6, 2019


End of Document
How a Technology Gap Helped China Win Jobs
The New York Times
July 18, 2004 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; SundayBusiness; Pg. 9; OFFICE SPACE: ARMCHAIR M.B.A.
Length: 867 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. HOLSTEIN
William J. Holstein is editor in chief of Chief Executive magazine.
Body


CHINA is challenging India as a low-cost home for software development. In the process, says Dale L. Fuller, president and chief executive of Borland Software in Scotts Valley, Calif., the technology industry is becoming ever more globalized. Following are excerpts from a conversation with him:

Q. Is India still the country where Western companies look when they outsource technology work?
  So they are closing the gap. They will catch up. They are three to five years away.
 Q. Are software development jobs moving from the United States to these other places, or are companies adding positions offshore?

A. Over the 2001-03 time frame, we saw a significant decrease in the head count within U.S. organizations because of cost controls. I don't believe those jobs are coming back. There are clearly not as many developers employed in the U.S. today as there were three years ago. But you have to remember that if there are 600,000 or 700,000 very well-trained staffers in India, that still pales in comparison with the almost three million jobs in North America.

Q. Isn't some of this work too complicated to be outsourced or offshored?

A. Yes, the environments are more complex.

Q. What do you mean by that?

A. That means there are multiple platforms, or different kinds of computer systems, and they have to work together. It's a lot more complex. The notion that you can make all that work well together by taking your secret sauce and giving it to someone else just doesn't make sense.

Q. Is the American educational system doing a good job of producing the caliber of workers that technology companies need?

A. We have an amazing educational system, by far head and shoulders above anywhere else. The unfortunate part of that is that while it attracts talent from all over the world -- people fight to get into our universities -- most graduates with engineering degrees are foreign nationals and they don't stay here. One of our biggest exports is the education of our competitors.

A. It is clear today that India has the leadership, in terms of market share, for software development and outsourcing. The reason for that is that they had an early jump start. They began by being more Westernized and having more English speakers. A lot of guys who came over here from their institutes of technology and got trained here have now gone back. A lot of the start-ups during the Internet bubble were Indian, and a lot of the resources here in Silicon Valley were the holders of H-1B visas, who also transferred back after the bubble burst.

Q. But the Chinese are catching up?

A. Over the past couple of years, we've seen China really put the pressure on by bringing their skills sets up. They have the language barrier. But their president made the statement that everyone will be speaking English within 20 years. They're making some really big strides.

Q. What do the Japanese think about China's emergence?

A. Being in Japan recently, what I saw were quite a few of the systems integrators, such as NEC, Fujitsu and Hitachi, beginning to open very large outsourcing contracts with China, not India.

Q. Is it a question of costs, or do Chinese workers have some skills that are in particular demand?

A. China is a little bit lower-cost than India. But I don't think that will last for long. Both countries have what we would classify, over the next 10 to 20 years, as inexhaustible sources of human capital.

Q. Are both countries basically in the business of writing code, or of something more sophisticated than that?

A. Between the two cultures, there are some distinct differences. One is that we see more and more services going into India, the complete service, everything from consulting services to a full customer center where you have your phone systems set up with people answering them. It's all tied together. Having been established for a while, the Indians have a methodology and a process that's very familiar to those of us in the Western world. China hasn't really used that and is just now beginning to adopt it.

Q. Does China's very different political system help it compete against India?

A. China does have a lot more resources subsidized by the government. For example, it is doing something unique to accelerate its ability to compete against India. They are publishing a list of the authorized software that any Chinese-sponsored agency or company that is subsidized can buy. If you want to do business in China, you have to have a development arm in China to build your applications or your software. China is using their muscle to say, ''Hey, Mr. Microsoft, or Hey, Mr. Borland, if you want to sell to our companies or our government, you have to be based here.'' That will accelerate China's growth.

Q. Does China have any other advantages?

A. India has processes and methodology from the 90's. It's old. China gets to look at all the mistakes of the Indian outsourcers and learn from them. And China gets to use the new technology that we and others have developed over the past year, but India is handicapped. China did the exact same thing with wireless technology. They were so far behind that they said: ''We're not going to lay copper lines all over China. We're going to go wireless.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (Drawing by Sean Kelly)                                                                         
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Question

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: LOW COST HOUSING SCHEMES (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (89%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); ECONOMIC BUBBLE (84%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); OFFSHORING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (76%); FOREIGN LABOR (73%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (68%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (61%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (60%); Terms not available from NYTimes (%)

Industry: COMPUTER SOFTWARE (91%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (90%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (76%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (61%); MARKET SHARE (60%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); INDIA (94%); CHINA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: July 18, 2004


End of Document
What You Missed in the Debate
The New York Times
March 11, 2016 Friday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Politics; Pg. 
Length: 1035 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER
Body


Here's how we analyzed the Republican debate.
_______ 
  MIAMI -- The four candidates still battling for the Republican nomination for president gathered at the University of Miami for the party's 12th debate, hosted by CNN. Donald J. Trump leads in both delegates and states won, with Gov. John Kasich's home state, Ohio, and Senator Marco Rubio's home state, Florida, both heading to the polls on Tuesday.
   In a surprise twist, the first question, on jobs and the economy, goes to Mr. Kasich. Asked by Jake Tapper, the debate moderator, if his advocacy for trade deals had come at the ''expense of the middle class,'' Mr. Kasich cited his blue-collar background -- his father was a mailman and his family worked in the steel industry -- and said he believes in ''free trade, but fair trade.''
   Mr. Rubio -- who supports increasing the number of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers -- was asked about the case of Disney, which used a loophole in the program to lay off American workers and replace them with foreign workers. Companies like Disney that abuse the program, he said, ''should be barred from using it in the future.''
   On the question of visas for high-skilled workers, Mr. Trump seemed to try to have it both ways. As a businessman, he said, he uses the program and ''I do what I have to do.'' But, he added, it's ''unfair'' for workers -- ''And we should end it.''
   Senator Ted Cruz of Texas used the H-1B question to switch to the issue of illegal immigration, a hot topic for the Republican base. He said he would cut federal funds to ''sanctuary cities'' that don't follow the nation's immigration laws. And, he added, Democrats don't have the political will to fix the nation's broken immigration system, because they ''view those illegal immigrants as potential voters.''
   And the mystery of just why Mr. Trump is holding a news conference at Mar-a-Lago, his private club, on Friday morning became clear midway through the first hour, when Mr. Trump declared that Ben Carson, the retired pediatric neurosurgeon, would be endorsing him. He will make sure Mr. Carson will be very involved in his education policies, he added.
   ''First of all, Ted was in favor of amnesty,'' Mr. Trump said. ''There's no question about that.'' In any other debate, those would have been fighting words. But none of the candidates have really had a highly heated exchange yet. As Mr. Trump himself said, just moments later, ''I cannot believe how civil it's been up here.''
   Mr. Cruz and Mr. Trump did get into a brief back-and-forth over Mr. Trump's threat to impose a 45 percent tariff on foreign goods. Mr. Trump called it a ''threat'' that would become a tax only if foreign countries, like China, ''don't behave.'' Mr. Cruz countered that ''it's not China who pays the tax,'' but the ''working men and women'' here in the United States.
  Not so, Mr. Trump argued, explaining that he would ''start building those factories and those plants here instead of China,'' thus creating more jobs. And then it was time for a commercial break.
   Asked about his recent comments that ''Islam hates us,'' and if he really meant all Muslims, Mr. Trump doubled down: '' I mean a lot of them, I mean a lot of them,'' he said. ''There's tremendous hatred, and I will stick with exactly what I said.'' He is not willing to be politically correct, he said.
  ''I'm not interested in being politically correct -- I'm interested in being correct,'' Mr. Rubio retorted, saying the nation would need to work with Muslim countries to help defeat radical extremism. Mr. Kasich, similarly, said that the United States would need Muslim and Arab countries to fight the Islamic State.
   On an issue that has dogged Mr. Trump in recent weeks -- his calls for violating international law and targeting the families of suspected terrorists -- the New York billionaire called on existing laws to be expanded in order to fight terrorists on ''equal footing.'' Both Mr. Cruz and Mr. Rubio, meanwhile, quickly and firmly said they would not target the families of terrorists.
   Mr. Trump said that he would be a strong supporter of Israel, citing a somewhat unlikely list of credentials: his Jewish son-in-law, his daughter Ivanka who converted to Judaism, and his Jewish grandchildren. He also mentioned that he had served as the grand marshal of the Israeli Day Parade down Fifth Avenue.
  He also added that a peace deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians would be a tough negotiation. But, he said, ''I'd like to give it a shot.''
   Asked about his comments seeming to praise authoritarian governments -- calling both President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and China's government during the Tiananmen Square massacre ''strong'' -- Mr. Trump said that ''strong doesn't mean good,'' adding that he was not endorsing the massacre.
  ''Putin is a strong leader, absolutely,'' he said. ''I don't say that in a good way or a bad way. I say that as a fact.'' Mr. Kasich, asked a follow-up question, was swift in his rebuke: ''I think the Chinese government butchered those kids,'' he said.
   Does Mr. Trump share some culpability for encouraging the hostile tone at his rallies, which in recent weeks have turned increasing violent, Mr. Tapper asked.
  ''I hope not, I truly hope not,'' Mr. Trump said. But, he said, when his supporters see protesters, when ''they see what's going on in this country, they have anger that's unbelievable.'' And, he added, ''We have some protesters who are bad dudes'' and are ''really dangerous.''
   ''There are only two of us who have a path to winning the nomination -- Donald and myself,'' Mr. Cruz said, responding to a question about the possibility of a brokered convention, and noting that he has finished ahead of Mr. Trump in eight states. He then appealed to voters, saying that if Mr. Trump is the nominee, Hillary Clinton will win in November and urging, ''Come and join us.''
  But Mr. Trump also returned to the numbers. What Mr. Cruz doesn't mention, he said, is that he has actually beaten Mr. Cruz far more frequently -- in 13 states.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/us/politics/what-you-have-missed.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); EDUCATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); SANCTUARY SITES (77%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (75%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (75%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (72%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%); NEGATIVE NEWS (71%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (67%); IMMIGRATION LAW (62%); MIGRATION ISSUES (62%)

Industry: FACTORY WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); IRON & STEEL INDUSTRY (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); JOHN KASICH (78%); BEN CARSON (73%); MARCO RUBIO (73%)

Geographic: MIAMI, FL, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 11, 2016


End of Document
How Stephen Miller Seized the Moment to Battle Immigration
The New York Times 
August 17, 2019 Saturday 16:33 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 4800 words
Byline: Jason DeParle
Highlight: Behind Mr. Miller’s singular grip on the Trump anti-immigrant agenda are forces far bigger than his own hostility toward the foreign-born.
Body


WASHINGTON — When historians try to explain how opponents of immigration captured the Republican Party, they may turn to the spring of 2007, when President George W. Bush threw his waning powers behind a legalization plan and conservative populists buried it in scorn.
Mr. Bush was so taken aback, he said he worried about America “losing its soul,” and immigration politics have never been the same.
That spring was significant for another reason, too: An intense young man with wary, hooded eyes and fiercely anti-immigrant views graduated from college and began a meteoric rise as a Republican operative. With the timing of a screenplay, the man and the moment converged.
Stephen Miller was 22 and looking for work in Washington. He lacked government experience but had media appearances on talk radio and Fox News and a history of pushing causes like “Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week.” A first-term congresswoman from Minnesota offered him a job interview and discovered they were reading the same book: a polemic warning that Muslim immigration could mean “the end of the world as we know it.”
By the end of the interview, Representative Michele Bachmann had a new press secretary. And a dozen years later, Mr. Miller, now a senior adviser to President Trump, is presiding over one of the most fervent attacks on immigration in American history.
The story of Mr. Miller’s rise has been told with a focus on his pugnacity and paradoxes. Known more for his enemies than his friends, he is a conservative firebrand from liberal Santa Monica, Calif., and a descendant of refugees who is seeking to eliminate refugee programs. He is a Duke graduate in bespoke suits who rails against the perfidy of so-called elites. Among those who have questioned his moral fitness are his uncle, his childhood rabbi and 3,400 fellow Duke alumni.
Less attention has been paid to the forces that have abetted his rise and eroded Republican support for immigration — forces Mr. Miller has personified and advanced in a career unusually reflective of its times.
Rising fears of terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks brought new calls to keep immigrants out. Declining need for industrial labor left fewer businesses clamoring to bring them in. A surge of migrants across the South stoked a backlash in the party’s geographic base.
Conservative media, once divided, turned against immigration, and immigration-reduction groups that had operated on the margins grew in numbers and sophistication. Abandoning calls for minority outreach, the Republican Party chose instead to energize its conservative white base — heeding strategists who said the immigrant vote was not just a lost cause but an existential threat.
Arriving in Washington as these forces coalesced, Mr. Miller rode the tailwinds with zeal and skill. Warning of terrorism and disturbed by multicultural change, he became the protégé of a Southern senator especially hostile to immigration, Jeff Sessions of Alabama. And he courted allies in the conservative media and immigration-restriction groups.
Mr. Miller, who declined to comment for this article, affects the air of a lone wolf — guarded, strident, purposefully provocative. But he has been shaped by the movement whose ideas and lieutenants he helped install across the government as he consolidated a kind of power unusual for a presidential aide and unique in the Trump White House.
“I don’t agree with his policy on reducing legal immigration, but I’m in awe of how he’s been able to impact this one issue,” said Cesar Conda, who battled Mr. Miller on Capitol Hill as an aide to Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. “He’s got speech writing, he’s got policy, he’s got his own little congressional-relations operation, he’s got allies whom he’s helped place across the government.”
“Years ago, the restrictionist movement was a ragtag group” with no strong ties to either party, he added. Mr. Miller “embodies their rise into the G.O.P. mainstream.”
Country and Party in Motion
The story that has defined Mr. Miller’s life began two decades before his birth, when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed a 1965 law ending quotas that chose immigrants based on their national origin and heavily favored white people from Northern Europe. Although Mr. Johnson called the new law a largely symbolic measure that would neither increase immigrants’ numbers nor alter their ethnic mix, it did both on a vast scale — raising the foreign-born share of the population to near-record highs and setting the United States on course for non-Hispanic whites to become a minority of the population.
Opposition initially came from the left, especially from environmentalists worried about population growth.
The first major immigration-control group, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, or FAIR, was founded in 1979 by Dr. John Tanton, a Michigan ophthalmologist and Sierra Club member,            with funding from Cordelia Scaife May, an heiress to the Mellon banking fortune. Mindful of the bigotry in earlier anti-immigration movements, Dr. Tanton vowed to keep it “centrist/liberal in political orientation.”
[Newly unearthed personal writings by Cordelia Scaife May reveal why she dedicated her fortune to the cause.]
But his arguments about environmental harm and wage competition found little traction in a Democratic Party eager to court minorities. By the mid-1980s, Dr. Tanton was making the racial arguments he had pledged to avoid, decrying the “Latin onslaught” and insisting on the need for “a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.”
At the time, the Republican Party was divided on immigration. While cultural conservatives were wary of rapid demographic change, businesses wanted cheap labor and Cold Warriors embraced anti-Communist refugees, including large waves of Cubans and Vietnamese. Running for president, a conservative as definitional as Ronald Reagan hailed “millions of immigrants from every corner of the earth” as a sign that God had made America a “city on a hill.”
But by the 1990s, the Cold War had ended, and globalization was sending manufacturing abroad. The business wing of the Republican Party, its main pro-immigrant faction, had less need for foreign workers. “It’s not that the business lobby became anti-immigration; it’s just that they cared a lot less,” said Margaret Peters, a political scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Not least among the forces shaping the debate was immigration itself: It accelerated and spread to the South, with the number of unauthorized immigrants growing especially fast.
In 1986, President Reagan signed a compromise law that gave legal status to nearly three million people while adding new penalties to curb flows of illegal immigrants. But enforcement proved weak, and the unauthorized population reached a record 12 million. Restrictionists, feeling betrayed, swore never to allow another “amnesty.”
After a Republican backlash in the 1990s led more immigrants to vote for Democrats, Mr. Bush ran in 2000 as a pro-immigrant conservative. He saw Latinos as proto-Republican — religious, entrepreneurial, family-oriented — and was considering a legalization plan when the Sept. 11 attacks consumed his administration.
By the time he returned to the issue in 2007, his party’s skepticism toward legalization had hardened into implacable opposition. Amplified by talk radio, populist critics denounced his plan as “shamnesty”; one called it an effort to make America a “roach motel.” Three-quarters of Republican senators opposed it.
Just a year before, a rising Republican star had urged fellow conservatives not to abandon the party’s Reaganite support for immigration.
“We are either going to prove that we believe in the ideas enshrined on the Statue of Liberty, or the American people will go looking elsewhere,” said a congressman from Indiana, Mike Pence.
But the party’s shift proved decisive. Now, as vice president, Mr. Pence loyally defends the policies set by the president and Mr. Miller.
Early Provocations
The forces that pushed the Republican Party to the right also shaped Mr. Miller.
Born in 1985, he grew up in a post-Cold War world where the acceptance of refugees was no longer seen as part of America’s resistance to a hostile foreign power. Rapid ethnic change was shaping his world.
The son of an affluent real estate investor, he entered high school in a self-consciously multicultural Santa Monica in 1999, just as California became a majority-minority state. At the start of his junior year, the attacks on Sept. 11 took nearly 3,000 lives.
The terrorist plot was central to his political awakening. Complaining that school officials were insufficiently patriotic, Mr. Miller won an uphill fight to make them enforce regulations requiring the Pledge of Allegiance. “Osama bin Laden would feel very welcome at Santa Monica High School,” he wrote in 2002 in a local publication.
Tellingly, he took his case to talk radio, as a frequent guest on “The Larry Elder Show.” It was a pattern Mr. Miller would repeat in subsequent years: airing hyperbolic claims of liberal treachery to conservative media allies. “He loved being the provocative conservative behind liberal lines,” said Ari Rosmarin, who was editor of the school newspaper and now works on criminal justice issues at the American Civil Liberties Union.
Mr. Miller’s main issue was assimilation, or what he saw as its failures. Writing in a local paper, he complained that “a number of students lacked basic English skills,” and his yearbook page quoted Theodore Roosevelt: “There can be no fifty-fifty Americanism.” The school paper ran a parody of him railing against ethnic food and demanding white bread and “fine Virginia hams, just as the founding fathers used to enjoy on their bountiful plantations.”
Classmates were often unsure whether his provocative views were sincere or a bid for attention. “Am I the only one who is sick and tired of being told to pick up my trash when we have janitors who are paid to do it for us?” he said in a speech for student government. A video shows him flashing a self-satisfied smile as classmates jeer.
His uncle, Dr. David S. Glosser, a vocal critic, dismissed the antics as “just an early adolescent desire to be noticed.”
“This talk of his philosophy seems disingenuous to me,” he said in an interview. “It’s very seductive. All the sudden, you become the darling of media big shots and you get notoriety for it at home.”
Some of Mr. Miller’s Latino classmates say his comments made them feel personally attacked. In an interview, Jason Islas said Mr. Miller told him he was ending their friendship for reasons that included “my Latino heritage.” He added, “I think he is a racist.”
But with prominent allies like David Horowitz, a conservative author and organizer, Mr. Miller headed to Duke in 2003 with the beginnings of a national reputation.
The defining issue of Mr. Miller’s college career was the arrest, when he was a junior, of three white lacrosse players accused of raping a black stripper. Mr. Miller leaped to the players’ defense, charging that administrators and faculty members saw them as emblems of white privilege and simply assumed they were guilty — a case he made on the Fox News show “The O’Reilly Factor,” then the most-watched cable news program. He demanded that the school president be fired and the prosecutor jailed.
The case collapsed. North Carolina’s attorney general declared the players innocent, the prosecutor was disbarred for misconduct and the accuser was later convicted of murdering her boyfriend. For Mr. Miller, it was a two-part vindication — reinforcing his conviction that liberal dogma about racial oppression was wrong and that his scorched-earth tactics were effective.
In his last column for the Duke Chronicle before graduating, he called himself “a deeply committed conservative who considers it his responsibility to do battle with the left.” Then he headed for Washington.
Taking the Fight to Congress
Most of Mr. Miller’s work for Mrs. Bachmann was unrelated to immigration. He wrote news releases about gas prices and fire department grants. But in February 2008, soon after he began the job, an undocumented immigrant in rural Minnesota, Olga Franco, drove through a stop sign and killed four children. Mrs. Bachmann appeared on “The O’Reilly Factor,” where she framed the issue as “anarchy versus the rule of law.”
Although Ms. Franco was convicted of vehicular homicide, the National Academy of Sciences, a group founded to convey academic consensus, has written that immigrants are “much less likely than natives to commit crimes,” and recent evidence suggests that the undocumented are no exception.
But immigrant crime would be a running theme in Mr. Miller’s career, and his emphasis on the issue borrowed from the broader restrictionist movement. To erode public support for immigration, FAIR maintains an online archive of “serious crimes by illegal aliens.”
In a 2008 congressional campaign debate, Mrs. Bachmann’s opponent accused her of exploiting the tragedy, but she argued that unauthorized immigrants were “bringing in diseases, bringing in drugs, bringing in violence” — language nearly identical to what Mr. Trump would later employ with Mr. Miller as his aide — and she mustered a slender win.
Soon after that election, Mr. Miller went to work for Representative John Shadegg of Arizona, and then quickly crossed the Capitol to work for Mr. Sessions. Perhaps the leading immigration foe in the Senate, Mr. Sessions was a product of a region where immigration had soared, largely in places unaccustomed to it. In two decades, the number of immigrants had grown fourfold in Alabama, Kentucky and South Carolina; fivefold in Arkansas, Georgia and Tennessee; and sixfold in North Carolina.
Mr. Miller had opposed immigration mostly on cultural grounds, warning that newcomers were failing to learn English and endangering public safety. But Mr. Sessions emphasized economic concerns and what he called “the real needs of working Americans,” saying foreigners threatened their jobs and wages.
As a defender of the working class, Mr. Miller had uncertain credentials. If his high school gibe about janitors was a joke, he returned to the issue at Duke. He mocked a campaign to have students thank their dorm-cleaning staff, arguing that employment was thanks enough. “The janitors need a job, which we provide,” he wrote.
Striking a self-consciously elitist pose, he ridiculed calls for improved relations with working-class Durham, N.C. (“one of the last spots in America anyone would visit”) and asked for a student smoking lounge with “plenty of mahogany and leather.”
The impact of immigrants on jobs and wages is much debated — they take jobs but make jobs, too. Most economists see greater downward pressure on wages coming from other forces, including the decline of the minimum wage (adjusted for inflation), weak unions, outsourcing and technological change.
The National Academy of Sciences concluded in 2017 that immigration’s overall effect on wages was “very small,” but added that “some studies have found sizable negative short-run impacts for high school dropouts” (who account for about 8 percent of the work force). Even among dropouts, some economists find the effects modest or nonexistent.
One prominent scholar, the Harvard economist George Borjas, consistently finds negative impacts much larger than his peers do. He is the figure Mr. Miller most often cites.
A Sign of Things to Come
In moving to Mr. Sessions’s Senate suite, Mr. Miller arrived at a crossroads for the restrictionist movement’s people and ideas.
As head of communications, Mr. Miller acquired a deep knowledge of the movement’s players and policy goals. Others in the office would also go on to influential jobs in the Trump administration, not least Mr. Sessions himself, who as attorney general presided over a policy that separated thousands of young immigrant children from parents illegally crossing the border.
Mr. Miller’s minor moment of Capitol Hill renown stems from his efforts to defeat the so-called Gang of Eight bill, a bipartisan attempt to pair new enforcement measures with legalization for most of the country’s 11 million undocumented immigrants, and to offer them a long path to citizenship.
He opposed the bill with the same zeal that had inspired high school parodies, haranguing reporters into the night and earning a gadfly reputation.
In retrospect, three elements of Mr. Miller’s approach foreshadowed his future exercise of power. One was his rejection of the view that Republicans needed to court minorities. The Gang of Eight bill was born after the 2012 presidential race, in which the defeated Republican, Mitt Romney, lost the Latino vote by 44 points.
No less a hard-liner than the Fox News host Sean Hannity called for legalizing most of the country’s undocumented immigrants. “Pathway to citizenship — done,” he said on his radio show. The Republican National Committee urged the party “to empower and support ethnic minorities” and “champion comprehensive immigration reform,” meaning legalization.
Mr. Miller took the opposite view, which the party ultimately followed: Mobilize the white working-class base, among whom turnout had fallen.
While Mr. Bush had seen Latinos as natural Republicans, most restrictionists saw them as an electoral threat. “If four out of five Latinos are registering with the Democrats, perhaps less immigration would be in the interest of the Republican Party, no?” wrote Jon Feere of the Center for Immigration Studies, a spinoff of FAIR. (Mr. Feere later joined the Trump administration as an immigration adviser. )
A second feature of Mr. Miller’s efforts was his symbiotic relationship with conservative media, especially online publications like Breitbart News.
Lacking gatekeepers, the internet was a medium tailor-made for anti-establishment causes. Right-wing populism had long flourished on talk radio, but Breitbart, with few restrictions on space, could cover the issue in greater depth, bringing intense scrutiny to hot-button issues. And social media made articles easy to share.
Breitbart ran three stories making the false charge, circulated by Mr. Sessions’s staff, that the bill offered undocumented immigrants free cellphones.
Mr. Miller and Breitbart worked together closely.
“Sessions: Special Interest, Extremist Groups Wrote Immigration Bill,” claimed one Breitbart headline.
“Sessions: ‘Tide is Beginning to Turn’ Against Immigration Bill,” announced another.
A third element of Mr. Miller’s work involved his alliance with outside groups, especially three that Dr. Tanton helped create and that received millions of dollars from Mrs. May’s foundation. (Over a recent 12-year period alone, the foundation gave the Center for Immigration Studies $17.6 million, FAIR $56.7 million and NumbersUSA $58.2 million.)
Once a lonely cause, restrictionism had grown into a mature movement — an intellectual ecosystem of sorts — with groups specializing in areas as diverse as litigation and voter mobilization.
When Mr. Sessions claimed on a conference call that the Gang of Eight bill threatened jobs, an analyst from the Center for Immigration Studies was on the line to vouch for the data, and Breitbart covered it as news. When the center presented its journalism award, Mr. Miller was the speaker, and his first-name references to the Center’s staff — “all the great work that Mark and Jessica and Steve are doing”— made it clear that he felt among friends.
Despite Mr. Sessions’s opposition, the bill passed in the Democratic Senate in 2013. As it headed to the Republican House, Mr. Miller drafted a 30-page memo that Mr. Sessions shared with the House Republican caucus, urging members to oppose the bill on behalf of “millions of struggling American workers.”
House leaders were mulling how to proceed when, in June 2014, an obscure Virginia professor toppled the majority leader, Eric Cantor, in a Republican primary. Though vastly outspent, the newcomer, Dave Brat, prevailed in large part by attacking Mr. Cantor for being “in cahoots” with Democrats on immigration.
“The world just changed,” Mr. Miller exulted the next day.
Indeed, it had. Among those commenting in Breitbart was the “conservative provocateur” Donald J. Trump, who said the upset showed that the Republican establishment was at risk. “Everybody is now vulnerable,” he said.
Circulating the article, Mr. Miller told friends that he wished Mr. Trump would run for president. When Mr. Trump did — demanding a wall and a ban on Muslims entering the country — Mr. Miller soon signed on.
The Right Kind of Candidate
Mr. Miller rose quickly on the small staff. A prolific writer and combative surrogate, he was the person most knowledgeable about the campaign’s central issue, and he lavished Mr. Trump with praise. (The Trump candidacy, Mr. Miller said, had altered “Western civilization.”) He also served as an ideological chaperone to a candidate given to sudden reversals of signature policies, a role Mr. Miller continues to play in the White House.
Mr. Trump scored a coup by winning the support of some tech workers who, after being laid off by the Walt Disney Company, were forced to train foreign replacements admitted on temporary H-1B visas.
The workers embodied Mr. Trump’s larger argument that immigration hurt American employment. Yet days after appearing with them at a rally, Mr. Trump said in a televised debate that he would drop his plan to restrict the H-1B program.
“I’m changing, I’m changing,” he told the stunned interviewer. “I’m softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.”
Within hours, Mr. Trump reversed himself again, issuing a statement to assure his followers that he planned to “end forever the use of H-1B as a cheap labor program.”
Despite the president’s public image as an unrelenting immigration foe, some restrictionist leaders view him as soft — a businessman whose desire for labor will lead him to support more immigration. That unreliability, they say, makes Mr. Miller’s presence especially important.
“If he weren’t there, I’m pretty sure it’d be worse,” said Mark Krikorian, director of the Center for Immigration Studies.
To Remake America’s Self-Image
Mr. Miller now occupies a large West Wing office and has influence on virtually every element of immigration policy, from the words the president uses to the regulations he promulgates. Mr. Miller is a speechwriter, policy architect, personnel director, legislative aide, spokesman and strategist. At every step, he has pushed for the hardest line.
When Mr. Trump wavered on his pledge to abolish protections for 800,000 so-called Dreamers — people brought illegally to the United States as children — Mr. Miller urged conservative states to threaten lawsuits. Mr. Trump then canceled the protections.
When the president later mulled a deal to restore them, Mr. Miller stacked the negotiations with people who opposed the move, leading Mr. Trump to abandon compromise and rail against immigrants from “shithole countries.”
“As long as Stephen Miller is in charge of negotiating immigration, we are going nowhere,” complained Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who supported a deal.
The Trump effort to curb immigration has played out amid so much chaos — judicial setbacks, congressional defeats, personnel purges, Twitter wars — that it can be hard to keep a running tally of its impact.
The attempt to revoke Dreamer protections has been blocked in court. An effort to bar travelers from certain predominantly Muslim countries was struck down twice. The promised border wall has not been built. A campaign to deter illegal immigration by separating thousands of children from their mothers was abandoned amid blistering criticism, including some from the right.
Still, Mr. Miller has left a big mark, in ways both obvious and obscure. After two highly publicized failures, he helped craft a travel ban that passed court muster. A fervent critic of refugee programs, he has helped cut annual admissions by about three-quarters since the end of the Obama administration.
Writing in Politico, his uncle, Dr. Glosser, expressed an “increasing horror” at his nephew’s hostility to refugees and noted that their ancestor, Wolf-Leib Glosser, arrived at Ellis Island after fleeing Russian pogroms. Had Mr. Miller’s policies prevailed then, he wrote, the Glossers probably “would have been murdered by the Nazis,” as most in their village were.
With less fanfare, Mr. Miller has guided a series of policy changes that critics liken to building an “invisible wall.” The Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan research group, counted more than 100 of them, noting that “most have moved forward untouched.”
The Trump administration quadrupled the number of work site investigations. It slowed the processing of temporary H-1B visas. It imposed new performance measures on immigration judges, to encourage faster deportations.
Though Mr. Miller was often the driving force, many of these changes were longstanding goals of the restrictionist movement. “He comes from a community of people who’ve been working on this, some of them, since the ’90s,” said Roy Beck, the president of NumbersUSA.
Beyond the commas and clauses of government rules, Mr. Miller and Mr. Trump are trying to change something deeper: America’s self-conception as a land of immigrants. Mr. Trump is the son of an immigrant. Two of the three women he married are immigrants. Four of his five children have an immigrant parent. Yet his immigration agency rewrote its mission statement to remove the phrase “nation of immigrants.”
Mr. Miller even took to the White House briefing room to offer a revisionist view of the Statue of Liberty. Like many in his movement, he argued it should not be seen as welcoming immigrants because it was originally built for a different purpose (to celebrate political freedom) and that the Emma Lazarus poem hailing the “huddled masses” carries little meaning because it was added later.
The border wars intensified this spring as large numbers of Central American families sought asylum and Mr. Trump, with Mr. Miller urging him on, purged top officials from the Homeland Security Department, including the secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen; he argued they weren’t doing enough to keep them out.
But a quieter bureaucratic story may have revealed as much about Mr. Miller’s priorities and bureaucratic skill.
After long deliberation, the administration last week released a 217-page rule making it easier to deny admission or permanent residency to low-income immigrants deemed likely to receive public benefits. Unlike the border disputes, this so-called public charge rule affects only legal immigrants, since the unauthorized are already barred from most safety-net programs.
Critics say the rule is already causing needy immigrants to forgo health care and nutritional aid. They call it a backdoor way of circumventing Congress and creating a new immigration system that admits fewer people, excludes the “huddled masses,” and favors Europeans over poorer Mexican and Central Americans.
Mr. Miller was so eager to see the rule enacted, he helped push out a one-time ally, L. Francis Cissna, the head of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, for not moving fast enough.
Mr. Krikorian of the Center for Immigration Studies argued that the rule would have only modest effects on immigrant numbers but praised Mr. Miller for asserting a principle. “The point of immigration policy is to benefit Americans,” he said, not “strain the social safety net.”
While the restrictionist movement had long taken that principle to heart, he said “Stephen understood how to operationalize it.”
Michael D. Shear contributed reporting, and Kitty Bennett contributed research. 
PHOTOS: Stephen Miller has the ear of the president on immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); Long vocal against immigration, Stephen Miller, at left above, has consolidated power over a single issue in a way that’s unusual for a presidential aide and unique in the Trump White House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES); President Ronald Reagan signing the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986, which gave nearly three million people legal status. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN, VIA GETTY IMAGES); PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN/CORBIS, VIA GETTY IMAGES) (A22); PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LUKE SHARRETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES); President Trump at the United States-Mexico border in April with the Home- land Security secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen, left, shortly before she was pushed out. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A23)
Related Articles
    • Why an Heiress Spent Her Fortune Trying to Keep Immigrants Out
    • Trump Policy Favors Wealthier Immigrants for Green Cards
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (96%); IMMIGRATION (95%); HISTORY (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); TERRORISM (86%); FASCISM (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); POPULISM (78%); REFUGEES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS VOCATIONS (67%); EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWS (67%); Miller, Stephen (1985- ) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Conservatism (US Politics) (%); Republican Party (%); Race and Ethnicity (%); Discrimination (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Company:  FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (69%)

Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (69%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (69%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); JEFF SESSIONS (79%); MICHELE BACHMANN (58%); Miller, Stephen (1985- ); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: December 14, 2019


End of Document
Cutting the Losses From Outsourcing
The New York Times
July 3, 2005 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; SundayBusiness; Pg. 8; OFFICE SPACE: ARMCHAIR M.B.A.
Length: 870 words
Byline: By WILLIAM J. HOLSTEIN
William J. Holstein is editor in chief of Chief Executive magazine.
Body


OUTSOURCING will inevitably eliminate many more American jobs, says Ron Hira, assistant professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology.
It's time for the federal government to take action to limit the damage, says Professor Hira, co-author with Anil Hira of ''Outsourcing America: What's Behind Our National Crisis and How We Can Reclaim American Jobs'' (American Management Association, $22). Here are excerpts from a conversation.

Q. Will more jobs be lost offshore?

A. We're just at the beginning of this trend, particularly in the services area. The manufacturing sector is much more mature, but in the services area we're just scratching the surface.

Q. What jobs are likely to move next?

A. Information technology jobs and call-centers jobs were the first movers. Now it's snowballing in industries that are information intensive. Companies in insurance and financial services, in particular, have seen that I.T. operations can be successfully offshored. Because of that, they're beginning to think about types of other jobs like claims processing or financial analysis. We're also seeing it in engineering and design.

Q. How can this trend be stopped?

A. There's nothing that can be done to stop it. The question is, how do we adapt to it and deal with the negative effects? Nobody has done anything on the policy front. We've more or less ignored it. We need to take some steps to deal with this new reality.
  Some steps are pretty much no-brainers, like extending trade-adjustment assistance to service workers. If you lose your job in manufacturing because of trade, you get extended unemployment insurance. You get training and health benefits so that you can ''adjust,'' as economists put it -- so that you can find a new job in a different occupation. We do that for manufacturing workers, although the plan is underfunded, but we don't do it for service workers. Congress decided to kill that bill last year, and the reason was that we couldn't afford it, which is surprising. 

Q. How well do retraining efforts work?

A. Most people think retraining doesn't work very well. We need to start experimenting with free training programs right away because there is a new class of workers who are being displaced. They are no longer blue-collar workers. These workers have degrees, sometimes advanced degrees, in computer science or engineering.
  Over the longer term, we need basic things like gathering some data. The Department of Commerce spent $335,000 to do one outsourcing study, and that hasn't been released yet. When the government spends almost $1 trillion a year, it's pretty surprising they can't come up with more money to study this problem.

Q. Should companies face penalties for eliminating jobs?

A. There's a reasonable case to be made to extend the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act to these situations. The idea is to give some advance notification to workers that they're going to be laid off. That gives those workers enough time to begin the adjustment process. Companies don't like this. It's in their self-interest to keep it secret until the end. Companies would look at extending the WARN Act as a penalty. I would look at that as smart economics.

Q. You suggest that in some ways the government actually encourages the outsourcing of jobs. How?

A. One policy that was part of the presidential campaign last year was about tax deferrals that companies got for expanding offshore operations. Companies are able to defer their taxes on profits that are earned offshore as long as they don't repatriate those profits. What Senator John Kerry was proposing, and companies have been lobbying for, was to get a moratorium, or a holiday, for one year to bring those profits back in. Kerry wanted that as a quid pro quo for eliminating the policy. There was $600 billion involved, according to J.P. Morgan. Companies not only got the moratorium but they also got the deferral back in. So the perverse incentive is already back in place. In a few years, they'll say: ''We have another $500 billion overseas. Why don't you give us a tax break for a year?'' This game will go on.

Q. How else does the government encourage outsourcing?

A. You've got programs like the H-1B visa. The intent of the program is, when you can't find American workers, you bring in highly skilled foreign workers who work on temporary visas. They can stay up to six years. The way it's been used traditionally is as a bridge to immigration. You capture the best and the brightest, and they become permanent residents.
  Unfortunately, some businesses have started using this in a different way. They're using it as a purely temporary means to bring in rank-and-file employees who will work for less money. They're not even bothering looking for American workers. This is pretty rampant in the I.T. sector in particular. Those workers then gain experience in the U.S. on the latest technologies, interfacing with customers, and then they are able to take that back to their home country.

Q. How can this situation be corrected?

A. The main thing is to ensure that American companies are looking for American workers first. That's the way Congress believes the program works, but more and more it doesn't.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (Drawing by Sean Kelly)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Interview

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: OUTSOURCING (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (89%); EMPLOYEE RETRAINING (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); SERVICE WORKERS (89%); TRENDS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (79%); OFFSHORING (79%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); MANUFACTURING SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); ECONOMICS (73%); FINES & PENALTIES (73%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (70%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (69%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (68%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (68%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (60%); CALL CENTERS (54%); Labor (%); Foreign Labor (%); Unemployment (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%)

Company:  HIRA CO LTD (72%)

Organization: AMERICAN MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION (57%); Rochester Institute of Technology

Industry: MANUFACTURING (89%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); MANUFACTURING SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (78%); INFORMATION MANAGEMENT (74%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (70%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (69%); CALL CENTERS (54%)

Person: Ron Hira; William J Holstein

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 3, 2005


End of Document
The Tone and the Content of the Republican Debate
The New York Times
March 12, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; LETTERS
Length: 293 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Candidates Lower Volume as Five Key Primaries Near'' (front page, March 11): 
  The change of tone was calculated and totally unconvincing. To hear the narcissism (and all other things ugly) coming from the leading candidate, Donald Trump, is thoroughly nauseating, regardless of whether it comes via yelling and name calling or soft-speak. And Marco Rubio seemed no more capable or ready to be president than he did when making crude jokes. I noticed no significant change in tenor in the performances of Ted Cruz and John Kasich.
  GARY WALDMAN
  Delray Beach, Fla.
  To the Editor:
  Marco Rubio stuck his foot in his mouth when he was asked about climate change. He went into a long-winded tirade that climate change is caused by the changing climate and that there is no law that can be passed that will affect it. Then he said that anything we did wouldn't make any difference because of all the pollution caused by China and India. To state that the activities of China and India are affecting climate change is to admit that human activity is causing climate change. This is a complete contradiction to his arguments and the position of many Republicans that human activity is not causing climate change.
  BRUCE ROZENBLIT
  Kansas City, Mo.
  To the Editor:
  Donald Trump's defense of his use of H-1B visas to hire foreigners instead of American workers -- ''I'm a businessman and I have to do what I have to do'' -- is classic business hypocrisy. It's the same defense used for underpaying workers, refusing to clean up the environment and ruthlessly manipulating workers' hours to avoid providing benefits. And the others on stage gave him a pass on that lame explanation.
  And these guys call Hillary Clinton unethical?
  JIM MILLER
  Tucson

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/12/opinion/the-tone-and-the-content-of-the-republican-debate.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CLIMATE CHANGE (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (74%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (69%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP (67%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (64%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (69%); ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP (67%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (64%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); MARCO RUBIO (72%); JOHN KASICH (57%); JAMES H MILLER (55%)

Geographic: KANSAS CITY, MO, USA (77%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); MISSOURI, USA (79%); CHINA (92%); INDIA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 12, 2016


End of Document
Shift Against Immigration Lifted a Young Firebrand
The New York Times
August 18, 2019 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 4674 words
Byline: By JASON DePARLE; Michael D. Shear contributed reporting, and Kitty Bennett contributed research.
Body


WASHINGTON -- When historians try to explain how opponents of immigration captured the Republican Party, they may turn to the spring of 2007, when President George W. Bush threw his waning powers behind a legalization plan and conservative populists buried it in scorn.
Mr. Bush was so taken aback, he said he worried about America ''losing its soul,'' and immigration politics have never been the same. 
  That spring was significant for another reason, too: An intense young man with wary, hooded eyes and fiercely anti-immigrant views graduated from college and began a meteoric rise as a Republican operative. With the timing of a screenplay, the man and the moment converged.
  Stephen Miller was 22 and looking for work in Washington. He lacked government experience but had media appearances on talk radio and Fox News and a history of pushing causes like ''Islamo-Fascism Awareness Week.'' A first-term congresswoman from Minnesota offered him a job interview and discovered they were reading the same book: a polemic warning that Muslim immigration could mean ''the end of the world as we know it.''
  By the end of the interview, Representative Michele Bachmann had a new press secretary. And a dozen years later, Mr. Miller, now a senior adviser to President Trump, is presiding over one of the most fervent attacks on immigration in American history.
  The story of Mr. Miller's rise has been told with a focus on his pugnacity and paradoxes. Known more for his enemies than his friends, he is a conservative firebrand from liberal Santa Monica, Calif., and a descendant of refugees who is seeking to eliminate refugee programs. He is a Duke graduate in bespoke suits who rails against the perfidy of so-called elites. Among those who have questioned his moral fitness are his uncle, his childhood rabbi and 3,400 fellow Duke alumni.
  Less attention has been paid to the forces that have abetted his rise and eroded Republican support for immigration -- forces Mr. Miller has personified and advanced in a career unusually reflective of its times.
  Rising fears of terrorism after the Sept. 11 attacks brought new calls to keep immigrants out. Declining need for industrial labor left fewer businesses clamoring to bring them in. A surge of migrants across the South stoked a backlash in the party's geographic base.
  Conservative media, once divided, turned against immigration, and immigration-reduction groups that had operated on the margins grew in numbers and sophistication. Abandoning calls for minority outreach, the Republican Party chose instead to energize its conservative white base -- heeding strategists who said the immigrant vote was not just a lost cause but an existential threat.
  Arriving in Washington as these forces coalesced, Mr. Miller rode the tailwinds with zeal and skill. Warning of terrorism and disturbed by multicultural change, he became the protégé of a Southern senator especially hostile to immigration, Jeff Sessions of Alabama. And he courted allies in the conservative media and immigration-restriction groups.
  Mr. Miller, who declined to comment for this article, affects the air of a lone wolf -- guarded, strident, purposefully provocative. But he has been shaped by the movement whose ideas and lieutenants he helped install across the government as he consolidated a kind of power unusual for a presidential aide and unique in the Trump White House.
  ''I don't agree with his policy on reducing legal immigration, but I'm in awe of how he's been able to impact this one issue,'' said Cesar Conda, who battled Mr. Miller on Capitol Hill as an aide to Senator Marco Rubio of Florida. ''He's got speech writing, he's got policy, he's got his own little congressional-relations operation, he's got allies whom he's helped place across the government.''
  ''Years ago, the restrictionist movement was a ragtag group'' with no strong ties to either party, he added. Mr. Miller ''embodies their rise into the G.O.P. mainstream.''
  Country and Party in Motion
  The story that has defined Mr. Miller's life began two decades before his birth, when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed a 1965 law ending quotas that chose immigrants based on their national origin and heavily favored white people from Northern Europe. Although Mr. Johnson called the new law a largely symbolic measure that would neither increase immigrants' numbers nor alter their ethnic mix, it did both on a vast scale -- raising the foreign-born share of the population to near-record highs and setting the United States on course for non-Hispanic whites to become a minority of the population.
  Opposition initially came from the left, especially from environmentalists worried about population growth.
  The first major immigration-control group, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, or FAIR, was founded in 1979 by Dr. John Tanton, a Michigan ophthalmologist and Sierra Club member, with funding from Cordelia Scaife May, an heiress to the Mellon banking fortune. Mindful of the bigotry in earlier anti-immigration movements, Dr. Tanton vowed to keep it ''centrist/liberal in political orientation.''
  [Newly unearthed personal writings by Cordelia Scaife May reveal why she dedicated her fortune to the cause.]
  But his arguments about environmental harm and wage competition found little traction in a Democratic Party eager to court minorities. By the mid-1980s, Dr. Tanton was making the racial arguments he had pledged to avoid, decrying the ''Latin onslaught'' and insisting on the need for ''a European-American majority, and a clear one at that.''
  At the time, the Republican Party was divided on immigration. While cultural conservatives were wary of rapid demographic change, businesses wanted cheap labor and Cold Warriors embraced anti-Communist refugees, including large waves of Cubans and Vietnamese. Running for president, a conservative as definitional as Ronald Reagan hailed ''millions of immigrants from every corner of the earth'' as a sign that God had made America a ''city on a hill.''
  But by the 1990s, the Cold War had ended, and globalization was sending manufacturing abroad. The business wing of the Republican Party, its main pro-immigrant faction, had less need for foreign workers. ''It's not that the business lobby became anti-immigration; it's just that they cared a lot less,'' said Margaret Peters, a political scientist at the University of California, Los Angeles.
  Not least among the forces shaping the debate was immigration itself: It accelerated and spread to the South, with the number of unauthorized immigrants growing especially fast.
  In 1986, President Reagan signed a compromise law that gave legal status to nearly three million people while adding new penalties to curb flows of illegal immigrants. But enforcement proved weak, and the unauthorized population reached a record 12 million. Restrictionists, feeling betrayed, swore never to allow another ''amnesty.''
  After a Republican backlash in the 1990s led more immigrants to vote for Democrats, Mr. Bush ran in 2000 as a pro-immigrant conservative. He saw Latinos as proto-Republican -- religious, entrepreneurial, family-oriented -- and was considering a legalization plan when the Sept. 11 attacks consumed his administration.
  By the time he returned to the issue in 2007, his party's skepticism toward legalization had hardened into implacable opposition. Amplified by talk radio, populist critics denounced his plan as ''shamnesty''; one called it an effort to make America a ''roach motel.'' Three-quarters of Republican senators opposed it.
  Just a year before, a rising Republican star had urged fellow conservatives not to abandon the party's Reaganite support for immigration.
  ''We are either going to prove that we believe in the ideas enshrined on the Statue of Liberty, or the American people will go looking elsewhere,'' said a congressman from Indiana, Mike Pence.
  But the party's shift proved decisive. Now, as vice president, Mr. Pence loyally defends the policies set by the president and Mr. Miller.
  Early Provocations
  The forces that pushed the Republican Party to the right also shaped Mr. Miller.
  Born in 1985, he grew up in a post-Cold War world where the acceptance of refugees was no longer seen as part of America's resistance to a hostile foreign power. Rapid ethnic change was shaping his world.
  The son of an affluent real estate investor, he entered high school in a self-consciously multicultural Santa Monica in 1999, just as California became a majority-minority state. At the start of his junior year, the attacks on Sept. 11 took nearly 3,000 lives.
  The terrorist plot was central to his political awakening. Complaining that school officials were insufficiently patriotic, Mr. Miller won an uphill fight to make them enforce regulations requiring the Pledge of Allegiance. ''Osama bin Laden would feel very welcome at Santa Monica High School,'' he wrote in 2002 in a local publication.
  Tellingly, he took his case to talk radio, as a frequent guest on ''The Larry Elder Show.'' It was a pattern Mr. Miller would repeat in subsequent years: airing hyperbolic claims of liberal treachery to conservative media allies. ''He loved being the provocative conservative behind liberal lines,'' said Ari Rosmarin, who was editor of the school newspaper and now works on criminal justice issues at the American Civil Liberties Union.
  Mr. Miller's main issue was assimilation, or what he saw as its failures. Writing in a local paper, he complained that ''a number of students lacked basic English skills,'' and his yearbook page quoted Theodore Roosevelt: ''There can be no fifty-fifty Americanism.'' The school paper ran a parody of him railing against ethnic food and demanding white bread and ''fine Virginia hams, just as the founding fathers used to enjoy on their bountiful plantations.''
  Classmates were often unsure whether his provocative views were sincere or a bid for attention. ''Am I the only one who is sick and tired of being told to pick up my trash when we have janitors who are paid to do it for us?'' he said in a speech for student government. A video shows him flashing a self-satisfied smile as classmates jeer.
  His uncle, Dr. David S. Glosser, a vocal critic, dismissed the antics as ''just an early adolescent desire to be noticed.''
  ''This talk of his philosophy seems disingenuous to me,'' he said in an interview. ''It's very seductive. All the sudden, you become the darling of media big shots and you get notoriety for it at home.''
  Some of Mr. Miller's Latino classmates say his comments made them feel personally attacked. In an interview, Jason Islas said Mr. Miller told him he was ending their friendship for reasons that included ''my Latino heritage.'' He added, ''I think he is a racist.''
  But with prominent allies like David Horowitz, a conservative author and organizer, Mr. Miller headed to Duke in 2003 with the beginnings of a national reputation.
  The defining issue of Mr. Miller's college career was the arrest, when he was a junior, of three white lacrosse players accused of raping a black stripper. Mr. Miller leaped to the players' defense, charging that administrators and faculty members saw them as emblems of white privilege and simply assumed they were guilty -- a case he made on the Fox News show ''The O'Reilly Factor,'' then the most-watched cable news program. He demanded that the school president be fired and the prosecutor jailed.
  The case collapsed. North Carolina's attorney general declared the players innocent, the prosecutor was disbarred for misconduct and the accuser was later convicted of murdering her boyfriend. For Mr. Miller, it was a two-part vindication -- reinforcing his conviction that liberal dogma about racial oppression was wrong and that his scorched-earth tactics were effective.
  In his last column for the Duke Chronicle before graduating, he called himself ''a deeply committed conservative who considers it his responsibility to do battle with the left.'' Then he headed for Washington.
  Taking the Fight to Congress
  Most of Mr. Miller's work for Mrs. Bachmann was unrelated to immigration. He wrote news releases about gas prices and fire department grants. But in February 2008, soon after he began the job, an undocumented immigrant in rural Minnesota, Olga Franco, drove through a stop sign and killed four children. Mrs. Bachmann appeared on ''The O'Reilly Factor,'' where she framed the issue as ''anarchy versus the rule of law.''
  Although Ms. Franco was convicted of vehicular homicide, the National Academy of Sciences, a group founded to convey academic consensus, has written that immigrants are ''much less likely than natives to commit crimes,'' and recent evidence suggests that the undocumented are no exception.
  But immigrant crime would be a running theme in Mr. Miller's career, and his emphasis on the issue borrowed from the broader restrictionist movement. To erode public support for immigration, FAIR maintains an online archive of ''serious crimes by illegal aliens.''
  In a 2008 congressional campaign debate, Mrs. Bachmann's opponent accused her of exploiting the tragedy, but she argued that unauthorized immigrants were ''bringing in diseases, bringing in drugs, bringing in violence'' -- language nearly identical to what Mr. Trump would later employ with Mr. Miller as his aide -- and she mustered a slender win.
  Soon after that election, Mr. Miller went to work for Representative John Shadegg of Arizona, and then quickly crossed the Capitol to work for Mr. Sessions. Perhaps the leading immigration foe in the Senate, Mr. Sessions was a product of a region where immigration had soared, largely in places unaccustomed to it. In two decades, the number of immigrants had grown fourfold in Alabama, Kentucky and South Carolina; fivefold in Arkansas, Georgia and Tennessee; and sixfold in North Carolina.
  Mr. Miller had opposed immigration mostly on cultural grounds, warning that newcomers were failing to learn English and endangering public safety. But Mr. Sessions emphasized economic concerns and what he called ''the real needs of working Americans,'' saying foreigners threatened their jobs and wages.
  As a defender of the working class, Mr. Miller had uncertain credentials. If his high school gibe about janitors was a joke, he returned to the issue at Duke. He mocked a campaign to have students thank their dorm-cleaning staff, arguing that employment was thanks enough. ''The janitors need a job, which we provide,'' he wrote.
  Striking a self-consciously elitist pose, he ridiculed calls for improved relations with working-class Durham, N.C. (''one of the last spots in America anyone would visit'') and asked for a student smoking lounge with ''plenty of mahogany and leather.''
  The impact of immigrants on jobs and wages is much debated -- they take jobs but make jobs, too. Most economists see greater downward pressure on wages coming from other forces, including the decline of the minimum wage (adjusted for inflation), weak unions, outsourcing and technological change.
  The National Academy of Sciences concluded in 2017 that immigration's overall effect on wages was ''very small,'' but added that ''some studies have found sizable negative short-run impacts for high school dropouts'' (who account for about 8 percent of the work force). Even among dropouts, some economists find the effects modest or nonexistent.
  One prominent scholar, the Harvard economist George Borjas, consistently finds negative impacts much larger than his peers do. He is the figure Mr. Miller most often cites.
  A Sign of Things to Come
  In moving to Mr. Sessions's Senate suite, Mr. Miller arrived at a crossroads for the restrictionist movement's people and ideas.
  As head of communications, Mr. Miller acquired a deep knowledge of the movement's players and policy goals. Others in the office would also go on to influential jobs in the Trump administration, not least Mr. Sessions himself, who as attorney general presided over a policy that separated thousands of young immigrant children from parents illegally crossing the border.
  Mr. Miller's minor moment of Capitol Hill renown stems from his efforts to defeat the so-called Gang of Eight bill, a bipartisan attempt to pair new enforcement measures with legalization for most of the country's 11 million undocumented immigrants, and to offer them a long path to citizenship.
  He opposed the bill with the same zeal that had inspired high school parodies, haranguing reporters into the night and earning a gadfly reputation.
  In retrospect, three elements of Mr. Miller's approach foreshadowed his future exercise of power. One was his rejection of the view that Republicans needed to court minorities. The Gang of Eight bill was born after the 2012 presidential race, in which the defeated Republican, Mitt Romney, lost the Latino vote by 44 points.
  No less a hard-liner than the Fox News host Sean Hannity called for legalizing most of the country's undocumented immigrants. ''Pathway to citizenship -- done,'' he said on his radio show. The Republican National Committee urged the party ''to empower and support ethnic minorities'' and ''champion comprehensive immigration reform,'' meaning legalization.
  Mr. Miller took the opposite view, which the party ultimately followed: Mobilize the white working-class base, among whom turnout had fallen.
  While Mr. Bush had seen Latinos as natural Republicans, most restrictionists saw them as an electoral threat. ''If four out of five Latinos are registering with the Democrats, perhaps less immigration would be in the interest of the Republican Party, no?'' wrote Jon Feere of the Center for Immigration Studies, a spinoff of FAIR. (Mr. Feere later joined the Trump administration as an immigration adviser. )
  A second feature of Mr. Miller's efforts was his symbiotic relationship with conservative media, especially online publications like Breitbart News.
  Lacking gatekeepers, the internet was a medium tailor-made for anti-establishment causes. Right-wing populism had long flourished on talk radio, but Breitbart, with few restrictions on space, could cover the issue in greater depth, bringing intense scrutiny to hot-button issues. And social media made articles easy to share.
  Breitbart ran three stories making the false charge, circulated by Mr. Sessions's staff, that the bill offered undocumented immigrants free cellphones.
  Mr. Miller and Breitbart worked together closely.
  ''Sessions: Special Interest, Extremist Groups Wrote Immigration Bill,'' claimed one Breitbart headline.
  ''Sessions: 'Tide is Beginning to Turn' Against Immigration Bill,'' announced another.
  A third element of Mr. Miller's work involved his alliance with outside groups, especially three that Dr. Tanton helped create and that received millions of dollars from Mrs. May's foundation. (Over a recent 12-year period alone, the foundation gave the Center for Immigration Studies $17.6 million, FAIR $56.7 million and NumbersUSA $58.2 million.)
  Once a lonely cause, restrictionism had grown into a mature movement -- an intellectual ecosystem of sorts -- with groups specializing in areas as diverse as litigation and voter mobilization.
  When Mr. Sessions claimed on a conference call that the Gang of Eight bill threatened jobs, an analyst from the Center for Immigration Studies was on the line to vouch for the data, and Breitbart covered it as news. When the center presented its journalism award, Mr. Miller was the speaker, and his first-name references to the Center's staff -- ''all the great work that Mark and Jessica and Steve are doing''-- made it clear that he felt among friends.
  Despite Mr. Sessions's opposition, the bill passed in the Democratic Senate in 2013. As it headed to the Republican House, Mr. Miller drafted a 30-page memo that Mr. Sessions shared with the House Republican caucus, urging members to oppose the bill on behalf of ''millions of struggling American workers.''
  House leaders were mulling how to proceed when, in June 2014, an obscure Virginia professor toppled the majority leader, Eric Cantor, in a Republican primary. Though vastly outspent, the newcomer, Dave Brat, prevailed in large part by attacking Mr. Cantor for being ''in cahoots'' with Democrats on immigration.
  ''The world just changed,'' Mr. Miller exulted the next day.
  Indeed, it had. Among those commenting in Breitbart was the ''conservative provocateur'' Donald J. Trump, who said the upset showed that the Republican establishment was at risk. ''Everybody is now vulnerable,'' he said.
  Circulating the article, Mr. Miller told friends that he wished Mr. Trump would run for president. When Mr. Trump did -- demanding a wall and a ban on Muslims entering the country -- Mr. Miller soon signed on.
  The Right Kind of Candidate
  Mr. Miller rose quickly on the small staff. A prolific writer and combative surrogate, he was the person most knowledgeable about the campaign's central issue, and he lavished Mr. Trump with praise. (The Trump candidacy, Mr. Miller said, had altered ''Western civilization.'') He also served as an ideological chaperone to a candidate given to sudden reversals of signature policies, a role Mr. Miller continues to play in the White House.
  Mr. Trump scored a coup by winning the support of some tech workers who, after being laid off by the Walt Disney Company, were forced to train foreign replacements admitted on temporary H-1B visas.
  The workers embodied Mr. Trump's larger argument that immigration hurt American employment. Yet days after appearing with them at a rally, Mr. Trump said in a televised debate that he would drop his plan to restrict the H-1B program.
  ''I'm changing, I'm changing,'' he told the stunned interviewer. ''I'm softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.''
  Within hours, Mr. Trump reversed himself again, issuing a statement to assure his followers that he planned to ''end forever the use of H-1B as a cheap labor program.''
  Despite the president's public image as an unrelenting immigration foe, some restrictionist leaders view him as soft -- a businessman whose desire for labor will lead him to support more immigration. That unreliability, they say, makes Mr. Miller's presence especially important.
  ''If he weren't there, I'm pretty sure it'd be worse,'' said Mark Krikorian, director of the Center for Immigration Studies.
  To Remake America's Self-Image
  Mr. Miller now occupies a large West Wing office and has influence on virtually every element of immigration policy, from the words the president uses to the regulations he promulgates. Mr. Miller is a speechwriter, policy architect, personnel director, legislative aide, spokesman and strategist. At every step, he has pushed for the hardest line.
  When Mr. Trump wavered on his pledge to abolish protections for 800,000 so-called Dreamers -- people brought illegally to the United States as children -- Mr. Miller urged conservative states to threaten lawsuits. Mr. Trump then canceled the protections.
  When the president later mulled a deal to restore them, Mr. Miller stacked the negotiations with people who opposed the move, leading Mr. Trump to abandon compromise and rail against immigrants from ''shithole countries.''
  ''As long as Stephen Miller is in charge of negotiating immigration, we are going nowhere,'' complained Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who supported a deal.
  The Trump effort to curb immigration has played out amid so much chaos -- judicial setbacks, congressional defeats, personnel purges, Twitter wars -- that it can be hard to keep a running tally of its impact.
  The attempt to revoke Dreamer protections has been blocked in court. An effort to bar travelers from certain predominantly Muslim countries was struck down twice. The promised border wall has not been built. A campaign to deter illegal immigration by separating thousands of children from their mothers was abandoned amid blistering criticism, including some from the right.
  Still, Mr. Miller has left a big mark, in ways both obvious and obscure. After two highly publicized failures, he helped craft a travel ban that passed court muster. A fervent critic of refugee programs, he has helped cut annual admissions by about three-quarters since the end of the Obama administration.
  Writing in Politico, his uncle, Dr. Glosser, expressed an ''increasing horror'' at his nephew's hostility to refugees and noted that their ancestor, Wolf-Leib Glosser, arrived at Ellis Island after fleeing Russian pogroms. Had Mr. Miller's policies prevailed then, he wrote, the Glossers probably ''would have been murdered by the Nazis,'' as most in their village were.
  With less fanfare, Mr. Miller has guided a series of policy changes that critics liken to building an ''invisible wall.'' The Migration Policy Institute, a nonpartisan research group, counted more than 100 of them, noting that ''most have moved forward untouched.''
  The Trump administration quadrupled the number of work site investigations. It slowed the processing of temporary H-1B visas. It imposed new performance measures on immigration judges, to encourage faster deportations.
  Though Mr. Miller was often the driving force, many of these changes were longstanding goals of the restrictionist movement. ''He comes from a community of people who've been working on this, some of them, since the '90s,'' said Roy Beck, the president of NumbersUSA.
  Beyond the commas and clauses of government rules, Mr. Miller and Mr. Trump are trying to change something deeper: America's self-conception as a land of immigrants. Mr. Trump is the son of an immigrant. Two of the three women he married are immigrants. Four of his five children have an immigrant parent. Yet his immigration agency rewrote its mission statement to remove the phrase ''nation of immigrants.''
  Mr. Miller even took to the White House briefing room to offer a revisionist view of the Statue of Liberty. Like many in his movement, he argued it should not be seen as welcoming immigrants because it was originally built for a different purpose (to celebrate political freedom) and that the Emma Lazarus poem hailing the ''huddled masses'' carries little meaning because it was added later.
  The border wars intensified this spring as large numbers of Central American families sought asylum and Mr. Trump, with Mr. Miller urging him on, purged top officials from the Homeland Security Department, including the secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen; he argued they weren't doing enough to keep them out.
  But a quieter bureaucratic story may have revealed as much about Mr. Miller's priorities and bureaucratic skill.
  After long deliberation, the administration last week released a 217-page rule making it easier to deny admission or permanent residency to low-income immigrants deemed likely to receive public benefits. Unlike the border disputes, this so-called public charge rule affects only legal immigrants, since the unauthorized are already barred from most safety-net programs.
  Critics say the rule is already causing needy immigrants to forgo health care and nutritional aid. They call it a backdoor way of circumventing Congress and creating a new immigration system that admits fewer people, excludes the ''huddled masses,'' and favors Europeans over poorer Mexican and Central Americans.
  Mr. Miller was so eager to see the rule enacted, he helped push out a one-time ally, L. Francis Cissna, the head of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, for not moving fast enough.
  Mr. Krikorian of the Center for Immigration Studies argued that the rule would have only modest effects on immigrant numbers but praised Mr. Miller for asserting a principle. ''The point of immigration policy is to benefit Americans,'' he said, not ''strain the social safety net.''
  While the restrictionist movement had long taken that principle to heart, he said ''Stephen understood how to operationalize it.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/17/us/politics/stephen-miller-immigration-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Stephen Miller has the ear of the president on immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1)
Long vocal against immigration, Stephen Miller, at left above, has consolidated power over a single issue in a way that's unusual for a presidential aide and unique in the Trump White House. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
President Ronald Reagan signing the Immigration Reform and Control Act in 1986, which gave nearly three million people legal status. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN, VIA GETTY IMAGES)
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY BETTMANN/CORBIS, VIA GETTY IMAGES) (A22)
PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LUKE SHARRETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
President Trump at the United States-Mexico border in April with the Home- land Security secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen, left, shortly before she was pushed out. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AL DRAGO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A23) CHART: How Immigrants' Share of the U.S. Population Has Changed: Since the late 1960s, a surge of immigrants from Latin America and Asia has altered America's ethnic mix and has driven the foreign-born share of the population close to a record high. (Sources: U.S. Census
American Community Survey 2012-17) (CHART BY JULIETTE LOVE/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
MAPS: Where Immigrants' Population Share Has Grown the Most: Green areas had an increase in their share of foreign-born, with darker shading signifying a larger uptick. Blue areas had a decrease. (Sources: U.S. Census
 American Community Survey 2012-17) (MAPS BY JULIETTE LOVE/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A23)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); HISTORY (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); TERRORISM (86%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); POPULISM (78%); REFUGEES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); FASCISM (77%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS VOCATIONS (68%); EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWS (67%)

Company:  FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (69%)

Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (69%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (69%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); MICHELE BACHMANN (58%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: August 21, 2019


End of Document
Mayor Seeks New Ways To Tighten Immigration
The New York Times
April 1, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 569 words
Byline: By SEWELL CHAN
Body


Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg yesterday offered some of his most explicit views so far on the national immigration debate, calling for much tighter border controls, more generous visa policies for foreign scientists and the granting of permanent residency -- though not necessarily citizenship -- to the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants in this country.
  The mayor, who has seized on ideas from both the right and the left on immigration matters, spoke favorably for the first time about erecting a ''physical wall'' along the borders with Mexico and Canada or using technologies like sensors to detect the movements of migrants across borders.
''I have said from Day 1, get control of the borders,'' the mayor said in a radio call-in program on WABC. ''People say, 'All right, I want control of the borders, but I don't want a wall.' Well, that's O.K. Just tell me what else works. And nobody's come up with an idea.'' 
  Later, speaking about illegal immigrants, he said: ''Legalize them, close the border and be serious about closing the border. And people say, 'Oh, you know, the wall -- you can always climb over it.' Well, if 3,000 come through one little point on the border every day and you build a wall so only 10 climb the wall, I would argue that if you get it down to a hundred, if you get it down to a thousand, you'd be successful by that standard.'' 
  Just as Mr. Bloomberg's call for legalizing illegal immigrants has placed him at odds with conservative Republicans, so his call for tighter border controls could alienate liberal Democrats, who make up much of the city's electorate. 
  Moises Perez, executive director of Alianza Dominicana, a nonprofit group that provides social services in Manhattan and the Bronx, applauded Mr. Bloomberg's condemnation of criminalizing illegal immigrants and his recognition of their economic contributions, but said the idea of a wall was absurd. ''Why not build a wall around the entire country?'' he asked. 
  Deborah J. Notkin, a Manhattan lawyer who is president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association, which supports gradual legalization of illegal immigrants, said that a fence along the border would not work and would cost far more to monitor than the entire current budget for Customs and border enforcement. 
  ''The drug traffickers can dig tunnels, the smugglers can get boats and we cannot have a Berlin Wall-type structure become our symbol, and substitute itself for the Statue of Liberty,'' she said.
  On the radio show, Mr. Bloomberg called for raising the number of H-1B visas, which allow skilled professionals sponsored by their employers to work temporarily in the United States. 
  ''We are killing ourselves, hurting universities and hospitals and research in this country,'' he said. ''We're losing the battle. Our science is going overseas.''
  The mayor also ridiculed rules that bar employers from inquiring about immigration status and said it was difficult for many employers to verify applicants' identification documents. 
  ''Let's say they don't speak a word of English, O.K.?'' he asked. ''So that's a good tip, maybe, that the guy wasn't born here. Maybe you should check. Unh-unh. Can't check any more for that person than you check for the person who speaks the king's English.''
  Meanwhile, he said, forgers ''set up tables in the streets. You can buy a green card and a Social Security card, a combination for $50.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (97%); IMMIGRATION (96%); BORDER CONTROL (94%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SMUGGLING (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (73%); CONSERVATISM (67%); POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); EXECUTIVES (62%); LAWYERS (61%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (60%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (60%); Immigration and Refugees (%); Illegal Immigrants (%); Visas (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); BUDGETS (77%); LAWYERS (61%)

Person: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (79%); Sewell Chan; Michael R (Mayor) Bloomberg

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); CANADA (79%); MEXICO (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); New York City

Load-Date: April 1, 2006


End of Document
A Homecoming, and a Job, After Years in Limbo
The New York Times
April 4, 2016 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 640 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


Angelo Cabrera was offered a job administering a program for Mexican immigrants at Baruch College in Manhattan more than two years ago.
This month, he will show up for his first day of work. 
  He spent around 24 months stuck in his native Mexico, trying to straighten out his immigration status and qualify for a work visa, and almost 24 years as an undocumented New Yorker. During those years, he earned two degrees from Baruch, part of the City University of New York, and started a social services organization. Now he is back -- legally.
  ''It has been a miracle,'' Mr. Cabrera, 41, said on Friday at the college. ''It feels like I was under the shadows, under the darkness, for nearly 24 years.''
  Mr. Cabrera crossed the border as a teenager in 1990 and made his way to New York. While working menial jobs, he earned an undergraduate and a graduate degree from Baruch and founded Masa, a nonprofit in the South Bronx that tutors Mexican and Mexican-American students.
  In 2014, he was offered a job working with his mentor, Robert C. Smith, a sociology professor at Baruch. In that role, Mr. Cabrera would help immigrants apply for a deportation-deferral program for childhood arrivals. But first, he needed to fix his own immigration status.
  That is when he returned to his parents' home in San Antonio Texcala, Mexico. Because he lived illegally for more than a year in the United States, he faced a 10-year ban on re-entry unless he qualified for a humanitarian waiver.
  His petition was rejected. Mr. Cabrera stewed for several months and then threw himself into what came naturally to him -- helping others. He worked at a university in Puebla state with students recently deported from the United States -- known as ''Los Otros Dreamers'' (the Other Dreamers) -- helping them navigate the bureaucratic challenges of transferring academic credit. He sent youth groups to New York City to do volunteer work with community organizations helping Mexican immigrants. And he created a library in his hometown.
  After an article about Mr. Cabrera appeared in The New York Times in January 2015, an international campaign to win him a waiver began. Dr. Smith turned to younger Latino activists who involved community organizations that leaned on lawmakers in Washington. The ''Bring Angelo Home''  social media campaign garnered more than 25,000 signatures on Change.org and the Daily Kos political website.
  In January this year, Mr. Cabrera was granted his visa. Dr. Smith said he was pleased that the authorities had finally weighed Mr. Cabrera's accomplishments more than the way he had entered the country as a teenager.
  But the relief may be temporary, illuminating just how byzantine the American immigration system can be: The process took so long that Mr. Cabrera's work visa has less than six months left. He may have to return to Mexico on Sept. 30.
  His lawyer with the City University of New York, Andrés Lemons, said the university would seek an extension of the visa, an H-1B, though there is not yet funding for the job past September.
  ''The work is going to continue,'' Dr. Smith said. ''And we need him.''
  After leaving Mexico last month, Mr. Cabrera had one last hurdle to cross. When he landed at Kennedy International Airport, a customs officer brusquely directed him to a back room for questioning, past a man in handcuffs.
  It took one more anxious hour in limbo until he was free to go.
  ''To have that opportunity, even if it is a very short time, to fulfill that dream of being in the United States legally, has surpassed any other experience,'' Mr. Cabrera said.
  Back in New York, Mr. Cabrera registered for a Social Security number, which he would need to start his job. The official must have recognized him from news reports. ''He said, 'Welcome back. Sorry you had to wait so long,''' Mr. Cabrera recalled.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/04/nyregion/a-new-yorker-long-caught-in-immigration-limbo-comes-home-to-start-his-job.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Above, Angelo Cabrera at Baruch College in Manhattan. He was offered a job there over two years ago, but immigration issues kept him from starting it until this month. Right, his arrival at Kennedy International Airport. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 MAITE H. MATEO)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); MENTORS & ROLE MODELS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (75%); SOCIOLOGY (75%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (75%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); VOLUNTEERS (72%); PETITIONS (63%); SOCIAL MEDIA (60%)

Industry: COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIAL MEDIA (60%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (94%); MEXICO (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 4, 2016


End of Document
At Rally for India’s Modi, Trump Plays Second Fiddle but a Familiar Tune
The New York Times 
September 22, 2019 Sunday 10:05 EST


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1356 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear
Highlight: Mr. Trump treated the giant Houston gathering as his own, seizing on the chance to brag about slashing regulations, lowering unemployment and implementing a tax cut.
Body


HOUSTON — President Trump played second fiddle on Sunday to            Narendra Modi, the prime minister of            India, at a boisterous cultural rally in which the American president was technically just an invited guest.
But never one to let a good crowd go to waste, Mr. Trump treated the giant gathering at NRG Stadium in Houston as his own, declaring that “you have never had a better friend as president than President Donald Trump, that I can tell you.”
Tens of thousands of Indian-Americans gathered to celebrate the recent re-election of India’s fiery populist leader at an event cheekily called “Howdy, Modi!” Big screens throughout the stadium displayed the face of the prime minister, who arrived to thunderous cheers on a red carpet.
There were no Trump signs in the crowd, as there would be at one of his “Make America Great Again” rallies. And the president mostly stuck to his prepared remarks as the crowd of mostly Indian-Americans responded with polite applause.
Mr. Trump praised Mr. Modi, marveling that some 600 million people voted in India’s recent elections. “That’s a lot of people,” the president said, adding that Indian-Americans enrich the culture of the United States and that the two nations are “grounded in our common values.”
But he mostly seized on his own rally themes, bragging about slashing regulations, lowering unemployment, implementing a tax cut and hardening the nation’s borders against “those who would threaten our security.”
“There are those in Washington who would raid your health care to fund free benefits to those who enter our country illegally,” he said, previewing his attacks on Democrats during the presidential campaign. “I will never allow politicians to take away your health care or give it to illegal immigrants.”
The rally brought together two leaders with similar styles. Both rose to power by embracing right-wing populism, portraying themselves as champions of the masses fighting against an entrenched establishment. Both presented voters with a vision to make their respective countries “great again,” and both have fanned tensions along religious, economic and social fault lines.
Mr. Modi, who is in the United States for a week largely to attend the United Nations General Assembly in New York, won a landslide re-election in May. But Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi are also both polarizing figures among the people they lead. While many Indians see Mr. Modi as a strong, decisive leader, a small but vocal minority say he is            becoming an autocrat, rapidly consolidating power, going after political enemies inside his country and sowing division between Hindus and Muslims.
In the United States, Mr. Trump is preparing to run for re-election in a bitterly divided country with polls regularly showing him receiving well short of 50 percent support. His participation in Sunday’s rally with Mr. Modi offered a chance to woo a constituency — the four million American residents of Indian descent — whose support could prove helpful.
Mr. Modi delivered in English an over-the top introduction of Mr. Trump, declaring that the president’s name is “familiar to every person on the planet” and “comes up in almost every conversation in the world on global politics.”
Standing next to Mr. Modi, the president beamed with pleasure as the prime minister delivered a twist on his own election slogan: “Abki baar Trump sarkar” or “This time, a Trump government.”
But earning votes from Indian-Americans will not be easy for Mr. Trump, even with Mr. Modi by his side.
Indian-Americans have supported both Democrats and Republicans in the past, though they have gravitated away from Mr. Trump’s party more recently. Although the president’s tax and economic policies appeal to many Indians, his tough stance on immigration, including legal immigrants from India, has caused great angst, especially in Silicon Valley, which relies heavily on Indian workers who come on H-1B visas.
An overwhelming majority of Indian-American voters are registered as Democrats and voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, according to the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund.
M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a group that tries to organize Indian-Americans, said events like Sunday’s rally help the community become more relevant in the United States. He said Mr. Trump’s appearance here was an opportunity to increase his 14 percent showing among Indian-Americans in 2016.
“He could hope he could change some minds,” Mr. Rangaswami said. “It could happen.”
Mr. Trump crowed last week that his decision to join Mr. Modi at the event on Sunday enlarged the crowd at the stadium, which can hold up to about 70,000 people.
“I have a very good relationship with Prime Minister Modi. By the way, great relationship with Pakistan and with India,” Mr. Trump told reporters on Air Force One several days ahead of the Modi event. “But he’s got a big crowd coming, and I guess the crowd just got a lot bigger because they just announced — he asked would I go, and I will go.”
Mr. Trump’s appearance at the event, which was followed by a stop with the Australian prime minister at an Ohio recycled packaging plant owned by an Australian company, comes as his administration is finalizing plans for a modest trade deal with India. That step that would help resolve earlier tensions between Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi over India’s trade balance with the United States and other trade issues.
The trade agreement, which could be finalized by the two leaders as soon as this week, is expected to help American farmers and manufacturers by eliminating Indian restrictions on electronics, medical devices and a few agricultural goods. In return, Mr. Trump would restore a special trade status for developing countries, something the president stripped from India this year.
Resolving a nettlesome trade dispute with India presents Mr. Trump with an opportunity for a public relations victory amid increasing frustration over his global trade wars with China and other countries.
Mr. Modi, 69, is at his best outside India. He has prioritized, more than any other Indian leader in recent decades, India’s brand around the world and projected an image of a muscular India, an emerging superpower. He travels all across Asia, he was the first Indian prime minister to visit Israel, he has journeyed across Africa and during a visit to New York in 2014 he packed Madison Square Garden with ecstatic crowds cheering: “Modi! Modi! Modi!”
He has come a long way. Years ago, he was banned by American authorities from even entering the United States because of allegations that as chief minister in Gujarat in the early 2000s he was responsible for an explosion of religiously driven violence that claimed more than 1,000 lives, most of them Muslim.
The goal of this trip is to attract investment to India, and there is a little extra urgency: India’s economy is suffering its biggest downturn in years. Mr. Modi is also eager to shore up diplomatic support. But a controversy threatens to cast a shadow over his visit.
Human rights groups and three Nobel Peace Prize winners have criticized the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation for a prestigious award they plan to bestow upon Mr. Modi this week. The peace activists say that under Mr. Modi’s leadership, “India has descended into dangerous and deadly chaos that has consistently undermined human rights.”
A group of protesters gathered in Houston on Sunday to denounce Mr. Modi.
But Mr. Modi has typically drawn strong support from the Indian diaspora, even those who disagree with some of his domestic policies, because he has been so successful at burnishing India’s image on the world stage.
Reporting was contributed by Jeffrey Gettleman from New Delhi, Vindu Goel from Mumbai, India, Alisha Haridasani Gupta from New York and Ana Swanson from Washington. 
PHOTO: Attendees of a ‘Howdy, Modi!’ rally for the prime minister of India in Houston on Sunday. President Trump largely stuck to his script. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As Narendra Modi Heads to U.S., Controversy Follows Him
    • With India, Trump Practices the Art of the Mini-Deal
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); TAX LAW (90%); TAXES & TAXATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); POPULISM (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (79%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (75%); VOTERS & VOTING (75%); IMMIGRATION (73%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (69%); RELIGION (65%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (64%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (60%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (60%); UNITED NATIONS (60%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%); Trump, Donald J (%); Modi, Narendra (%); United States International Relations (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Indian-Americans (%); NRG Stadium (Houston, Tex) (%); Houston (Tex) (%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); NARENDRA MODI (79%); Trump, Donald J; Modi, Narendra

Geographic: HOUSTON, TX, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: February 24, 2020


End of Document
How to Lose the Brain Race
The New York Times
April 10, 2006 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 848 words
Byline: By Steven Clemons and Michael Lind
Steven Clemons is the director of the American Strategy Program at the New America Foundation. Michael Lind is a senior fellow there.
Dateline: Washington 
Body


IS the United States importing too many immigrant physicists and not enough immigrant farm workers? You might think so, to judge from two provisions that Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, added to the comprehensive immigration reform package that just fell apart in the Senate. Senator Feinstein insisted that the bill call for some fees for foreign students applying to study at American colleges and universities to be doubled, and also demanded that agribusiness get the right to 1.5 million low-wage foreign guest workers over five years. Combined, the two proposals sent a message to the rest of the world: send us your brawn, not your brains.
  Whether Senator Feinstein's amendments will resurface in any reconstituted legislation on immigration reform remains unclear. But her priorities reflect in many ways those of Congress as a whole. Congress seems to believe that while the United States must be protected from an invasion of educated, bright and ambitious foreign college students, scientists, engineers and entrepreneurs, we can never have too many low-wage fruit-pickers and dishwashers.
In making immigration laws, Congress caters to cheap-labor industries like agribusiness and sweatshop manufacturing while shortchanging the high-tech, high-wage industries on which the future of the American economy depends. Witness the Senate bill's provision to admit 400,000 temporary workers a year, or roughly four million a decade, in addition to the 12 million mostly low-wage illegal immigrants already here, many of whose status would be legalized. Few if any of those guest workers would go to universities, corporate campuses or innovation clusters like Silicon Valley. They would head straight to restaurants, hotels and plantation-like farms.
  While the United States perversely tries to corner the market in uneducated hotel maids and tomato harvesters, other industrial democracies are reshaping their immigration policies to invite the skilled immigrants that we turn away. Britain is following Australia and Canada in adopting a points system that gives higher scores to skilled immigrants with advanced education and proficiency in English. British, Canadian, German and even French universities are overflowing in undergraduate and graduate enrollment as they absorb the foreign talent that America is repelling.
  Whereas Senator Feinstein fears that foreigners are snatching places at American universities from deserving American students, the fact is that our universities are weakened when fewer talented international students enter their programs.
  In recent years, skilled immigration to the United States has been accommodated chiefly by the H-1B visa program. But like all guest-worker programs, the H-1B program pits American workers against foreign workers lacking full legal and political rights. Because H-1B workers depend on employer sponsorship to remain in this country, unscrupulous employers can blackmail them into working longer hours for lower pay than American workers. Skilled workers admitted under a points system, by contrast, would be able to quit their employers in the United States and find new ones at will without risk of deportation.
  Will admitting more immigrants drive down the wages of American workers? That may be true in unskilled jobs, since there is a fixed number of bedpans to be emptied and restaurant meals to be cooked in the United States. 
  But it isn't necessarily true for skilled workers, at least not in the long run. That's because more talent means more innovation and opportunities for all, immigrant and native alike. The growth economist Paul Romer has spoken of the prospector theory of human capital. The more prospectors there are, the more likely it is that some will find gold. As the history of Silicon Valley and other tech centers proves, brain work migrates to where the brain workers are. It's a kind of Field of Dreams in reverse: You will build it, if they come. 
  Even if a skill-based immigration system did reduce incomes for the elite, that would not be the end of the world. For a generation, college-educated Americans have enjoyed a seller's market in professional services and a buyer's market in the labor of landscapers and nannies. If skilled immigration were increased while unskilled immigration were reduced, the wages of janitors would go up while the salaries and fees of professionals would fall, creating a broader middle class and a more equal society.
  The United States can always use another Albert Einstein or Alexander Graham Bell. But with the vast pool of poorly paid, ill-educated laborers already within our borders, we do not need a third of a million new ones a year.
  What the space race was to the cold war, the ''brain race'' is to today's peaceful global economic competition. The comprehensive immigration reform America needs is one that slashes unskilled immigration and creates a skill-rewarding points system modeled on those of Australia, Britain and Canada. In encouraging skilled labor, Congress for a change might perform some of its own.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); FARM LABOR (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (91%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GARMENT WORKERS (78%); HOTEL STAFF (78%); PHYSICS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); SWEATSHOPS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); EXTORTION (64%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (51%); Immigration and Refugees (%); Law and Legislation (%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Refugees (%)

Industry: FARM LABOR (91%); AGRICULTURE (90%); AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY, FISHING & HUNTING (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GARMENT WORKERS (78%); HOTEL STAFF (78%); MANUFACTURING (78%); HOTELS & MOTELS (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); HOTEL HOUSEKEEPING (63%); RESTAURANTS (63%)

Person: DIANNE FEINSTEIN (89%); Steven C Clemons; Michael Lind

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (78%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (92%); AUSTRALIA (79%); United States

Load-Date: April 10, 2006


End of Document
Fake University Is Used as Bait in a U.S. Case on Visa Fraud
The New York Times
April 6, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 1206 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


NEWARK -- On the surface, the University of Northern New Jersey seemed legitimate. It had a website, with a seal featuring the Latin words ''Humanus, Scientia, Integritas,'' a list of business-oriented degrees offered and a promise of ''an exceptional educational experience.''
It was so exceptional it did not exist. 
  Instead, the university was a fake, set up by the Homeland Security Department as part of a sting operation to ensnare criminals involved in student visa fraud.
  On Tuesday, that operation resulted in the arrests of 21 people, the United States attorney for New Jersey, Paul J. Fishman, and Sarah R. Saldaña, the director of United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, announced at a news conference here.
  The people arrested were brokers who recruited foreign students who were mainly from China and India to an institution that they knew would not have real classes. The brokers, working with people posing as university officials, then charged the students in a scheme that allowed them to maintain their student visas and stay in the country, the government said. Some brokers also arranged, illegally, for work visas and jobs, the authorities said. Some of these so-called students, according to a law enforcement official, even used the fraudulent visas to get jobs at high-profile companies.
  Those arrested were mainly naturalized citizens and legal permanent residents, Mr. Fishman said. Six live in New York City, including three in Flushing, Queens.
  ''Our message is pretty loud and clear,'' Ms. Saldaña said in an interview. ''We're out there, we have intelligence to identify you, we're going to find you and bring you to justice.''
  The brokers arranged student visas for the University of Northern New Jersey for a total of 1,076 people. Most of the ''students'' will ultimately have their visas revoked, Ms. Saldaña said.
  Mr. Fishman said all of the recruited students were already living in the United States, having initially obtained visas legally, but were looking for a way to stay. Many were living and working throughout the country.
  ''All the defendants were pretty stunned about the charges,'' said Michael Horn, whose client, Tajesh Kodali, 44, of Edison, N.J., pleaded not guilty. ''They're hopeful the truth will come out.''
  The operation, the government said, was a way to understand the extent of the criminal network behind visa fraud, including how students are recruited, how fake universities work and what happens after the students are enrolled.
  While the case exposed a network of fraud, it also exposed a gap in national security, the officials said on Tuesday. The brokers who negotiated visas did not do any background checks on their clients or their potential connections to terrorist organizations. Mr. Fishman said the United States government did vet the people who applied for student visas and did not find any threats to security.
  Some of the so-called students used the visas to get jobs at Facebook and Apple, according to the law enforcement official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because this information was not part of the complaints. ABC News  reported that Facebook hired an applicant with a fraudulent visa, and that another visa holder went to the Army.
  The official confirmed that one person did enlist, and that only one person was employed by Facebook, one person by Apple, two at Morgan Stanley and several at other prominent financial institutions.
  The University of Northern New Jersey opened in 2013, according to the complaints filed on Tuesday. The location was an office building in Cranford, N.J.
  The university may have been billed as an institution of higher learning, but no learning took place. It purported to offer undergraduate and graduate degree programs in areas like accounting, marketing and health care management. To lure recruiters, it was listed as state-licensed and certified by the Homeland Security Department. But there were no classes and no faculty members.
  No matter. ''Once word got out, brokers descended on the school, clamoring to enroll their clients,'' Mr. Fishman said.
  The Homeland Security Investigations unit, which conducted the sting operation, had undercover agents accept calls from recruiters, according to several of the 14 complaints filed on Tuesday. These agents, in recorded telephone calls, warned the brokers that there would be no classes.
  A defendant named Chaun Kit Yuen, 24, responded, according to the complaint, ''We've been doing this for years, no worries.''
  Some of the agents also obtained fraudulent work authorizations through the university in order to outsource their foreign national clients as full-time employees. A broker from Brooklyn, Syed Qasim Abbas, 41, who is an American citizen, owned an ''information technology staffing company'' in East Northport, N.Y., called Fastnet Software International, according to the complaint.
  He paid the university $6,000 to obtain 20 visas for skilled workers, known as H-1B visas, the complaint said. (The government never issued them.) He paid another $17,750 to the school for arranging the extension of student visas.
  Some brokers negotiated thousands of dollars of commissions from the undercover officials, one worth as much as $4,000, according to the complaint. Other brokers received illicit payments for placing students in jobs.
  About 1.2 million students are currently in the United States on student visas, a majority of whom are legitimately attending universities, government officials said.
  There have been several high-profile student visa fraud cases in recent years from California to New York, which represent a security concern for a government under pressure to screen visa applicants for possible terrorism ties.
  The most prominent arrest in the case of sham universities, also known as visa mills, was in 2011. Susan Xiao-Ping Su, the founder of Tri-Valley University, in Northern California, was sentenced to 16 years in prison. The university had offered classes in engineering and medicine, but did not require that students attend them. More than 1,500 students, mostly from India, were affected, and not all knew that they were being defrauded.
  In January, in a case brought by Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York,  three executives of Micropower Career Institute, a for-profit college with five locations in the New York City-New Jersey area, pleaded guilty to visa fraud. Among other offenses, the executives took $7.4 million from foreign students in exchange for visas, prosecutors said.
  In 2012, a Government Accountability Office report faulted Immigration and Customs Enforcement for not providing enough control in the verification process for student visas. Officials with ICE said it had since been trying to tighten its accreditation protocols.
  Although the officials would not discuss how many fraudulent schools might actually be operating, Mr. Fishman said they were ''too prevalent.''
  For the recruiters, he added, ''the University of Northern New Jersey was another stop on the 'pay to stay' tour.''
  Follow The New York Times's Metro coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the New York Today newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/nyregion/new-jersey-university-was-fake-but-visa-fraud-arrests-are-real.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The office building in Cranford, N.J., that was listed as the address of the fictitious University of Northern New Jersey. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD PERRY/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); ARRESTS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); NATURALIZATION (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%); LAWYERS (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (71%); TERRORISM (71%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (57%); US IMMIGRATION & CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT (56%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); LAWYERS (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 6, 2016


End of Document
Trump Takes Back Seat At Modi Rally, but Sees The Crowd as His Own
The New York Times
September 23, 2019 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2019 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 1286 words
Byline: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR; Reporting was contributed by Jeffrey Gettleman from New Delhi, Vindu Goel from Mumbai, India, Alisha Haridasani Gupta from New York and Ana Swanson from Washington.
Body


HOUSTON -- President Trump played second fiddle on Sunday to Narendra Modi, the prime minister of India, at a boisterous cultural rally in which the American president was technically just an invited guest.
But never one to let a good crowd go to waste, Mr. Trump treated the giant gathering at NRG Stadium in Houston as his own, declaring that ''you have never had a better friend as president than President Donald Trump, that I can tell you.'' 
  Tens of thousands of Indian-Americans gathered to celebrate the recent re-election of India's fiery populist leader at an event cheekily called ''Howdy, Modi!'' Big screens throughout the stadium displayed the face of the prime minister, who arrived to thunderous cheers on a red carpet.
  There were no Trump signs in the crowd, as there would be at one of his ''Make America Great Again'' rallies. And the president mostly stuck to his prepared remarks as the crowd of mostly Indian-Americans responded with polite applause.
  Mr. Trump praised Mr. Modi, marveling that some 600 million people voted in India's recent elections. ''That's a lot of people,'' the president said, adding that Indian-Americans enrich the culture of the United States and that the two nations are ''grounded in our common values.''
  But he mostly seized on his own rally themes, bragging about slashing regulations, lowering unemployment, implementing a tax cut and hardening the nation's borders against ''those who would threaten our security.''
  ''There are those in Washington who would raid your health care to fund free benefits to those who enter our country illegally,'' he said, previewing his attacks on Democrats during the presidential campaign. ''I will never allow politicians to take away your health care or give it to illegal immigrants.''
  The rally brought together two leaders with similar styles. Both rose to power by embracing right-wing populism, portraying themselves as champions of the masses fighting against an entrenched establishment. Both presented voters with a vision to make their respective countries ''great again,'' and both have fanned tensions along religious, economic and social fault lines.
  Mr. Modi, who is in the United States for a week largely to attend the United Nations General Assembly in New York, won a landslide re-election in May. But Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi are also both polarizing figures among the people they lead. While many Indians see Mr. Modi as a strong, decisive leader, a small but vocal minority say he is becoming an autocrat, rapidly consolidating power, going after political enemies inside his country and sowing division between Hindus and Muslims.
  In the United States, Mr. Trump is preparing to run for re-election in a bitterly divided country with polls regularly showing him receiving well short of 50 percent support. His participation in Sunday's rally with Mr. Modi offered a chance to woo a constituency -- the four million American residents of Indian descent -- whose support could prove helpful.
  Mr. Modi delivered in English an over-the top introduction of Mr. Trump, declaring that the president's name is ''familiar to every person on the planet'' and ''comes up in almost every conversation in the world on global politics.''
  Standing next to Mr. Modi, the president beamed with pleasure as the prime minister delivered a twist on his own election slogan: ''Abki baar Trump sarkar'' or ''This time, a Trump government.''
  But earning votes from Indian-Americans will not be easy for Mr. Trump, even with Mr. Modi by his side.
  Indian-Americans have supported both Democrats and Republicans in the past, though they have gravitated away from Mr. Trump's party more recently. Although the president's tax and economic policies appeal to many Indians, his tough stance on immigration, including legal immigrants from India, has caused great angst, especially in Silicon Valley, which relies heavily on Indian workers who come on H-1B visas.
  An overwhelming majority of Indian-American voters are registered as Democrats and voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, according to the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund.
  M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a group that tries to organize Indian-Americans, said events like Sunday's rally help the community become more relevant in the United States. He said Mr. Trump's appearance here was an opportunity to increase his 14 percent showing among Indian-Americans in 2016.
  ''He could hope he could change some minds,'' Mr. Rangaswami said. ''It could happen.''
  Mr. Trump crowed last week that his decision to join Mr. Modi at the event on Sunday enlarged the crowd at the stadium, which can hold up to about 70,000 people.
  ''I have a very good relationship with Prime Minister Modi. By the way, great relationship with Pakistan and with India,'' Mr. Trump told reporters on Air Force One several days ahead of the Modi event. ''But he's got a big crowd coming, and I guess the crowd just got a lot bigger because they just announced -- he asked would I go, and I will go.''
  Mr. Trump's appearance at the event, which was followed by a stop with the Australian prime minister at an Ohio recycled packaging plant owned by an Australian company, comes as his administration is finalizing plans for a modest trade deal with India. That step that would help resolve earlier tensions between Mr. Trump and Mr. Modi over India's trade balance with the United States and other trade issues.
  The trade agreement, which could be finalized by the two leaders as soon as this week, is expected to help American farmers and manufacturers by eliminating Indian restrictions on electronics, medical devices and a few agricultural goods. In return, Mr. Trump would restore a special trade status for developing countries, something the president stripped from India this year.
  Resolving a nettlesome trade dispute with India presents Mr. Trump with an opportunity for a public relations victory amid increasing frustration over his global trade wars with China and other countries.
  Mr. Modi, 69, is at his best outside India. He has prioritized, more than any other Indian leader in recent decades, India's brand around the world and projected an image of a muscular India, an emerging superpower. He travels all across Asia, he was the first Indian prime minister to visit Israel, he has journeyed across Africa and during a visit to New York in 2014 he packed Madison Square Garden with ecstatic crowds cheering: ''Modi! Modi! Modi!''
  He has come a long way. Years ago, he was banned by American authorities from even entering the United States because of allegations that as chief minister in Gujarat in the early 2000s he was responsible for an explosion of religiously driven violence that claimed more than 1,000 lives, most of them Muslim.
  The goal of this trip is to attract investment to India, and there is a little extra urgency: India's economy is suffering its biggest downturn in years. Mr. Modi is also eager to shore up diplomatic support. But a controversy threatens to cast a shadow over his visit.
  Human rights groups and three Nobel Peace Prize winners have criticized the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for a prestigious award they plan to bestow upon Mr. Modi this week. The peace activists say that under Mr. Modi's leadership, ''India has descended into dangerous and deadly chaos that has consistently undermined human rights.''
  A group of protesters gathered in Houston on Sunday to denounce Mr. Modi.
  But Mr. Modi has typically drawn strong support from the Indian diaspora, even those who disagree with some of his domestic policies, because he has been so successful at burnishing India's image on the world stage.

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/22/us/politics/trump-modi-houston-rally.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Attendees of a 'Howdy, Modi!' rally for the prime minister of India in Houston on Sunday. President Trump largely stuck to his script. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); POPULISM (89%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN MOVEMENT (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (77%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (75%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (75%); VOTERS & VOTING (75%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (68%); TAXES & TAXATION (67%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (65%); RELIGION (64%); TAX LAW (64%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (63%); IMMIGRATION (63%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (60%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (60%); UNITED NATIONS (60%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); NARENDRA MODI (79%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: September 23, 2019


End of Document
The Other Immigration
The New York Times
May 7, 2006 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; Pg. 15
Length: 963 words
Byline: By Christopher Caldwell
Christopher Caldwell is a contributing writer for the magazine.
Body


If you were to set out to design a story that would inflame populist rage, it might involve immigrants from poor countries, living in the United States without permission to work, hiring powerful Washington lobbyists to press their case. In late April, The Washington Post reported just such a development. The immigrants in question were highly skilled -- the programmers and doctors and investment analysts that American business seeks out through so-called H-1B visas, and who are eligible for tens of thousands of ''green cards,'' or permanent work permits, each year. But bureaucracy and an affirmative-action-style system of national-origin quotas have created a mess. India and China account for almost 40 percent of the world's population, yet neither can claim much more than 7 percent of the green cards. Hence a half-million-person backlog and a new political pressure group, which calls itself Immigration Voice.
The group's efforts will be a test of the commonly expressed view that Americans are not opposed to immigration, only to illegal immigration. Immigration Voice represents the kind of immigrants whose economic contributions are obvious. It is not a coincidence that the land of the H-1B is also the land of the iPod. Such immigrants are not ''cutting in line'' -- they're petitioning for pre-job documentation, not for post-job amnesty. And people who have undergone 18 years of schooling to learn how to manipulate advanced technology come pre-Americanized, in a way that agricultural workers may not.
  But Immigration Voice could still wind up crying in the wilderness. As the Boston College political scientist Peter Skerry has noted, many of the things that bug people about undocumented workers are also true of documented ones. Legal immigrants, too, increase crowding, compete for jobs and government services and create an atmosphere of transience and disruption. Indeed, it may be harder for foreign-born engineers to win the same grip on the sympathies of native-born Americans that undocumented farm laborers and political refugees have. Skilled immigrants can't be understood through the usual paradigms of victimhood. 
  The economists Philip Martin, Manolo Abella and Christiane Kuptsch noted in a recent book, ''As a general rule, the more difficult it is to migrate from one country to another, the higher the percentage of professionals among the migrants from that country.'' Often this means that the more ''backward'' the country, the more ''sophisticated'' the immigrants it supplies. Sixty percent of the Egyptians, Ghanaians and South Africans in the U.S. -- and 75 percent of Indians -- have more than 13 years of schooling. Their home countries are not educational powerhouses, yet as individuals, they are more highly educated than a great many of the Americans they live among. (This poses an interesting problem for Immigration Voice, which polices its Web forums for condescending remarks toward manual laborers.) 
  So how are we supposed to address the special needs of this class of migrant? For the most part, we don't. The differences between skilled and unskilled immigrants are important, but that doesn't mean that they are always readily comprehensible either to politicians or to public opinion. When high-skilled immigrants who are already like us show themselves willing to become even more so, jumping every hoop to join us on a legal footing, it dissolves a lot of resistance. But it doesn't dissolve everything. It doesn't dissolve our sense that people like them are different and potentially even threatening.
  If we consider our own internal migration of recent decades, this will not surprise us. You would have expected that big movements of people between states -- particularly from the North to the Sun Belt and from Pacific Coast cities to Rocky Mountain towns -- would cause increasing uniformity and unanimity. But that didn't happen. Instead, this big migration has coincided with the much harped-on polarization between ''red'' and ''blue'' America. 
  Georgians take up jobs on Wall Street and New Englanders unload their U-Hauls in Texas. The sky doesn't fall -- but neither do cultural or political tensions between respective regions of the country. Consider the diatribes that followed the last election, in which ''red'' America stood accused of everything from ignorance and bloodlust to knee-jerk conformity. Or consider North Carolina. As the state filled up with new arrivals from such liberal states as New York and New Jersey, political pundits predicted the demise of its longtime ultraconservative senator Jesse Helms. But Helms won elections until he retired in 2002, largely because many of those transplants voted for him enthusiastically. The sort of Yankees who moved to North Carolina had little trouble adopting the political outlook of their new neighbors. But you didn't notice North Carolinians begging for more of them.
  While Immigration Voice looks like an immigrant movement that Americans can rally behind, its prospects are mixed. A recent measure sponsored by Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania to nearly double the number of H-1B visas was passed through committee, then killed and then revived. The fate of skilled immigrants hinges on public opinion, and that is hard to gauge. Even an employer delighted to sponsor an H-1B immigrant for a green card might have no particular political commitment to defending the program, or to wringing inefficiencies out of it. The arrival of skilled individuals arguably makes America a more American place. But not necessarily a more welcoming one.

  Countries with the most H-1B visa recipients (temporary skilled workers), 2004
     Source: U.S. Dept. of Homeland Security, Office of Immigration Statistics
  (Chart by L. Eckstein)

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo (Photograph by Larry Downing
 Reuters)Chart: ''SKILLED SET''
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); POPULISM (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); LOBBYING (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (76%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (73%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (72%); ECONOMICS (71%); FARM LABOR (71%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (69%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (68%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (68%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (66%); Immigration and Refugees (%)

Company:  GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (58%)

Ticker: GHC (NYSE) (58%)

Industry: NAICS517311 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (58%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (58%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (58%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FARM LABOR (71%); AGRICULTURE (50%)

Person: Christopher Caldwell

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (78%); UNITED STATES (96%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: May 7, 2006


End of Document
National Briefing
The New York Times
April 8, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 760 words
Body


MID-ATLANTIC
Pennsylvania: Governor Issues Order Barring Gender Bias 
  Gov. Tom Wolf signed an executive order Thursday barring state contractors and grant recipients from discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. Mr. Wolf, a Democrat, said he could not wait any longer for Republican lawmakers to move on legislation to ban such discrimination in employment, housing and public services. The move has the support of some of the state's biggest businesses and advocacy groups. It comes amid a backlash over what Mr. Wolf has called a discriminatory law in North Carolina. The rules apply to entities that receive potentially tens of billions of dollars a year. (AP)
  WASHINGTON
  Visa Applications Reach Limit for Highly Skilled Workers
  Federal officials announced that the annual limit for applications for visas for highly skilled immigrants, known as H-1B visas, was reached on Thursday, less than a week after the application period opened on April 1. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the federal visa agency, said it received more than enough applications for the annual quotas of 65,000 new H-1B visas and 20,000 visas for students graduating with master's degrees or higher from American universities. It was the fourth year in a row that the yearly quota was reached within one week. The selection will now be made by a computer-run random lottery. Many American employers, especially those in technology, have clamored for Congress to increase the H-1B limits. But American tech workers have protested they were laid off from their jobs and replaced by less skilled H-1B visa holders. JULIA PRESTON
  MIDWEST
  Michigan: State Officials Sued Over Detroit Schools Condition
  The Detroit Public Schools board filed a class-action lawsuit against Gov. Rick Snyder and other state officials on Thursday over the deterioration of the city's schools. The suit seeks compensatory damages for all Detroit Public Schools children who have been subjected to ''constitutional violations'' since the state's takeover of the schools in 1999. Detroit's public school system faces $3.4 billion in debt and other obligations. (REUTERS)
  SOUTH
  Virginia: Man Jailed Since 1982 Is Cleared of Rape and Murder
  A man convicted of rape and murder more than three decades ago is innocent and should be released from prison, the state Supreme Court said Thursday. It granted a petition for a writ of actual innocence after DNA tests failed to identify his genetic profile in sperm at the crime scene. The man, Keith Harward, received a life sentence for the 1982 killing of Jesse Perron and the rape of his wife in Newport News. He will be released on Friday, said a lawyer with the Innocence Project who represented him. The order came a day after Attorney General Mark Herring said DNA evidence proves that Mr. Harward could not have committed the crimes. The evidence implicated Jerry L. Crotty, a sailor who was stationed in the area. He died in 2006 in prison while serving a sentence for abduction. (AP)
  WEST
  California: Cross on Seal Is Ruled Unconstitutional
  A federal judge found Thursday that Los Angeles County violated the Constitution by voting to put a cross on the county seal. The judge, Christina A. Snyder of Federal District Court, ruled in a lawsuit filed two years ago by the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California. The cross was removed when the 1957 seal was redesigned in 2004 after the A.C.L.U. threatened legal action. But in 2014, county supervisors voted to put a cross atop the seal's depiction of the San Gabriel Mission, saying that was historically accurate. The judge said the cross ''places the county's power, prestige and purse behind a single religion, Christianity.'' (AP)
  California: Man With Knife Killed by San Francisco Police
  Two San Francisco police officers shot and killed a man carrying a knife in the Mission District on Thursday, Police Chief Greg Suhr said. He said officers shot the unidentified Latino man after he refused to drop a knife and after he was shot with nonlethal beanbags full of pellets. The incident was the third fatal shooting of a minority suspect not carrying a gun in the last two years and the second since December. The U.S. Department of Justice recently agreed to requests from Chief Suhr and Mayor Ed Lee to review the department's procedures and policies. Officers said the man was charging at them with what was described as a chef's knife. Two witnesses say the man spoke only Spanish and the officers made their command in English. (AP)

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/08/us/national-briefing.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); DISCRIMINATION (91%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (91%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%); GOVERNORS (90%); LGBTQ+ PERSONS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); GENDER IDENTITY (89%); GRANTS & GIFTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (87%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (84%); FORENSIC DNA TESTING (84%); JAIL SENTENCING (84%); MURDER (84%); SEXUAL ASSAULT FORENSIC EVIDENCE (84%); DNA (83%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DAMAGES (78%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PETITIONS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); SEX OFFENDERS & PREDATORS (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%); SENTENCING (74%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (73%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (71%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (71%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (71%); SUPREME COURTS (66%); URBAN SCHOOLS (66%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (65%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (64%); EVIDENCE (64%); FORENSICS (64%); WRONGFUL CONVICTIONS (64%); CLASS ACTIONS (63%); DNA TESTING (60%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE (60%); SCHOOL TAKEOVERS (60%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (56%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (87%); PRESS AGENCY RELEASES (74%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); URBAN SCHOOLS (66%)

Person: TOM WOLF (79%); RICK SNYDER (58%)

Geographic: DETROIT, MI, USA (94%); VIRGINIA, USA (92%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); MIDWEST USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 8, 2016


End of Document
As Supreme Court Mulls Dreamers, Kushner Revives Immigration Plan
The New York Times 
March 5, 2020 Thursday 15:40 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1054 words
Byline: Maggie Haberman and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Highlight: The president’s son-in-law is hoping that a looming ruling will spur interest in his proposal, which is similar to one he tried to push last year.
Body


The president’s son-in-law is hoping that a looming ruling will spur interest in his proposal, which is similar to one he tried to push last year.
[Read more on the Supreme Court’s decision on President Trump and DACA.]
WASHINGTON — Jared Kushner, President Trump’s son-in-law and senior adviser, is trying to revive a broad overhaul of the nation’s immigration system, anticipating that a looming Supreme Court ruling on an Obama-era program that protects young, undocumented immigrants could give the nettlesome issue new life.
Mr. Trump and Mr. Kushner met with Republican senators at the White House on Thursday to discuss a range of immigration issues, including construction of the president’s long-desired border wall, crossings at the border, potential immigration legislation and the case before the Supreme Court. That case could decide the fate of immigrants brought to the country illegally as children, then protected by President Barack Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, or DACA.
White House aides have also briefed Senate Republican leaders and business groups in recent weeks.
The proposal is nearly identical to one that Mr. Kushner tried to push last year, with little open support from business leaders and none from Democrats.
It would decrease the number of family-based immigration visas and increase employment-based visas, according to people briefed on the plan. The White House has insisted it would streamline the process and make it easier for H-1B high-skilled worker visas to be obtained. But some activists say that it would most likely toughen the standards for applying for asylum, and that a new application process would make securing H-1B visas more difficult, not easier.
That could effectively reduce the number of legal immigrants at a time when even the White House’s acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, is privately saying the economy is “desperate” for more immigrants.
So far, immigration hawks and many business groups, long covetous of more H-1B visas, have remained cool to Mr. Kushner’s suggestions, and it is unclear whether the plan is anything more than a framework to point to after the Supreme Court rules on the legality of Mr. Trump’s ending of DACA, which he declared over in September 2017.
The court is expected to rule no later than June, meaning that as he seeks re-election, Mr. Trump could have to decide whether to start deporting young immigrants who have known no other home than the United States. Such immigrants, known as Dreamers, have long been the sympathetic face of Democratic efforts to loosen immigration restrictions.
Matthew T. Albence, the acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said in January that the agency would move forward with deporting Dreamers if the court rescinded the law. But Chad Wolf, the acting secretary of homeland security, told the Senate Homeland Security Committee on Wednesday that it was “very hard to say a blanket yes or a blanket no” on whether DACA recipients would be deported.
After Thursday’s White House meeting, Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who attended, said the main message was that if Mr. Trump “wins in court with DACA, we’re not going to let these people have their lives ruined, but we also want to address why we have these problems.”
Administration officials have indicated that some form of Mr. Kushner’s plan would be the president’s offer after the Supreme Court rules. But the plan notably does not address how to handle the hundreds of thousands of Dreamers who would face deportation if the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump’s administration lawfully lifted their protections.
Instead, Mr. Kushner has focused on the structure of legal immigration and immigration law enforcement. The immigration plan would create a new director position to oversee the Department of Homeland Security’s three immigration-related agencies: ICE, Customs and Border Protection, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
In preliminary meetings with homeland security representatives, the officials expressed concern over what the plan would mean for agencies within the department that are not focused on deportations, such as port officers and special agents with Homeland Security Investigations, according to an official familiar with the briefings.
With unemployment low and business demand for skilled workers high, the plan’s focus seems curious, analysts said. Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute, said raising costs on employment visas and establishing a more cumbersome approval process with the Labor Department would send “a strong signal against employment-based immigrants.”
“So it’s extremely surprising to hear that they’ll be making it more difficult for companies to recruit the best and brightest in the world,” Ms. Pierce said.
Trump administration policies have already restricted the flow of legal immigration. Mr. Trump in October cut the refugee cap to 18,000 slots, the lowest in the history of the United States. His travel ban, extended last month to a total of 13 countries, as well as increased vetting and additional interviews for immigration visas, has also restricted the ability of foreigners to work in the United States and relatives to reunite with their families.
The number of visas issued to foreigners abroad looking to immigrate to the United States has declined by about 25 percent, to 462,422 in the 2019 fiscal year from 617,752 in 2016.
While Mr. Trump’s policies have diminished the flow of immigrants to the United States, he prefers to emphasize his border crackdown and the construction of a wall on the southwestern border.
But after nine months of declining border crossings, Mark A. Morgan, the acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, said on Thursday that immigration authorities took 37,119 migrants into custody at the border in February, up from 36,660 the month before.
That is still far less than the 76,545 migrants taken into custody in February 2019, a fact that White House officials highlighted during the meeting on Thursday.
Zach Montague contributed reporting.
Zach Montague contributed reporting. 
PHOTO: A Supreme Court ruling could decide the fate of immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); INTERIM MANAGEMENT (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); FAMILY (75%); ACTIVISM (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Kushner, Jared (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Deportation (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Supreme Court (US) (%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); JARED KUSHNER (79%); MICK MULVANEY (54%); Kushner, Jared; Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: July 28, 2020


End of Document
Judge Orders U.S. to Decide If Muslim Scholar Can Enter
The New York Times
June 24, 2006 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 468 words
Byline: By ANTHONY RAMIREZ
Body


A federal judge in New York yesterday ordered the Bush administration to decide by September whether to grant an entry visa to a prominent Muslim scholar. The scholar has been barred from entering the United States for nearly two years, first because of supposed ties to terrorism, then for unspecified national security reasons.
  The American Civil Liberties Union filed the suit on behalf of three academic groups, including the PEN American Center, which had invited the scholar, Tariq Ramadan, a Swiss citizen, to speak at its meetings.
In a 34-page ruling, Judge Paul A. Crotty of United States District Court in Manhattan said that while the United States must come to a decision on admitting Mr. Ramadan, the academic groups had not met the legal burden for other demands.
  The groups had sought an order to stop the government from barring Mr. Ramadan under provisions of the Patriot Act and a finding that the government had abridged the free-speech rights of the groups, which also include the American Academy of Religion and the American Association of University Professors.
  Judge Crotty, noting the government's shifting reasons for Mr. Ramadan's exclusion, said, ''While the Government may exclude Ramadan if he poses a legitimate threat to national security, it may not invoke 'national security' as a protective shroud to justify the exclusion of aliens on the basis of their political beliefs.''
  Jameel Jaffer, deputy director of the A.C.L.U.'s national security program, said that ''we're very happy with the decision that we got.''
  Mr. Jaffer added that the decision was significant, ''one, because it clearly rejects the government's contention that Professor Ramadan endorsed terrorism and two, it makes clear that the government cannot use the immigration laws as a means of manipulating political debate inside the United States.''
  The suit was filed against the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Bridget Kelly, a spokeswoman for the United States attorney for the Southern District, said the government's lawyers were reviewing the ruling and would have no immediate comment.
  Mr. Ramadan is a scholar of Arab descent who is now a visiting fellow at Oxford University. He has published more than 20 books, 700 articles, and 170 audiotapes focusing on Islam and the Western world.
  He is also the grandson of Hasan al-Banna, a founder in 1928 of the Muslim Brotherhood, an Egyptian group that opposes Hosni Mubarak, the president of Egypt and an ally of the United States. A group that has been known for violence, the brotherhood recently elected members to Egypt's parliament.
  Mr. Ramadan's troubles began in July 2004 when his work visa, known as H-1B, was revoked and he was later unable to accept a tenured professorship at the University of Notre Dame. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: JUDGES (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); RELIGION (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (78%); LAWYERS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TEACHER UNIONS (78%); US PATRIOT ACT (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); IMMIGRATION LAW (75%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); IMMIGRATION (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); POLITICAL DEBATES (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); GRANDCHILDREN (50%); Terrorism (%); Decisions and Verdicts (%); Islam (%); Terrorism (%); Security and Warning Systems (%); Suits and Litigation (%)

Organization: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%); AMERICAN ACADEMY OF RELIGION (55%); AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (55%); American Civil Liberties Union; State Department; Homeland Security Department; Pen American Center

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LAWYERS (78%)

Person: HOSNI MUBARAK (50%); Anthony Ramirez; Paul A (Judge) Crotty; Tariq Ramadan; George W (Pres) Bush

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); EGYPT (93%)

Load-Date: June 24, 2006


End of Document
National Briefing | Washington; Visa Applications Reach Limit for Highly Skilled Workers
The New York Times
April 8, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 148 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal officials announced that the annual limit for applications for visas for highly skilled immigrants, known as H-1B visas, was reached on Thursday, less than a week after the application period opened on April 1. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the federal visa agency, said it received more than enough applications for the annual quotas of 65,000 new H-1B visas and 20,000 visas for students graduating with master's degrees or higher from American universities. It was the fourth year in a row that the yearly quota was reached within one week. The selection will now be made by a computer-run random lottery. Many American employers, especially those in technology, have clamored for Congress to increase the H-1B limits. But American tech workers have protested they were laid off from their jobs and replaced by less skilled H-1B visa holders. JULIA PRESTON 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); CITIZENSHIP (88%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (77%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (75%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (74%); LAYOFFS (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (72%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (58%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (75%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 8, 2016


End of Document
With 'Dreamers' on Docket, a Visa Proposal Is Revived
The New York Times
March 6, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1025 words
Byline: By Maggie Haberman and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Body


The president's son-in-law is hoping that a looming ruling will spur interest in his proposal, which is similar to one he tried to push last year.
WASHINGTON -- Jared Kushner, President Trump's son-in-law and senior adviser, is trying to revive a broad overhaul of the nation's immigration system, anticipating that a looming Supreme Court ruling on an Obama-era program that protects young, undocumented immigrants could give the nettlesome issue new life. 
  Mr. Trump and Mr. Kushner met with Republican senators at the White House on Thursday to discuss a range of immigration issues, including construction of the president's long-desired border wall, crossings at the border, potential immigration legislation and the case before the Supreme Court. That case could decide the fate of immigrants brought to the country illegally as children, then protected by President Barack Obama's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, or DACA.
  White House aides have also briefed Senate Republican leaders and business groups in recent weeks.
  The proposal is nearly identical to one that Mr. Kushner tried to push last year, with little open support from business leaders and none from Democrats.
  It would decrease the number of family-based immigration visas and increase employment-based visas, according to people briefed on the plan. The White House has insisted it would streamline the process and make it easier for H-1B high-skilled worker visas to be obtained. But some activists say that it would most likely toughen the standards for applying for asylum, and that a new application process would make securing H-1B visas more difficult, not easier.
  That could effectively reduce the number of legal immigrants at a time when even the White House's acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, is privately saying the economy is ''desperate'' for more immigrants.
  So far, immigration hawks and many business groups, long covetous of more H-1B visas, have remained cool to Mr. Kushner's suggestions, and it is unclear whether the plan is anything more than a framework to point to after the Supreme Court rules on the legality of Mr. Trump's ending of DACA, which he declared over in September 2017.
  The court is expected to rule no later than June, meaning that as he seeks re-election, Mr. Trump could have to decide whether to start deporting young immigrants who have known no other home than the United States. Such immigrants, known as Dreamers, have long been the sympathetic face of Democratic efforts to loosen immigration restrictions.
  Matthew T. Albence, the acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said in January that the agency would move forward with deporting Dreamers if the court rescinded the law. But Chad Wolf, the acting secretary of homeland security, told the Senate Homeland Security Committee on Wednesday that it was ''very hard to say a blanket yes or a blanket no'' on whether DACA recipients would be deported.
  After Thursday's White House meeting, Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who attended, said the main message was that if Mr. Trump ''wins in court with DACA, we're not going to let these people have their lives ruined, but we also want to address why we have these problems.''
  Administration officials have indicated that some form of Mr. Kushner's plan would be the president's offer after the Supreme Court rules. But the plan notably does not address how to handle the hundreds of thousands of Dreamers who would face deportation if the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump's administration lawfully lifted their protections.
  Instead, Mr. Kushner has focused on the structure of legal immigration and immigration law enforcement. The immigration plan would create a new director position to oversee the Department of Homeland Security's three immigration-related agencies: ICE, Customs and Border Protection, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  In preliminary meetings with homeland security representatives, the officials expressed concern over what the plan would mean for agencies within the department that are not focused on deportations, such as port officers and special agents with Homeland Security Investigations, according to an official familiar with the briefings.
  With unemployment low and business demand for skilled workers high, the plan's focus seems curious, analysts said. Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute, said raising costs on employment visas and establishing a more cumbersome approval process with the Labor Department would send ''a strong signal against employment-based immigrants.''
  ''So it's extremely surprising to hear that they'll be making it more difficult for companies to recruit the best and brightest in the world,'' Ms. Pierce said.
  Trump administration policies have already restricted the flow of legal immigration. Mr. Trump in October cut the refugee cap to 18,000 slots, the lowest in the history of the United States. His travel ban, extended last month to a total of 13 countries, as well as increased vetting and additional interviews for immigration visas, has also restricted the ability of foreigners to work in the United States and relatives to reunite with their families.
  The number of visas issued to foreigners abroad looking to immigrate to the United States has declined by about 25 percent, to 462,422 in the 2019 fiscal year from 617,752 in 2016.
  While Mr. Trump's policies have diminished the flow of immigrants to the United States, he prefers to emphasize his border crackdown and the construction of a wall on the southwestern border.
  But after nine months of declining border crossings, Mark A. Morgan, the acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, said on Thursday that immigration authorities took 37,119 migrants into custody at the border in February, up from 36,660 the month before.
  That is still far less than the 76,545 migrants taken into custody in February 2019, a fact that White House officials highlighted during the meeting on Thursday.
  Zach Montague contributed reporting.Zach Montague contributed reporting.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/05/us/politics/immigration-kushner-trump-dreamers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: A Supreme Court ruling could decide the fate of immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIN SCHAFF/THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); INTERIM MANAGEMENT (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (76%); MIGRATION ISSUES (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (76%); FAMILY (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (73%); ACTIVISM (71%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (70%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); JARED KUSHNER (79%); BARACK OBAMA (73%); MICK MULVANEY (54%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: March 6, 2020


End of Document
A New Push To Raise Cap On H-1B Visa
The New York Times
November 15, 2006 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 763 words
Byline: By MIGUEL HELFT
Dateline: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 14 
Body


A coalition of business and education groups is making a renewed push to persuade Congress to raise the number of skilled foreign workers allowed into the United States this year. 
  The coalition, which calls itself Compete America and whose members are drawn heavily from the technology industry, sent a letter to every member of Congress on Monday calling for an increase in both the number of so-called H-1B visas, which are used by skilled immigrants and the number of employment-based green cards given to foreign workers.
''The first part is to ensure that U.S. companies have the ability to hire the best and the brightest,'' said Jack Krumholtz, managing director for federal government affairs at Microsoft. ''The second part is about making sure that we are able to retain them.''
  Microsoft's chairman, Bill Gates, is one of many technology executives who have advocated increased flexibility to hire educated foreign workers like engineers and scientists. He is expected to return to that theme at an industry conference on Wednesday at Stanford University.
  Increasing the number of H-1B visas has long been a top legislative priority of technology companies, which say they cannot find enough skilled workers in the United States. After a temporary increase to 195,000 during the years of the Internet boom, the annual number of visas issued has been capped at 65,000. An additional 20,000 visas have been granted to foreign workers who have an advanced degree from an American university.
  But in recent years, all the visas allotted for a given year were claimed on or before the start of the fiscal year on Oct. 1. 
  ''We can't hire people,'' said Jenifer Verdery, director of work force policy at Intel. 
  The notion of allowing more skilled foreign workers in the United States generally enjoys bipartisan support in Congress. Earlier this year, the Senate passed a bill that would increase the cap on H-1B visas to 115,000 and would automatically raise the cap by a further 20 percent if all visas for a given year were claimed. The bill also would raise the number of employment-based green cards issued to 290,000, from 140,000. 
  But the bill stalled as the House and Senate deadlocked on broader immigration reform legislation. And not everyone agrees that raising the cap on visas is a good idea. 
  ''We think that before raising the H-1B cap there should be reform of the H-1B system,'' said Ronil Hira, vice president for career activities at IEEE-USA, a professional organization representing engineers and computer programmers. 
  The organization, which includes many immigrants among its ranks, is not opposed to legal immigration. But Mr. Hira said that the H-1B visa program, which requires companies to pay foreign workers wages comparable to those they pay American workers, was riddled with loopholes that allow employers to pay subpar wages to immigrants. That, in turn, depresses the wages of American workers, Mr. Hira said.
  Lynn Shotwell, chairwoman of Compete America, said there was virtually no chance that Congress would pass the Senate bill this year. But Ms. Shotwell said the coalition, which includes universities and the Chamber of Commerce, was asking Congress to raise the cap on H-1B visas and green cards for the remainder of the fiscal year.
  Members of the coalition are hopeful that legislation modeled after the Senate bill could be enacted next year, when Democrats will control Congress. House Democrats have promoted what they are calling an innovation agenda that includes wide availability of visas for skilled immigrants.
  The National Venture Capital Association, which is among those advocating an expansion in visas and green cards for skilled workers, is backing that case with a study, to be released Wednesday, that highlights the role of immigrant entrepreneurs in the American economy. 
  The study found that one in four publicly traded American companies that were initially financed by venture capitalists in the last 15 years included at least one immigrant among their founders. During the 1980s, immigrants were involved in founding one in five such companies, and prior to 1980 only 7 percent. 
  ''The notion of being able to come here and shape your own destiny is tremendously appealing and, you have to believe, valuable for the economy, job creation and wealth creation,'' said Axel Bichara, a partner at Atlas Venture in Boston. Mr. Bichara came to the United States from Germany in 1986 to study at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A year later, he became co-founder of a software company. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); LABOR REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); Labor (%); Foreign Labor (%); Law and Legislation (%); Immigration and Refugees (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Visas (%); Labor (%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (56%)

Organization: STANFORD UNIVERSITY (55%); Compete America (Orgn)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (67%)

Person: BILL GATES (79%); Miguel Helft

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%); United States

Load-Date: November 15, 2006


End of Document
Students Say Fake College and the U.S. Duped Them
The New York Times
May 6, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 1942 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


For foreign-born students desperate to stay in the United States, the University of Northern New Jersey seemed like the perfect solution: They did not have to go to class, but they could get coveted student visas and still work at their dream jobs.
They just needed to pay a broker anywhere from $3,000 to $12,000. Over the last three and a half years, more than a thousand agreed. 
  That was their mistake.
  On April 5, the government revealed that the university was a fake -- part of an elaborate  sting operation that resulted in the arrest of 22 brokers who arranged for students to enroll. These brokers belonged to an underground network of recruiters operating throughout the country who acted as middlemen between students and fraudulent schools known as visa mills, the government said.
  Twenty-five students were listed as anonymous co-conspirators, but officials say all of them knew they were committing fraud by not going to class. Within days, 1,076 of them were ordered to appear in immigration court, facing deportation or even a lifetime ban from the United States.
  ''They were 100 percent fully aware,'' said Alvin Phillips, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security. ''All purported students are recorded at some point or another fully going along with the pay-to-stay scheme.''
  There are both audio and video recordings from the president's office in New Jersey, when students called or visited, Mr. Phillips said. He personally witnessed some of these exchanges, and heard students admit they knew the university would not have classes.
  But in interviews, more than a dozen students insisted that they were collateral damage in the sting operation, duped by both the brokers and the government.
  In some cases, their efforts to verify the university or even transfer were rebuffed by the brokers, they say. In other instances, the students point to what they say was active deception by the government: in-person meetings with the university's supposed president, letters confirming they could work instead of go to class, and Twitter messages about classes canceled because of bad weather.
  UNNJ will be closed today, March 5, due to bad weather. Stay safe and warm. Dr. B -- Univ of Northern NJ (@UNorthernNJ) March 5, 2015
  In October, A., a young man from Shanghai living in New York City, was so frustrated when the university had not sent a needed eligibility form that he rented a car and drove to the campus. (A., like most of the students, insisted on being identified only by an initial because their immigration cases were still pending or their families back home did not know their situation.)
  T-Shirt From the President
  At the university's office in a nondescript building off the Garden State Parkway in Cranford, a man presenting himself as the institution's president, Steve Brunetti, signed the form. He told A. how proud he was of all ''his students'' and gave him a souvenir.
  It was a slick T-shirt with the letters UNNJ on the front. On the left sleeve was an American flag.
  A. said he did not think the experience was odd. ''I just figured that was the way it was done,'' he said.
  Winona Sun, an art therapist in Brooklyn, learned of the sting operation while she was in China visiting her parents, when her visa to re-enter the United States was revoked. ''I feel it's over-punishment,'' she said in a telephone interview from China. ''If the target is for the brokers, why do they want to tear people down and lie to me?''
  The federal government accredits 8,687 educational institutions in the United States to enroll international students; 1.18 million are currently studying here. The students enrolled at the University of Northern New Jersey had all come to the United States legally and had earned degrees from schools including the University of Chicago, the University of Michigan and Fordham.
  But after graduation, the clock was ticking for those who wanted to stay in the country. A program called Optional Practical Training lets foreign-born graduates remain for 12 or 36 months, depending on their field. Companies can apply for a temporary skilled worker visa, known as an H-1B, for employees, but around 230,000 people apply annually for the 85,000 visas given out.
  A number of the students failed to get an H-1B and seemed out of options -- with jobs at Facebook, Google and Morgan Stanley on the line. Others were seeking to transfer from colleges they heard were under investigation to stay one step ahead of immigration officials.
  That is when the University of Northern New Jersey beckoned.
  According to some students, brokers assured them that they could immediately earn credit hours for their work experience in a program called Curricular Practical Training, without taking classes.
  ''It is very much like a honey trap because you have a very, very great temptation being waved in front of these young men and women,'' said David Grunblatt, co-head of the immigration and nationality group in the labor and employment law department at Proskauer Rose in New Jersey. He represents companies concerned about hiring foreign graduates for practical training.
  Most of the students were from China and India, where working with brokers is a familiar way of doing business. But in retrospect, they seem to have ignored what should have been red flags, whether because they were overly trusting, willfully ignorant or willing participants in visa fraud.
  Corey Lee, an immigration lawyer in Manhattan, said: ''If you didn't go to a class for a year, you should expect something is going on.''
  Ms. Sun, 29, earned a master's degree in art therapy at a Massachusetts college and moved to New York to work for a nonprofit social services agency. (She declined to name the college or the organization because she did not want to endanger her application for a waiver to return to the United States.)
  Her employer applied for an H-1B visa for her, but she faced a gap of several months before it would come through.
  Ms. Sun said her broker told her she could work instead of taking classes, but referred her to the university. In February 2015, after she enrolled, Ms. Sun said she called there approximately 20 times; no one responded.
  ''If one person called me back and told me it was fake, I would not have gone to the University of Northern New Jersey,'' Ms. Sun said. ''What else can I do? I don't know the American system.''
  Louis Farrell, the director of the Student and Exchange Visitor Program, part of United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said academic nonimmigrant student visas require the holder ''to enroll in a full course of study and attend and pass all their classes'' and that ''they should be wary of any recruiter who promises they can work without restrictions while attending school.''
  Listed on Official Sites
  But there seem to be inconsistencies in the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services' definition of a ''full course of study.'' In one entry on its website, it says that the designated school officer can determine a full course of study. Farther down, it says that a student must complete at least 18 hours of classroom study.
  Ultimately, the students said that because the Department of Homeland Security's website certified the University of Northern New Jersey, they believed the institution was legitimate. In addition, the website of the New Jersey Education Department listed it as approved. So did the website of the Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges, a national body. Its director, Michale S. McComis, later said he had certified the university in order to cooperate with the government's investigation.
  Z., who is 27 and also from China, did not win the H-1B lottery. He found the University of Northern New Jersey online without a broker. ''How risky will it be for obtaining full-time C.P.T. without attending any classes?'' he wrote to the university in an email he showed to The New York Times, referring to Curricular Practical Training.
  The response, from the generic info@unnj.edu: ''If you are not comfortable with what we have offered, I ask you to try another university in the New Jersey area.''
  Without a direct answer, Z. said he fell back on the university's government accreditation. A year passed.
  When he asked how he would provide evidence for another H-1B application, the university suggested making up classes from a template, and to send it in with $620.
  That was the final flag. Unlike students who were listed as co-conspirators, Z. did not fabricate school transcripts. Instead, he transferred.
  But on April 5, his student status was terminated because he had been enrolled at the fake university for more than 45 days.
  K., a 30-year-old from China who earned an M.B.A. in New England, began to suspect something about the university after he had worked for a year and did not hear about the start of classes. ''I was wondering if there was a lecture or something I could attend,'' he said. His broker told him online classes were coming soon.
  K. said that he, too, relied on the university's accreditations. ''If the government is not trustworthy, who should we trust?'' he said.
  His girlfriend, S., 26, whom he met at business school, was accepted to the university the next year, in January 2016. But she said the broker told her that her authorization form and the school schedule would be delayed while the university expanded to two more campuses.
  The couple went to the campus in Cranford in March, only to find the doors locked, supposedly because it was spring break.
  Then at 8:20 a.m. on April 5, Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents knocked on the door of their rural New England home.
  K. and S. were detained in separate cells for several hours. The next day, K. resigned from his job at a local company. They are both waiting for hearing dates.
  Reputations Tainted
  Like the other students, they were notified that they needed to leave the country or apply for reinstatement of their student visas. But students have said that few colleges, if any, have been willing to sponsor them after they were tainted by the University of Northern New Jersey. Reinstatement ultimately depends on the government's approval.
  The students say they have been put in an untenable position financially. They paid thousands of dollars either to brokers or directly to the university. Eight students alone said they spent a combined $46,000. Some paid the university via PayPal or cash, with the money going to a holding company listed on some students' invoices: Waterfall Properties.
  As they wait for a hearing in immigration court that could take a year or longer, they cannot legally work.
  ''Typically in any fraud investigation, it is our policy that we do not refund any money,'' Mr. Phillips, the Homeland Security spokesman, said.
  ''Absolutely there was a message,'' Mr. Phillips added. ''We welcome international students in America, but they must do so according to the standards, the right way.''
  But Barmak Nassirian, the director of federal relations and policy analysis for the American Association of State Colleges and Universities, wondered why government officials bothered to create a fake university when such places already existed. Several fraudulent universities have been shut down in previous years.
  The brokers may have recognized the University of Northern New Jersey as a visa mill, Mr. Nassirian said, but he could see how some students could be deceived by its certifications. ''Can you really blame a student,'' he said, ''even if they are a little greedy, a little gullible, or a little too hopeful?''

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/06/nyregion/students-at-fake-university-say-they-were-collateral-damage-in-sting-operation.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A T-shirt given to a student at the University of Northern New Jersey, a fake institution created by the government. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAM HODGSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)
 ''If the government is not trustworthy, who should we trust?'' said K., with his girlfriend, S. Both are awaiting hearing dates. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JACOB HANNAH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (92%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ARRESTS (75%); CONSPIRACY (75%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%); DEPORTATION (73%); IMMIGRATION LAW (72%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (51%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: May 6, 2016


End of Document
Pakistani Doctor, Arrested in Minneapolis, Is Accused of Plan to Join ISIS
The New York Times 
March 19, 2020 Thursday 11:40 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 478 words
Byline: Neil Vigdor
Highlight: Muhammad Masood, 28, a doctor, said he wanted to “fight on the front line as well as help the wounded brothers,” according to the F.B.I.
Body


Muhammad Masood, 28, a doctor, said he wanted to “fight on the front line as well as help the wounded brothers,” according to the F.B.I.
A Pakistani doctor who the F.B.I. said was intent on joining the Islamic State, either on the battlefield in Syria or as a “lone wolf” in the United States, was arrested on Thursday before boarding a flight at Minneapolis-St. Paul Airport.
The doctor, Muhammad Masood, 28, had been en route to Los Angeles to try to travel to the Middle East by cargo ship, the authorities said. He had initially bought a plane ticket from Chicago to Jordan, but officials said the flight was canceled because of the coronavirus outbreak.
Mr. Masood, who most recently worked as a research coordinator at a medical clinic in Rochester, Minn., was charged with one count of attempting to provide material support to a designated foreign terrorist organization. 
The charge carries a penalty of up to 20 years in prison.
Mr. Masood spent the past two years in the United States on a temporary visa, known as a H-1B, that is issued to skilled workers from abroad, a criminal affidavit said.
Law enforcement officials said they began their investigation of Mr. Masood in January, after he posted on an encrypted social media platform asking for help making “hijrah,” the Arabic word for migration. The Federal Bureau of Investigation said the word was widely used by those seeking to join ISIS. 
Mr. Masood then used the same social media platform to correspond with two informants about his plans, according to the affidavit.
He told one, “I want to fight on the front line as well as help the wounded brothers,” Carson Green, an F.B.I. special agent, wrote in the affidavit. 
Mr. Masood was kept in custody after a brief appearance in U.S. District Court in Minneapolis on Thursday. 
Manny Atwal, an assistant federal public defender who accompanied Mr. Masood in court, said in an email on Thursday that he could not comment on the case.
In a message exchange, Mr. Masood told one of the informants that, as a doctor, “I want to help mujahedeen on the ground,” Mr. Green wrote in the affidavit. Mr. Masood also told the informant that he sometimes wanted to carry out a terrorist attack in the United States because not many fighters could “reach here to attack,” the affidavit said. 
“Masood further explained that he will need weapons training when he joins ISIS, and he discussed the use of small drones that can be purchased online and turned into ‘istishhaddi’ (meaning martyr or suicide) drones for use in Syria or in America,” Mr. Green wrote. 
Mr. Masood is due back in court on Tuesday.
PHOTO: A faded flag of the Islamic State in Raqqa, Syria, in 2018. A Pakistani doctor was trying to travel to the Middle East by cargo ship to join the terrorist group, the authorities said.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ivor Prickett for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); ARRESTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ & THE LEVANT (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); CONFIDENTIAL INFORMANTS (89%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (79%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WEAPONS & ARMS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); RELIGION (73%); FLIGHT CANCELLATIONS & DELAYS (71%); SOCIAL MEDIA (70%); CORONAVIRUSES (69%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (69%); VIRUSES (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); Terrorism (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Federal Bureau of Investigation (%); Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) (%); Minneapolis (Minn) (%); Minnesota (%); Syria (%); Pakistan (%); Masood, Muhammad (%)

Organization: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%)

Industry: UNMANNED AIRCRAFT (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (78%); AIRPORTS (76%); FLIGHT CANCELLATIONS & DELAYS (71%); TRAVEL TICKETS (71%); SOCIAL MEDIA (70%); CLINICS & OUTPATIENT SERVICES (54%)

Person: Masood, Muhammad

Geographic: MINNEAPOLIS, MN, USA (94%); ROCHESTER, MN, USA (79%); SAINT PAUL, MN, USA (79%); MINNESOTA, USA (95%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); SYRIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAQ (79%); JORDAN (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

Load-Date: March 20, 2020


End of Document
Quota Quickly Filled on Visas For High-Tech Guest Workers
The New York Times
April 5, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 322 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body


The federal Citizenship and Immigration Services reached its 2008 limit for skilled-worker visa petitions in a single day and says it will not accept any more, to the dismay of technology companies that rely on the visas to hire foreign employees.
  The agency began accepting petitions Monday for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1 and said it received about 150,000 applications by midafternoon.
The temporary H-1B visas are for foreign workers with high-technology skills or in specialty occupations. Congress has mandated that the immigration agency limit the visas granted to 65,000, although the cap does not apply to petitions made on behalf of current H-1B holders, and an additional 20,000 visas can be granted to applicants who hold advanced degrees from American academic institutions.
  The agency said it would use computers to pick visa recipients randomly from the applications received Monday and Tuesday. It will reject the rest of the applications and return the filing fees.
  Employers seek H-1B visas on behalf of scientists, engineers, computer programmers and other workers with theoretical or technical expertise. About one-third of Microsoft's 46,000 employees in the United States have work visas or are legal permanent residents with green cards, said Ginny Terzano, a spokeswoman for the company.
  ''We are trying to work with Congress to get the cap increased,'' Ms. Terzano said. ''Our real preference here is that there not be a cap at all.''
  Compete America, a coalition that includes Microsoft, the chip maker Intel, the business software company Oracle and others, voiced its opposition to the visa cap in a statement Tuesday.
  ''Our broken visa policies for highly educated foreign professionals are not only counterproductive, they are anticompetitive and detrimental to America's long-term economic competitiveness,'' said Robert E. Hoffman, an Oracle vice president and co-chairman of Compete America.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (93%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); PETITIONS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); Computers and the Internet (%); Foreign Labor (%); Immigration and Refugees (%); Visas (%); Quotas (%); Labor (%); Computers and the Internet (%)

Company:  ORACLE CORP (92%);  INTEL CORP (84%);  MICROSOFT CORP (55%)

Organization: Citizenship and Immigration Services

Ticker: ORCL (NYSE) (92%); INTC (NASDAQ) (84%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (92%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (92%); SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (92%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (92%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (84%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (77%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (76%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (72%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 5, 2007


End of Document
Putting Trump to the Test
The New York Times
May 22, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3075 words
Byline: By NELSON D. SCHWARTZ
Body


In the hills and hollows of Mingo County, W.Va., where unemployment is nearly triple the national average, it's coal. On the southwest side of Chicago, where the landscape couldn't be more different but the economic fears are much the same, it's Oreo cookies. Elsewhere, it is cars, computers and air-conditioners.
And whether it is through rolling back regulations, imposing tariffs or making some none-too-discreet phone calls from the Oval Office to the C-suites, Donald J. Trump has vowed to bring back the vanishing jobs of miners, bakers and assembly-line workers, beginning on Day 1 of his administration. 
  ''It's going to happen fast,'' Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, recently told a cheering crowd in Charleston, W.Va. ''This is so easy.''
  [Video: FULL Event: Donald Trump's HUGE RALLY in Charleston, WV (5-5-16) Watch on YouTube.]
  If only that were true.
  For all of the appeal his message might have for residents there (Mr. Trump captured almost 90 percent of the vote in Mingo County), much of what he is promising to do -- on his own, and through congressional legislation -- couldn't be accomplished in the first 1,000 days of a Trump administration, much less the first 100.
  For example, Mr. Trump has suggested easing clean-air regulations enacted by Democrats and Republicans alike that have hurt the coal industry. But King Coal is unlikely to ever recapture market share lost in recent years to natural gas made cheap by the fracking boom, not to mention fast-growing alternative energy sources like wind and solar.
  Nor could Mr. Trump, a billionaire businessman, force steel makers to buy coal from Appalachia to heat furnaces in Asia, Europe and North America that have been idled by weak demand.
  ''I will not say he can't do anything, but it's very unlikely he'll be able to restore coal to where it was,'' said John Deskins, director of the West Virginia University Bureau of Business and Economic Research. With production and employment in the mines down by about a third since 2008, Mr. Deskins said, ''even in our most optimistic scenario, we don't expect a big bounce back.''
  Of course, a Trump presidency is far from certain. And any president's sway over the national economy is debatable.
  But a big part of what has gotten Mr. Trump this far are his outsize promises. And while the case of coal and clean air illustrates the limits of a president's power in the economic arena, there are other places where Mr. Trump would have considerably more room to maneuver.
  Like much of his speechifying, Mr. Trump's economic and business agenda is a mixture of opening bids and dog-whistle messages as well as some nuts-and-bolts proposals he might be able to put in effect as president, even without congressional approval. Sorting out what's what, though, isn't simple or safe. Just ask the pundits who wrote off Mr. Trump's candidacy as a sideshow even as he won one primary after another.
  For his part, Mr. Trump warns it would be a mistake to underestimate his ability to change the rules of the game.
  ''In my whole life, I've gotten things done,'' he said in an interview on Saturday. ''Whether it's getting a city built on the West Side of Manhattan or getting zoning board approvals, my whole life has been finding a consensus.''
  But when it comes to companies moving jobs out of the United States, he said a tougher tone was in order.
  ''I'm not Obama, and there are stupid people in our government,'' he said. ''With me, there will be consequences if you move, and the consequences will be severe.''
  In terms of coal and recovering all of those vanished jobs in West Virginia, Mr. Trump acknowledged that price competition from cheaper natural gas was fierce.
  ''But coal is still less expensive, and it has a major place in terms of energy,'' he said. And regulatory relief -- whether in terms of environmental rules or workplace safety -- would benefit the industry, he said.
  ''I have become very well versed on coal,'' Mr. Trump said. ''The regulations are brutal, and they are sending inspectors into the mines two and three times a day. Even the miners say it's out of control.''
  In law firms, corporate boardrooms, lobbyist watering holes and think tanks in Washington and beyond, experts are quietly assessing what a Trump presidency might actually look like in practice. Or to put it more bluntly, business is business. So whether they find Mr. Trump politically abhorrent or a welcome antidote to the status quo, these insiders also want to know what he might mean for their bottom line.
  National debate: ''Trump would put the bully in bully pulpit.''
  Perhaps the greatest opportunity for Mr. Trump lies in the extraordinary ability of any president to direct the tone and contours of the national debate, especially on issues he has highlighted, like how American companies should treat their American workers. And unlike most past Republican candidates, Mr. Trump has not been reluctant to criticize big business on that topic.
  ''Donald Trump would put the bully in bully pulpit,'' said Seth Harris, who served as a top official in the Labor Department under Democratic presidents.
  Immigration: ''Where the president's power is least restricted.''
  Consider immigration, one of Mr. Trump's signature issues. He might well be able to deliver on one of his central campaign promises: handing out fewer green cards to foreign workers, or denying a place to H-1B visa holders unless their American employers agree to pay them more.
  ''There's a reason why so many of Trump's proposals revolve around the idea of denying visas to people,'' said William A. Stock, a lawyer in Philadelphia who is the president-elect of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. ''That's where the president's power is least restricted, if he asserts it.''
  The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, Mr. Stock said, gives the president ''the ability to suspend the entry of foreign nationals whose entry is deemed to be detrimental to the interests of the U.S.''
  Noting that recent administrations have invoked the law to forbid entry to individuals from the former Yugoslavia accused of human rights violations, as well as to Cuban and Iranian government officials, Mr. Stock said, ''This is a tool that is pretty powerful, but it's usually been used in more limited instances.''
  Financial reform: ''When it comes to regulation, people are policy.''
  And what about ''dismantling'' the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial law, as Mr. Trump promised this month?
  Repealing the law might be difficult, but experts who helped draft the regulations agreed that Mr. Trump could defang them through selective enforcement -- appointing different officials to the Federal Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Commission -- and by issuing new executive orders.
  A President Trump would have wide latitude to name his own people to oversee less conspicuous but powerful agencies like the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and to seed Treasury and other government departments with like-minded officials.
  ''When it comes to regulation, people are policy,'' said Aaron Klein, a top official at the Treasury Department from 2009 to 2012 and helped draft the Dodd-Frank bill. ''Regulators who don't want to regulate can thwart the will of Congress.''
  But the president's reach isn't unlimited. Nor is it speedy. And however stupendous Mr. Trump's deal-making skills may be, the forces of gridlock in the nation's capital are no less awesome.
  ''The system doesn't change,'' said Tom Korologos, a longtime Republican strategist and an adviser at the law firm DLA Piper in Washington. ''Trump can say, 'I'm going to repeal this or I'm going to repeal that,' but it's going to take longer than 100 days.''
  Mr. Korologos, who served on the transition teams of President Ronald Reagan and President George W. Bush, isn't supporting Mr. Trump this year. He added that while the presumptive Republican nominee's promises might make ''for nice talking points, it will be harder than he thinks.''
  Tax cuts: A Republican Congress is unlikely to accept a $10 trillion deficit over 10 years.
  That's especially true when it comes to the macroeconomic picture. Mr. Trump claims his proposal for sweeping tax cuts for individuals and businesses wouldn't bust the budget and could lift the economy's annual growth rate to 6 percent.
  More sober-minded experts say that's magical thinking, a 2016 version of ''voodoo economics,'' as President George H. W. Bush famously described what came to be known as Reaganomics in the 1980s. They estimate Mr. Trump's tax plan could create a $10 trillion shortfall at the Treasury over the next decade, and note that annual economic growth has topped 5 percent only once in the last 35 years.
  ''I have a hard time believing that even a Republican Congress would enact his tax plan, because it would create enormous deficits,'' said William G. Gale, an economist under the first President Bush who is now co-director of the Tax Policy Center in Washington.
  Mr. Trump responded that ''those tax cuts go hand in hand with many other things.''
  As a result of getting tough on trade policy and what he considers currency manipulation by China, Mr. Trump argues that more jobs would return to the United States, which in turn would spur economic growth and therefore tax revenues.
  Whether or not that's realistic, any significant alteration in trade or tax policy means winning over the House Ways and Means Committee and the Senate Finance Committee, both of which zealously guard their turf. ''This is what makes them tick,'' Mr. Korologos said. ''It's going to take more than just a bunch of rhetoric to change things.''
  Labor: An ebb and flow when administrations change hands in Washington.
  Like Mr. Korologos, Mr. Harris, the former Labor Department official, has seen the ebb and flow when administrations change hands in Washington. Except he was on the opposite side of the aisle, having served on the Democratic transition teams after President Bill Clinton was elected in 1992 and after President Obama's victory in 2008.
  At Labor, where he was a top adviser under Mr. Clinton, and then as deputy secretary in the Obama administration, Mr. Harris saw firsthand just how much influence the president could have.
  Tasked with enforcing regulations on whether companies are abiding by minimum wage requirements, child labor restrictions, affirmative action guidelines, workplace safety rules and a web of other laws, Mr. Harris said, the Labor Department has never been very popular with big business or the Republican candidates it supports.
  And when George W. Bush succeeded Bill Clinton, the change was swift, Mr. Harris said. Budgets were cut, and travel to inspect factories and mines decreased. There was less emphasis on enforcement, going into workplaces and punishing violations, he said, and more on educating employers about potential infractions.
  After Mr. Harris returned to the Labor Department in 2009, budgets were increased, and surprise workplace inspections were resumed.
  ''We investigated more deeply, enforced procedures, and were more likely to find violations,'' he said. ''There was no executive order or action by Congress or the White House. We just did it. The laws existed -- it was a matter of whether you were going to solve the problem aggressively or be more passive.''
  Republicans, including Mr. Trump, have long argued that regulatory zeal kills jobs and undermines economic growth. Democrats maintain it is necessary to protect employees from abuses and risks, while imposing checks on the power of big companies.
  Both arguments contain elements of truth. But Mr. Harris said that what was critical was that rank-and-file civil servants quickly adapted to the message coming down from the Oval Office.
  ''The president sets the tone for how our government is going to relate to our country,'' said Mr. Harris, who is now a lawyer in private practice in Washington. ''How the laws are implemented and enforced, how the money is spent and how motivated people are to do their job.''
  Health care: ''Selling insurance isn't like selling credit cards.''
  Dodd-Frank isn't the only big Obama-era law Mr. Trump has talked about repealing. The other prominent target of Mr. Trump's ire -- the Affordable Care Act -- would be trickier to dispose of.
  Even if Republicans controlled the White House and both houses of Congress, simply repealing the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, could bring on a political backlash from the 12.7 million Americans who are directly covered under the law, not to mention millions more who benefit from provisions like those that allow young adults to be covered under their parents' policy and those that prevent insurers from dropping coverage for pre-existing conditions.
  Moreover, Mr. Trump displays a lack of understanding of how health insurance works. For example, one specific change in the A.C.A. that Mr. Trump, along with other Republican candidates, has called for -- allowing insurers to sell policies across state lines -- is permitted under the law now.
  The problem, said Nicholas Bagley, a professor of law at the University of Michigan, is that insurers don't want to do it because it's not practical. ''Selling insurance isn't like selling credit cards,'' Mr. Bagley said. ''Out-of-state health insurers don't have networks of doctors and hospitals in place. The problem isn't legal restraints, and it's not a solution to what ails the health care economy.''
  Mr. Trump responded that deregulation is still the answer, despite the skepticism of experts like Mr. Bagley.
  ''The problem is rules, regulations and restrictions,'' he said. ''You're going to have rate increases that are catastrophic, and the deductibles are so high people can't even use the health care. If it was really open and you got competition going, amazing things will happen.''
  Environment: Sending ''a chill down the spine'' of people who enforce the laws.
  Environmental regulation offers a more promising target for Mr. Trump, who has called the Environmental Protection Agency a laughingstock and a disgrace, and has promised to cut its budget.
  In fact, in the absence of congressional action, the Trump administration could target many other environmental regulations by simply going after the people who enforce them, said Don Barry, who spent two decades at the Interior Department and directed the United States Fish and Wildlife Service under President Clinton.
  Decades later, Mr. Barry still recalls how a round of firings in the Interior Department at the dawn of the Reagan administration signaled a turnabout in policy. ''The single biggest thing they can do is send a chill down the spine of career survivors in the bureaucracy and bring things to a halt,'' he said.
  Similarly, a Trump administration might be willing to approve state environmental plans that are more friendly to fossil fuels, said Kevin Book, head of research at ClearView Energy Partners. Proposed, but not completed, clean-water regulations aimed at restricting mountaintop-removal mining for coal in West Virginia could be eased, he said.
  Trade: Trump can punish countries, but jobs are unlikely to return.
  Still, even if Mr. Trump were to win in November and roll back some environmental regulations, it wouldn't significantly alter the fate of Mingo County and much of the nation's depressed coal industry.
  ''Taking a more lenient stance on clean-air or clean-water rules would do nothing to help coal demand,'' Mr. Book said. ''Coal-fired power plants have been mothballed and are being disassembled, and that capacity is gone. It's not even close to something you could reverse by administrative fiat.''
  If Washington's ability to gridlock even the most ambitious of presidential agendas were to block Mr. Trump's White House plans, he would still have the bully pulpit, of course. And unlike Theodore Roosevelt, who coined that term, Mr. Trump probably wouldn't speak softly.
  Still, that might not be enough to keep Oreos baking in Chicago. Nabisco's bakery there isn't shuttering completely as Mr. Trump has suggested, but some Oreo production will begin shifting to Salinas, Mexico -- where Mondelez, Nabisco's corporate parent, has invested $130 million to build new lines. Oreos will also continue to be produced at Nabisco bakeries in Virginia, New Jersey and Oregon.
  Announced in July 2015, the Nabisco layoffs in Chicago continued during the Illinois primary in March, despite jabs from Mr. Trump and both Democratic presidential contenders, Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders.
  United Technologies is similarly unlikely to rethink Carrier's move out of Indianapolis. And in an era when Apple is willing to fight the Obama administration's efforts to unlock an iPhone on national security grounds, more corporate defiance may become the norm.
  Blanketing countries from China to Mexico with import duties would be a tall order without congressional approval. The White House, though, does retain plenty of leeway to punish countries it thinks are engaged in currency manipulation, dumping of products below the cost of production and other free-trade abuses.
  The problem for Mr. Trump -- or any president who wants to get tough on trade violators -- is that, in the global economy, imposing tariffs on competitors abroad could have serious economic consequences at home by sharply raising prices on imported goods.
  Cheaper flat-screen televisions, computers, clothes, furniture and other products from Walmart, Amazon and elsewhere have been a rare bright spot for struggling working- and middle-class Americans. And trade wars cut both ways: Retaliatory tariffs on American-made products from countries like China would prompt howls of pain at still strong domestic manufacturers like Caterpillar and Boeing.
  But for all the uncertainty around what might happen after Jan. 20, 2017, the lawyers and lobbyists who are now trying to gauge a Trump presidency are already emerging as winners. Mr. Trump's much-talked-about unpredictability, Mr. Korologos said, is proving to be a boon for Washington's legions of lobbyists.
  ''Corporate America hates the unknown,'' he said. ''God only knows what the hell Trump is for. And corporate America is going to want someone to save them.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/22/business/economic-promises-a-president-trump-could-and-couldnt-keep.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Perhaps Donald Trump's greatest opportunity if he wins the White House would lie in the ability any president has to direct the tone and contours of the national debate. (BU4)
 Donald Trump has told his supporters that change would happen fast if he is elected. But a Republican strategist disagreed, saying, ''It's going to take more than just a bunch of rhetoric to change things.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAMON WINTER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU5) DRAWING (DRAWING BY TOM GRILLO)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BUSINESS NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); MINE WORKERS (78%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (76%); ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION & POLICY (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); TAXES & TAXATION (73%); ECONOMICS (72%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (72%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION (71%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (71%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (69%)

Company:  BUREAU OF BUSINESS PRACTICE (52%)

Industry: SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (52%); COAL MINING (89%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (89%); COAL INDUSTRY (78%); MINE WORKERS (78%); AUTOMOTIVE FUELS (76%); ENERGY & UTILITY REGULATION & POLICY (76%); HYDRAULIC FRACTURING (75%); NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (75%); ALTERNATIVE & RENEWABLE ENERGY (69%); WIND ENERGY (69%); MARKET SHARE (66%); NATURAL GAS (63%); IRON & STEEL MILLS (62%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%)

Geographic: CHARLESTON, WV, USA (90%); WEST VIRGINIA, USA (93%); ASIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: May 22, 2016


End of Document
Your Thursday Briefing
The New York Times 
April 22, 2020 Wednesday 18:26 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1675 words
Byline: Carole Landry
Highlight: Let us help you start your day. 
Body


Good morning.
We’re covering global instability from plummeting oil prices, anger in the Indian diaspora about U.S. immigration and a looming hunger crisis.
Collapsing oil prices are upending the world
The collapse in oil prices brought on by the coronavirus pandemic spells disaster for countries like Nigeria and Venezuela that rely on oil production for their economic survival.
“No one imagined a crisis of this scope. This was in no scenario,” one global energy expert said.
Our reporters looked at the destabilizing effects of the oil-coronavirus shock in countries around the world.
Here are the latest updates on the pandemic as well as updated maps.
    • Oil prices, which had been sinking since lockdown orders sharply cut demand in late February, reversed some of the tremendous losses of recent days, leading U.S. and European stocks to rally.
    • Eight infants and toddlers at a care center in Tokyo tested positive for the coronavirus, raising concerns about a wider outbreak at Japanese care facilities for neglected or abused children.
    • Taiwan is competing with Chinaon pandemic aid diplomacy, promoting itself as a model of democracy, in defiance of Beijing’s efforts to isolate the self-ruled island that it claims as its own.
    • British lawmakers carried out their normally boisterous question-and-answer session in the House of Commons by video link. Just a few dozen lawmakers sat in the chamber, to comply with social distancing rules.
    • The first death from the virus in the U.S. was earlier than previously thought. A medical examiner in Santa Clara County, California, said two residents there died of the coronavirus in early and mid-February, weeks earlier than was previously known. (See our Back Story below.)
The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.
U.S. immigration restrictions unsettle the Indian diaspora
A majority of the 800,000 immigrants currently wait-listed for a green card to live or work in the U.S. are Indian nationals, and many of them fill specialized roles in the tech sector for companies like Google and Apple.
So after President Trump announced a suspension of issuing green cards, members of the Indian community expressed fears over their futures.
“I likely won’t receive a green card in this lifetime unless the laws change,” said an electrical engineer who applied for a green card in 2011.
The potential for family separation is another concern: “I am afraid of losing everything,” said an Indian software developer in Atlanta, whose daughters are naturalized American citizens. “This is not really about a job. It is about dreams.”
Mr. Trump has suggested that further immigration restrictions are not out of the question, though they would be unlikely to immediately impact other popular visa programs like H-1B.
Rationale: Mr. Trump, who has taken a number of measures against immigration through his presidency, says that his latest moves are meant to protect jobs for Americans put out of work by the pandemic.
Chinese trolls are pushing disinformation, U.S. says
Alarming messages that popped up last month on the cellphones and social media feeds of millions of Americans warned that the Trump administration was about to lock down the entire country.
U.S. intelligence agencies have determined that the warnings were amplified by Chinese operatives.
American officials said the operatives had adopted some of the techniques mastered by Russia-backed trolls, like creating fake social media accounts to push false messages to receptive Americans, who in turn unwittingly help spread them.
Related: China’s state propaganda machine has highlighted other countries’ mistakes during the pandemic while suppressing domestic problems, fueling anger toward foreigners and domestic critics alike, our columnist writes.
If you have 7 minutes, this is worth it
‘Instead of coronavirus, hunger will kill us’
Lockdowns are drying up work and incomes, leaving millions to worry about getting enough to eat. The World Food Program estimates that 265 million people could be pushed to the brink of starvation by year’s end — 130 million more than expected before the pandemic.
Our reporters spoke to people worldwide who are alarmed: a migrant worker in Delhi, a construction worker displaced from his home in Syria, an aid worker in a Nairobi shantytown.
Here’s what else is happening
U.S.-Iran tensions: President Trump told the Navy to “shoot down” and destroy any Iranian gunboats that harass U.S. naval ships. The threat came a week after the Pentagon accused Iranian boats of “dangerous” approaches to U.S. warships in the Persian Gulf.
Iranian satellite: Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps said it put a military satellite into orbit for the first time, a surprise launch that came during wider tensions with the U.S. The launch has not been independently confirmed.
Indian tech: Facebook made its largest single investment by putting $5.7 billion into Jio Platforms of India, a subsidiary of Reliance Industries. Facebook intends to bring together its WhatsApp service and JioMart, Jio’s small-business initiative.
U.S. presidential campaign: Polls show that Joe Biden leads Donald Trump by just under six percentage points among registered voters, but they also indicate that Mr. Biden, the former vice president, has gained appeal among older voters while support for President Trump has grown among nonwhite voters.
Snapshot: Above, two nuns label food products for sale at thePhoka Nunnery of St. Nino in the country of Georgia. The photojournalist Robert Presutti has visited the nunnery, which is housed in a restored 11th-century church, several times over the years. His report is the latest in our travel series “The World Through a Lens.”
What we’re reading: Outside’s deep dive on the eruption of the volcano on White Island in New Zealand. Elisabeth Goodridge, our deputy travel editor, calls it “a well-written, thoroughly reported and very, very gripping read, which shines a light on the risks of adventure tourism and the question of who’s responsible when disaster strikes.”
Now, a break from the news
Cook: Meatballs work with almost any meat, including vegan substitutes. And once you master the basics, you can change the seasonings for lots of variety.
Explore: The Lyrid meteor shower will reward anyone with a clear view of the night sky. We have art to discover and Merce Cunningham choreography to learn. And check in on these graphic designers and illustrators to see what they’ve been up to.
Cope: Here’s how to be a good roommate at this juncture in history, as well as how to get your garden going. And wouldn’t you like your kids to treat you the way they treated their teacher, in the days before home schooling?
Need a little inspiration? We have many more ideas on things to cook, watch, read and do on our At Home page.
And now for the Back Story on …
A new U.S. timeline for the coronavirus
News that a person who died in Santa Clara County, California, on Feb. 6 had the coronavirus has raised questions about the timeline of the U.S. outbreak, which is by far the world’s largest. To get a scientific view of the implications, we spoke to Carl Zimmer, a science reporter, Times columnist and the author of the book “A Planet of Viruses.”
What do we know about the timing of the virus’s arrival in the U.S.?
The virus itself jumped from bats into humans in Asia, most likely China. Then there’s the outbreak in Wuhan, picking up speed in December. Then it’s in Europe, probably in early January.
Studies of samples of virus from New York showed that the vast majority belonged to lineages introduced from Europe, and probably arrived early to mid-February. You can see this from minor but telltale mutations in their genes that act like a signature. What the New York viruses are most similar to is not the viruses in Italy, but viruses in England, in France, in Belgium. It looks like a lot of viruses were moving around in Europe, and some were brought to the United States.
The evidence from California indicates it was arriving there by early or mid-January.
Could the virus have been circulating in California even earlier?
Scientists don’t believe Covid was raging in California in November. Looking at virus genes, they can see it was just getting started around then in Wuhan. They don’t see the kind of hospitalizations in California you’d see if it was taking off. We know what it’s like when Covid-19 takes off, and it was not happening in November.
What are you looking for next?
In the autopsy for the Feb. 6 case, all they needed to find to confirm that this person had Covid-19 was some fragments of the virus’s genes.
If you really want to know more, you need the whole genome — all the genetic material in the virus. Then, looking at the mutations, you can see where the virus came from and you can start getting some guesses about how it got there.
But we’re dealing here with a deceased person. The virus in their remains is breaking down.
Still, it’s possible that scientists may be able to extract enough virus to put the genome back together. I’m hoping for that.
That’s it for this briefing. See you next time.
— Carole
Thank you
To Melissa Clark for the recipe, and to Theodore Kim and Jahaan Singh for the rest of the break from the news. Andrea Kannapell, the Briefings editor, wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at briefing@nytimes.com.
P.S.
 We’re listening to “The Daily.” Our latest episode is about protests in the U.S. against stay-at-home orders.
 Here’s our Mini Crossword, and a clue: Varieties (five letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
 The Times print edition was named World’s Best Designed Newspaper for the third straight year by the Society for News Design, and our Photo and Video teams won six World Press Photo awards.
PHOTO: A worker wearing a mask following an outbreak in March at an oil field north of Basra, Iraq. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Essam Al-Sudani/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EPIDEMICS (92%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); OIL & GAS PRICES (90%); OIL PRICE CRASHES (90%); PANDEMICS (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); VIRUSES (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); MIGRATION ISSUES (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (84%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (77%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); SOCIAL DISTANCING (77%); JOURNALISM (76%); ABUSE & NEGLECT (73%); CHILD ABUSE & NEGLECT (73%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (72%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (71%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (71%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (68%); CORONERS COURTS & OFFICES (64%); TECHNOLOGY (64%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (63%)

Industry: OIL & GAS PRICES (90%); OIL PRICE CRASHES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (63%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (60%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (60%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (50%)

Geographic: TOKYO, JAPAN (76%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (73%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); NIGERIA (79%); TAIWAN (79%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Lottery Used To Narrow Work Visa Petitions - Correction Appended
The New York Times
April 14, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 9
Length: 745 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Swamped by petitions for work visas from highly educated or skilled foreigners, immigration authorities have conducted a lottery for the first time to determine which ones will be considered, federal officials announced yesterday.
  A computer randomly selected 65,000 petitions from among the 123,480 that had passed a preliminary check for eligibility, said Shawn Saucier, a spokesman for the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency that oversees the visas.
 The lottery, conducted Thursday, brought cries of pain from technology companies and immigration lawyers around the country. They lamented the limit that Congress has imposed on the high-skilled visas, known as H-1B, and the luck-of-the-draw method to make the cut.
  ''The people we need to contribute to our innovation economy are being subjected to a perverse form of 'Wheel of Fortune,' '' said Robert Hoffman, vice president for government and public affairs at the Oracle Corporation, the information software giant based in Redwood Shores, Calif.
  The immigration authorities resorted to the lottery after the annual ceiling for the visas was exceeded by the cascade of petitions it received on April 2, the first day of the application period. In all, the agency received 133,000 packages with visa petitions on April 2 and 3, more than double the 65,000 high-skilled visas that are available for the year beginning Oct. 1.
  For the past three years, petitions for the visas have far exceeded the cap. But this year was the first time that the cap was surpassed on the first day, triggering the lottery, according to the agency's regulations.
  The H-1B visas are three-year work visas for immigrants who have at least a bachelor's degree, either from an American or a foreign university. Immigrants seeking the visas generally are young adults who are software and computer engineers, construction engineers, doctors and nurses, mathematicians and scientists.
  In 2005, the last year for which figures are available, about 40 percent of the visas went to immigrants from India. About 54 percent of the immigrants who received the visas that year had a master's degree, a doctorate or a professional degree. High-skilled visa holders can extend for another three years before they must return home. They can also apply to become permanent residents.
  With about half of this year's applicants eliminated in the lottery, thousands of immigrants waiting overseas for jobs and foreign students graduating from American colleges have been left in limbo.
  ''Many members of the Class of 2007 effectively received deportation orders and lost their post-graduation jobs last week,'' said an April 9 editorial in The Harvard Crimson, the student newspaper. Harvard seniors would not be able to apply for this year's high-skilled visas until after they graduated in June.
  For three years after 2001, the visa limit was raised by Congress to 195,000. It reverted to the 65,000 in 2003. The immigration agency is still accepting petitions for H-1B visas from those with advanced degrees from American universities, who do not fall under the limit of 65,000.
  Some critics of the visas argue that American companies use them to hire foreign software programmers with unexceptional skills who may be willing to work for lower wages than Americans.
  ''If you wanted to find a labor shortage, you would look at the data and ask if there has been dramatic wage growth among those workers,'' said Steven Camarota, research director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which favors curbing immigration. ''We just don't find evidence that wages are rising.''
  Corporate executives and lawyers said that employers seeking visas for immigrants must demonstrate to the Department of Labor that no American workers are available.
  ''There are penalties, and the Department of Labor really is enforcing these rules,'' said Angelo A. Paparelli, an immigration lawyer. ''So where's the harm?''
  Several lawyers warned that businesses that could not hire skilled foreign employees might move abroad.
  Mr. Hoffman said Oracle hired 100 to 125 new H-1B visa workers each year, mainly software engineers, many of them foreign graduates of engineering programs in American colleges. ''The competition for this talent is global,'' he said.
  Mr. Saucier said Citizenship and Immigration Services would review the petitions to decide whether the applicants who survived the lottery met the requirements for approval.

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


An article on Saturday about a lottery by immigration authorities to select applicants for 65,000 visas for highly skilled foreign workers misstated the requirements employers must meet in order to sponsor the visas, known as H-1B. For most of these visas, employers must affirm to the Labor Department that they will pay the immigrant at least the prevailing wage for the job and that hiring the immigrant would not negatively affect the labor conditions of United States workers in similar jobs. Employers do not have to show that no American workers were available for the job.
Correction-Date: April 18, 2007
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION (93%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (88%); CITIZENSHIP (79%); FOREIGN LABOR (79%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); ENGINEERING (75%); DEPORTATION (73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (71%); ADULTS (69%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION GRADUATION (67%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (67%); CIVIL ENGINEERING (61%); NURSES & NURSING (61%); Labor (%); Lotteries (%); Visas (%); Foreign Labor (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Immigration and Refugees (%)

Company:  ORACLE CORP (84%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (83%); Citizenship and Immigration Services

Ticker: ORCL (NYSE) (84%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (84%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (84%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (84%); SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (84%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (84%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (84%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); ENGINEERING (75%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (72%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (71%); CIVIL ENGINEERING (61%); NURSES & NURSING (61%)

Person: Julia Preston

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 14, 2007


End of Document
Laid-Off Americans, Required to Zip Lips on Way Out, Grow Bolder
The New York Times 
June 11, 2016 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1527 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Those who have lost jobs to foreigners on temporary visas, in particular, have begun to speak out despite their severance agreements with companies.
Body


LIBERTYVILLE, Ill. - American corporations are under new scrutiny from federal lawmakers after well-publicized episodes in which the companies laid off American workers and gave the jobs to foreigners on temporary visas.
But while corporate executives have been outspoken in defending their labor practices before Congress and the public, the American workers who lost jobs to global outsourcing companies have been largely silent.
Until recently. Now some of the workers who were displaced are starting to speak out, despite severance agreements prohibiting them from criticizing their former employers.
Marco Peña was among about 150 technology workers who were laid off in April by Abbott Laboratories, a global health care conglomerate with headquarters here. They handed in their badges and computer passwords, and turned over their work to a company based in India. But Mr. Peña, who had worked at Abbott for 12 years, said he had decided not to sign the agreement that was given to all departing employees, which included a nondisparagement clause.
Mr. Peña said his choice cost him at least $10,000 in severance pay. But on an April evening after he walked out of Abbott's tree-lined campus here for the last time, he spent a few hours in a local bar at a gathering organized by technology worker advocates, speaking his mind about a job he had loved and lost.
"I just didn't feel right about signing," Mr. Peña said. "The clauses were pretty blanket. I felt like they were eroding my rights."
Leading members of Congress from both major parties have questioned the nondisparagement agreements, which are commonly used by corporations but can prohibit ousted workers from raising complaints about what they see as a misuse of temporary visas. Lawmakers, including Richard Durbin of Illinois, the second-highest-ranking Senate Democrat, and Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the Republican chairman of theSenate Judiciary           Subcommittee on Immigration, have proposed revisions to visa laws to include measures allowing former employees to contest their layoffs.
"I have heard from workers who are fearful of retaliation," said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. "They are told they can say whatever they want, except they can't say anything negative about being fired."
Lawyers said the paragraph Mr. Peña and other workers object to in their separation agreements is routine in final contracts with employees who are paid severance as they leave, whether they were laid off or resigned voluntarily.
"It's a very, very common practice," said Sheena R. Hamilton, an employment lawyer at Dowd Bennett in St. Louis who represents companies in workplace cases. "I've never recommended a settlement that didn't have a clause like that."
But former Abbott employees said the provisions had stopped them from speaking openly with elected officials or appearing at congressional hearings.
"It is very frustrating that you can't share your story with the public," said one former Abbott manager, who had worked for the company for 13 years, rising to an important supervisory position. He had prepared a 90-page manual for his foreign replacements showing how to perform every detail of his work. With a disabled child who requires medical care, he said he had to take his severance and its nondisparagement clause, since it extended his medical benefits. So he asked to remain anonymous.
"I've been laid off before, I can understand that," he said. "But these visas were meant to fill in gaps for resources that are hard to find. This time the company actually asked me to transfer my knowledge to somebody else. That changes the equation."
According to federal rules, temporary visas known as H-1Bs are for foreigners with "a body of specialized knowledge" not readily available in the labor market. The visas should be granted only when they will not undercut the wages or "adversely affect the working conditions" of Americans.
But in the past five years, through loopholes in the rules, tens of thousands of American workers have been replaced by foreigners on H-1B and other temporary visas, according to Prof. Hal Salzman, a labor force expert at Rutgers University.
In March, two Americans who had been laid off in 2014 by a New England power company, Eversource Energy, spoke at a news conference in Hartford even though they had signed nondisparagement agreements. Craig Diangelo, 63, and Judy Konopka, 56, said most of the 220 people facing dismissal had been required as part of their severance to train Indian immigrants with H-1B and other visas.
In a protest, departing employees posted American flags outside their cubicles. As they left, they took the flags down. Mr. Diangelo took a photograph of the flags in his final days at the utility. At the time, he and Ms. Konopka spoke with reporters, including from The New York Times, but they did not want to be quoted, even without their names.
In January, Senator Blumenthal spotted the photograph in an article in Computerworld, a tech industry publication, and was dismayed to learn of the layoffs so long after they happened. In a            letter to the company, the senator questioned whether the dismissals were "accomplished through apparent abuses" of visas, and he demanded assurances that former employees would not be sued if they spoke with government officials.
In a forceful reply, the Eversource general counsel, Gregory B. Butler, said the company had not violated any laws, and its nondisparagement provisions were a "standard form release" that did not restrict former employees from discussing their layoffs "with you or anyone else."
Mr. Diangelo said he was not so sure the company would refrain from legal action if he spoke to the news media. But, he said, "I finally got to the point where I am tired of hiding in the shadows."
Two years later, his work with a local tech contracting company pays $45,000 a year less than his Eversource salary. Many of his former co-workers are also struggling, Mr. Diangelo said, but stay quiet to avoid provoking the company.
At Abbott, executives announced in February that technology jobs would be taken over by the Indian company Wipro. Senator Durbin, who is from Illinois, criticized the layoffs and said Abbott's nondisparagement clause was "overly broad."
According to a copy of the agreement, that clause read, in part: "You agree to make every effort to maintain and protect the reputation of Abbott and its products and agents."
A spokesman for Abbott, Scott Stoffel, said the changes were part of its efforts to "remain globally competitive and a strong U.S. employer." He said the company would retain "the vast majority" of its tech jobs in the United States. Nondisparagement clauses like Abbott's are "very common" in severance agreements, he said.
Mr. Peña said he could afford to turn down his severance payment because he is single and has no children. "I was the only one with the ability to put my foot down," he said.
He received consistently positive work reviews, and a merit raise weeks before his layoff, he said. With no indication that poor performance was a factor, he believed it was a measure to cut costs.
"Anything that had to deal with technology and resolving problems, that was my satisfaction, my passion," Mr. Peña said. "But these days that has no bearing on the decision making of the executives in the higher positions."
Abbott tried to reduce the role of foreigners in the layoffs. Only about 20 percent of the workers brought in by Wipro would be foreigners on H-1B visas, Mr. Stoffel said, while the rest would be American workers.
Mr. Peña said he had been told at first that he would train his Wipro replacements. But after Senator Durbin's rebuke, Wipro workers were trained only by employees who would be remaining with Abbott, he said.
He and 13 other former Abbott employees filed federal claims saying they faced discrimination because of their ages and American citizenship, said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing them. Those claims are confidential. Ms. Blackwell organized the tavern meeting where Abbott workers were invited to mourn their jobs. Of the small group that came, only Mr. Peña spoke up.
On April 20, about two dozen employees of EmblemHealth, a health insurer, protested outside its offices in Manhattan after the company announced that it would transfer about 200 tech jobs to Cognizant, another technology outsourcing company. Even though they were in the street holding signs, the employees declined to have their names used in news reports.
PHOTOS: Technology workers from Abbott Laboratories and supporters gathered in a North Chicago bar after the company laid off about 150 people in April. (A16); Marco Peña, laid off by Abbott, would not sign an agreement with a nondisparagement clause. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSHUA LOTT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)
Related Articles
    • Lawsuits Claim Disney Colluded to Replace U.S. Workers With Immigrants
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
    • Miscalculation on Visas Disrupts Lives of Highly Skilled Immigrants
    • Toys 'R' Us Brings Temporary Foreign Workers to U.S. to Move Jobs Overseas
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: LAYOFFS (99%); AGREEMENTS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SEVERANCE PAY (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); NONDISPARAGEMENT AGREEMENTS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (79%); OUTSOURCING (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); DISMISSALS (78%); EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); RESIGNATIONS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); LAWYERS (77%); CONGLOMERATES (73%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (73%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (70%); RANKINGS (62%); Outsourcing (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Abbott Laboratories (%); Eversource Energy (%); H-1B (%)

Company:  ABBOTT LABORATORIES (84%)

Ticker: ABT (SWX) (84%); ABT (NYSE) (84%); ABT (LSE) (84%); ABL (FRA) (84%); Abbott Laboratories; Abbott Laboratories; Eversource Energy

Industry: NAICS339113 SURGICAL APPLIANCE & SUPPLIES MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS339112 SURGICAL & MEDICAL INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325413 IN-VITRO DIAGNOSTIC SUBSTANCE MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325412 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325411 MEDICINAL & BOTANICAL MANUFACTURING (84%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (77%)

Person: JEFF SESSIONS (79%); RICHARD DURBIN (78%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (50%)

Geographic: ILLINOIS, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: November 30, 2016


End of Document
Protectionist Stance By Trump Strikes Fear In Workers From India
The New York Times
April 23, 2020 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1189 words
Byline: By Kai Schultz and Sameer Yasir
Body


Indian citizens fill critical jobs in the United States in tech and business. Now, they fear for their futures -- the ''upending of life by a tweet.''
NEW DELHI -- When President Trump announced via a late-night tweet that he would ''suspend immigration'' to protect American jobs from an economic tailspin caused by the coronavirus, Priyanka Nagar prepared for the worst. 
  For more than a decade, Ms. Nagar, an Indian citizen, had steadily built a life in the United States but she was now back in India, awaiting a visa extension. She and her husband, who works for Microsoft, have applied for green cards. They hung an American flag from their balcony in their home in Washington State, where Ms. Nagar had given birth to the couple's 5-year-old daughter.
  But when Ms. Nagar read Mr. Trump's tweet posted late Monday, while separated from her family in the United States, the thought of leaving her hard forged life behind without even a goodbye was devastating, she said.
  ''I beg the government not to think of us as enemies,'' Ms. Nagar, 39, a software developer, said. ''I want the U.S. to prosper. It has given us so much.''
  By Tuesday, Mr. Trump had ordered a 60-day halt in issuing green cards to prevent people from immigrating to the United States, backing away from his harder-edged plans to suspend guest worker programs after business groups erupted in anger at the prospect of losing labor from countries like India.
  But as millions of Americans file for unemployment, flooding food banks and hospitals, foreign workers worry that the pandemic will uproot them sooner rather than later.
  Immigrant groups warn that driven by what they call the Trump administration's protectionist impulses, the United States could purge some of its most talented workers, cutting into the vibrant multiculturalism that has made the United States such an attractive destination for decades.
  ''I cannot tell you the panic this has caused in the legal immigration community,'' Nandini Nair, an immigration lawyer based in New Jersey, said of Mr. Trump's ''upending of life by a tweet.''
  [Analysis: What will our post-virus normal feel like? Hints are beginning to emerge.]
  Further immigration restrictions could have particularly acute consequences for India, which sends thousands of highly skilled workers to the United States every year and counts a four million strong diaspora in the country, representing one of the largest contingents of immigrants to the United States.
  Visa programs like H-1B help fill specialty positions at companies like Google, Apple and Facebook. Indian-Americans are some of the country's most successful and wealthiest immigrants, with a particular stronghold in Silicon Valley's start-up scene.
  These days, Harkamal Singh Khural, 34, a software developer living in an Atlanta suburb, said he was barely sleeping. Even if the government did not push him out, he said a volatile job market meant his immigration status was already tenuous.
  The company that sponsors his H-1B visa has already let go of half of his team. His two daughters are United States citizens, meaning it was possible that his family could get separated.
  ''I am afraid of losing everything,'' Mr. Khural said. ''This is not really about a job. It is about dreams.''
  For now, programs like H-1B are unlikely to be immediately affected by the new restrictions. But on Tuesday, Mr. Trump left open the possibility of extending the ban on new green cards ''based on economic conditions at the time.''
  He suggested that he may also introduce a second executive order that could further restrict immigration, brushing aside studies showing that a flow of foreign labor into the country has an overall positive effect on the American work force and wages.
  ''We must first take care of the American worker,'' President Trump said, insisting that newly jobless citizens should not have to compete with foreigners when the economy reopens.
  Rights groups say the immigration process has become increasingly complex and frustrating in recent years, with Mr. Trump fanning the flames of anti-immigrant sentiment by pushing for an extensive wall along the Mexican border and labeling a group of African nations ''shithole countries.''
  For Indian citizens, building a more permanent base in the country was never easy.
  Most of the 800,000 immigrants currently waiting for a green card are Indian citizens. Because of quotas that limit the number of workers from each country, Indians can expect to wait up to 50 years for a green card since their representation among immigrants is so high in the United States.
  Last summer, the Fairness for High-Skilled Immigrants Act, which sought to address the backlog by eliminating country quotas, sailed through the House. But it stalled in the Senate, where critics like Senator Dick Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, argued that the bill would not solve the problem because it does not increase the overall number of green cards.
  Many Indian citizens said the back-and-forth was exhausting.
  ''I likely won't receive a green card in this lifetime unless the laws change,'' said Somak Goswami, an electrical engineer who applied for a green card in 2011. ''I have colleagues who came to the U.S. in 2017 and have a green card already. My only fault was I was born in India.''
  Analysts said immigration restrictions could strain the delicate but increasingly amicable relationship between India and the United States, the world's most populous democracies.
  In recent months, Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India have sought to build an even stronger alliance, trading compliments about each other onstage at glittering events in Houston and Ahmedabad, India.
  Milan Vaishnav, the director of the South Asia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, said, ''Any action that appears to infringe on the mobility of Indians or Indian-Americans will be strongly resisted.''
  ''Suffice it to say, this will not go over well in India,'' he said of stricter immigration controls. ''Prime Minister Modi has made outreach to the diaspora community in America and elsewhere a cornerstone of his foreign policy.''
  In India, Ms. Nagar, who is staying with her parents in the state of Uttar Pradesh, said she was trying to remain hopeful, telling herself to ''live today and wait for tomorrow.''
  But with international airspace largely closed, embassies shut for visa processing and the added stress of immigration restrictions, Ms. Nagar worried that the extension of her H-1B visa might be delayed by many more months, prolonging the separation from her family and raising the possibility that they may have to leave the United States entirely.
  Over a video call, Ms. Nagar's daughter, a kindergarten student, told her: ''Mommy, when the virus dies, you'll come. I'll wait for the virus to die.'' When video conversations with her daughter end, Ms. Nagar said she sometimes lies in bed and cries.
  ''In the U.S., you have the whole world working together toward a common goal,'' she said. ''You cannot find that diversity anywhere else. I love this country.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/22/world/asia/india-immigration-trump-coronavirus.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Families at a Hindu temple in New York City in 2016. Indians are one of the largest immigrant groups in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ESSENTIAL BUSINESSES & WORKERS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); JOBLESS CLAIMS (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); STRIKES (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); CORONAVIRUSES (76%); EPIDEMICS (76%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (76%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (73%); VIRUSES (71%); FOOD BANKS & SOUP KITCHENS (67%); LAWYERS (60%); FOOD CHARITIES (50%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (57%);  MICROSOFT CORP (57%);  FACEBOOK INC (50%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (57%); FB (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (57%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (57%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (69%); LAWYERS (60%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (94%)

Load-Date: April 23, 2020


End of Document
Parsing the Truths About Visas for Tech Workers
The New York Times
April 15, 2007 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4; ECONOMIC VIEW
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR; Anand Giridharadas contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
Body


THE United States has benefited immensely from its role as a magnet for the best and brightest workers from around the world, especially in innovative fields like high technology. Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, sounded precisely that theme in Senate testimony last month when asked about the visa program for skilled workers, the H-1B.
  Mr. Gates said that these workers are ''uniquely talented'' and highly paid -- ''taking jobs that pay over $100,000 a year'' -- and that America should ''welcome as many of those people as we can get.''
But that is not how the H-1B visa program as a whole is working these days, according to an analysis by Ronil Hira, an assistant professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology. The median salary for new H-1B holders in the information technology industry is actually about $50,000, based on the most recent data filed by companies with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services agency. That wage level, Mr. Hira says, is the same as starting salaries for graduating computer science majors with bachelor's degrees.
  Yet salaries, according to Mr. Hira, are only part of the story. He says that while Microsoft may be paying its H-1B visa holders well and recruiting people with hard-to-find talents, other companies have a different agenda. The H-1B visa program, Mr. Hira asserts, has become a vehicle for accelerating the pace of offshore outsourcing of computing work, sending more jobs abroad. Holders of H-1B visas, he says, do the on-site work of understanding a client's needs and specifications -- and then most of the software coding is done back in India.
  ''Information technology offshore outsourcing has just swamped the H-1B program in recent years,'' he said. The list of the top 10 companies requesting H-1B visas in fiscal 2006, the most recent government data available, was dominated by Indian-based technology outsourcing companies like Infosys Technologies, Wipro Technologies and Tata Consultancy Services, and a few other companies that offer outsourced services and have sizable operations in India like Cognizant Technology Solutions, Accenture and Deloitte & Touche, according to a paper last month by Mr. Hira, which was published by the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal research group. 
  Over the years, the H-1B visa, which allows a person to work in the United States for three years and can be renewed for an additional three, has been used by many people as a steppingstone to becoming a permanent resident. Traditionally, about half of all H-1B holders eventually get green cards, immigration experts say.
  Yet the major outsourcing companies, while seeking thousands of H-1B visas, are asking for relative handfuls of green cards, according to government figures.
  The statistics marshaled by Mr. Hira are not absolutely conclusive. The reported company-by-company numbers are for H-1B visas requested, not granted, but that is because the government does not publish visa counts by company. Since the visas are granted on a first-come-first-served basis, it seems reasonable that the companies seeking the most visas would, proportionately, get the most.
  It is not just critics like Mr. Hira who point to the crucial role that the H-1B visa program plays in the fast-growing global outsourcing industry. ''It has become the outsourcing visa,'' said Kamal Nath, the commerce minister of India.
  But is that a bad thing? Many economists say that paving the way for more efficient global trade in technology services should be a policy goal, and that the American economy will be more competitive and create more jobs as a result. Technology services like software programming and maintenance, they say, are an ''input,'' in economic terms, in industries from banking to manufacturing.
  It used to be that all the parts in a car or a computer were made in a single country; now they are manufactured wherever it is most efficient. The same thing is happening in technology services. ''We're seeing this growing international division of labor in services just as we saw in manufacturing decades ago,'' said Aaditya Mattoo, an economist at the World Bank.
  Still, the issue behind the H-1B controversy is how a nation devises a policy to benefit from global trade in technology services while treating its own workers fairly. The proposals before Congress range from significantly expanding the visa quota to tightening rules to protect American workers. 
  This month, the government announced that it had received more petitions for H-1B visas in one day than it could grant in the entire fiscal year that begins in October. It received 150,000 petitions; the current visa cap is 65,000. Technology lobbying groups declared that the immediate overflow demand for H-1B visas was proof of the skills shortage in the United States and the need for a sharply higher visa limit. But some immigration policy experts and economists say that this argument fails a simple test of economics. It is not surprising, they say, that global companies -- including I.B.M., Microsoft and Oracle -- that benefit from the H-1B program would like to see it enlarged. ''There is no labor market test, using technically sound criteria, to determine whether or not there is a shortage,'' said David M. Hart, an associate professor of public policy at George Mason University. The measures, Mr. Hart suggests, would include recent wage trends and unemployment rates in specific professions.
  Other suggested changes include phasing out caps but holding auctions for H-1B visas in, say, lots of 30,000. After the first auction, the bidding for the next batch would begin at the high end of the initial sale's prices. In 1994, a commission appointed by Congress recommended letting companies hire skilled foreign workers easily if the employers paid a $10,000-a-person fee that would go into a fund to train domestic workers. And there might be a limit on the number of visas that any one company can get.
  ''How to match policies to people in this emerging global labor market is something we really haven't thought through yet,'' said B. Lindsay Lowell, director of policy studies at the Institute for the Study of International Migration at Georgetown University. The current system, he said, tends to depend too much on the companies and how they use the complicated work-visa program. 
  Microsoft, it seems, is paying its H-1B holders quite well -- a median salary of $82,500 for new visa applicants, whose wages over the subsequent three to six years could well rise to about the $100,000 Mr. Gates mentioned. And in fiscal 2006, Microsoft applied for 1,181 green cards and 4,471 H-1B's, a ratio of more than 26 percent. For the leading Indian outsourcing companies, the ratio was less than 1 percent.
  ''Microsoft may well be using the program to bring in the best and the brightest,'' Mr. Hira said. ''But it's definitely not representative of how the H-1B program is being used today.''  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: Employees at the training center of Infosys Technologies in Mysore, India. Infosys and others that specialize in outsourcing top the list of companies requesting H-1B visas. (Photo by Aijaz Rahi/Associated Press)
 Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, told Congress last month that having more visas for skilled workers would increase American competitiveness. (Photo by Shawn Thew/European Pressphoto Agency)  Chart: ''Looking to India'' Companies that specialize in offshore outsourcing of technology work to India have the most requests for skilled-worker visas in the United States.  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Infosys Technologies H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 22,590  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Wipro Technologies H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 19,450  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Cognizant Technology Solutions H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 11,330  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Patni Computer Systems H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 9,922  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: MphasiS* H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 9,908  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: HCL America H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 9,128  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Deloitte & Touche H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 8,367  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Tata Consultancy Services H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 7,528  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Accenture H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 7,253  COMPANIES WITH THE MOST H-1B EMPLOYEES IN 2006: Satyam Computer Services H-1B POSITIONS REQUESTED: 7,235  *Now a subsidiary of Electronic Data Systems  (Source by Department of Labor)                                                
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); OFFSHORING (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); COMPANY LISTS & RANKINGS (78%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (78%); ECONOMIC POLICY (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); TESTIMONY (77%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (74%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (73%); RESEARCH REPORTS (69%); LIBERALISM (68%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (66%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); Computers and the Internet (%); Visas (%); Foreign Labor (%); Labor (%); Wages and Salaries (%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (82%);  DELOITTE TOUCHE TOHMATSU (62%);  MICROSOFT CORP (58%);  ACCENTURE PLC (58%);  COGNIZANT TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS CORP (53%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (52%);  WIPRO LTD (52%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (55%); Rochester Institute of Technology

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (82%); INFY (NYSE) (82%); INFY (NSE) (82%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (58%); ACN (NYSE) (58%); CTSH (NASDAQ) (53%); TCS (NSE) (52%); WIT (NYSE) (52%); WIPRO (NSE) (52%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (82%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (82%); NAICS541211 OFFICES OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS (62%); SIC8721 ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING SERVICES (62%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); NAICS541611 ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT & GENERAL MANAGEMENT CONSULTING SERVICES (58%); SIC8742 MANAGEMENT CONSULTING SERVICES (58%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (52%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (52%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (52%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (52%); NAICS325611 SOAP & OTHER DETERGENT MANUFACTURING (52%); SIC2841 SOAPS & OTHER DETERGENTS, EXCEPT SPECIALTY CLEANERS (52%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (89%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); CONSULTING SERVICES (64%)

Person: BILL GATES (79%); Steve Lohr; Ron Hira

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (93%); India

Load-Date: April 15, 2007


End of Document
Laid-Off Americans, Required to Zip Lips on Way Out, Are Growing Bolder
The New York Times
June 12, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1435 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


LIBERTYVILLE, Ill. -- American corporations are under new scrutiny from federal lawmakers after well-publicized episodes in which the companies laid off American workers and gave the jobs to foreigners on temporary visas.
But while corporate executives have been outspoken in defending their labor practices before Congress and the public, the American workers who lost jobs to global outsourcing companies have been largely silent. 
  Until recently. Now some of the workers who were displaced are starting to speak out, despite severance agreements prohibiting them from criticizing their former employers.
  Marco Peña was among about 150 technology workers who were laid off in April by Abbott Laboratories, a global health care conglomerate with headquarters here. They handed in their badges and computer passwords, and turned over their work to a company based in India. But Mr. Peña, who had worked at Abbott for 12 years, said he had decided not to sign the agreement that was given to all departing employees, which included a nondisparagement clause.
  Mr. Peña said his choice cost him at least $10,000 in severance pay. But on an April evening after he walked out of Abbott's tree-lined campus here for the last time, he spent a few hours in a local bar at a gathering organized by technology worker advocates, speaking his mind about a job he had loved and lost.
  ''I just didn't feel right about signing,'' Mr. Peña said. ''The clauses were pretty blanket. I felt like they were eroding my rights.''
  Leading members of Congress from both major parties have questioned the nondisparagement agreements, which are commonly used by corporations but can prohibit ousted workers from raising complaints about what they see as a misuse of temporary visas. Lawmakers, including Richard Durbin of Illinois, the second-highest-ranking Senate Democrat, and Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the Republican chairman of the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration, have proposed revisions to visa laws to include measures allowing former employees to contest their layoffs.
  ''I have heard from workers who are fearful of retaliation,'' said Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut. ''They are told they can say whatever they want, except they can't say anything negative about being fired.''
  Lawyers said the paragraph Mr. Peña and other workers object to in their separation agreements is routine in final contracts with employees who are paid severance as they leave, whether they were laid off or resigned voluntarily.
  ''It's a very, very common practice,'' said Sheena R. Hamilton, an employment lawyer at Dowd Bennett in St. Louis who represents companies in workplace cases. ''I've never recommended a settlement that didn't have a clause like that.''
  But former Abbott employees said the provisions had stopped them from speaking openly with elected officials or appearing at congressional hearings.
  ''It is very frustrating that you can't share your story with the public,'' said one former Abbott manager, who had worked for the company for 13 years, rising to an important supervisory position. He had prepared a 90-page manual for his foreign replacements showing how to perform every detail of his work. With a disabled child who requires medical care, he said he had to take his severance and its nondisparagement clause, since it extended his medical benefits. So he asked to remain anonymous.
  ''I've been laid off before, I can understand that,'' he said. ''But these visas were meant to fill in gaps for resources that are hard to find. This time the company actually asked me to transfer my knowledge to somebody else. That changes the equation.''
  According to federal rules, temporary visas known as H-1Bs are for foreigners with ''a body of specialized knowledge'' not readily available in the labor market. The visas should be granted only when they will not undercut the wages or ''adversely affect the working conditions'' of Americans.
  But in the past five years, through loopholes in the rules, tens of thousands of American workers have been replaced by foreigners on H-1B and other temporary visas, according to Prof. Hal Salzman, a labor force expert at Rutgers University.
  In March, two Americans who had been laid off in 2014 by a New England power company, Eversource Energy, spoke at a news conference in Hartford even though they had signed nondisparagement agreements. Craig Diangelo, 63, and Judy Konopka, 56, said most of the 220 people facing dismissal had been required as part of their severance to train Indian immigrants with H-1B and other visas.
  In a protest, departing employees posted American flags outside their cubicles. As they left, they took the flags down. Mr. Diangelo took a photograph of the flags in his final days at the utility. At the time, he and Ms. Konopka spoke with reporters, including from The New York Times, but they did not want to be quoted, even without their names.
  In January, Senator Blumenthal spotted the photograph in an article in Computerworld, a tech industry publication, and was dismayed to learn of the layoffs so long after they happened. In a letter to the company, the senator questioned whether the dismissals were ''accomplished through apparent abuses'' of visas, and he demanded assurances that former employees would not be sued if they spoke with government officials.
  In a forceful reply, the Eversource general counsel, Gregory B. Butler, said the company had not violated any laws, and its nondisparagement provisions were a ''standard form release'' that did not restrict former employees from discussing their layoffs ''with you or anyone else.''
  Mr. Diangelo said he was not so sure the company would refrain from legal action if he spoke to the news media. But, he said, ''I finally got to the point where I am tired of hiding in the shadows.''
  Two years later, his work with a local tech contracting company pays $45,000 a year less than his Eversource salary. Many of his former co-workers are also struggling, Mr. Diangelo said, but stay quiet to avoid provoking the company.
  At Abbott, executives announced in February that technology jobs would be taken over by the Indian company Wipro. Senator Durbin, who is from Illinois, criticized the layoffs and said Abbott's nondisparagement clause was ''overly broad.''
  According to a copy of the agreement, that clause read, in part: ''You agree to make every effort to maintain and protect the reputation of Abbott and its products and agents.''
  A spokesman for Abbott, Scott Stoffel, said the changes were part of its efforts to ''remain globally competitive and a strong U.S. employer.'' He said the company would retain ''the vast majority'' of its tech jobs in the United States. Nondisparagement clauses like Abbott's are ''very common'' in severance agreements, he said.
  Mr. Peña said he could afford to turn down his severance payment because he is single and has no children. ''I was the only one with the ability to put my foot down,'' he said.
  He received consistently positive work reviews, and a merit raise weeks before his layoff, he said. With no indication that poor performance was a factor, he believed it was a measure to cut costs.
  ''Anything that had to deal with technology and resolving problems, that was my satisfaction, my passion,'' Mr. Peña said. ''But these days that has no bearing on the decision making of the executives in the higher positions.''
  Abbott tried to reduce the role of foreigners in the layoffs. Only about 20 percent of the workers brought in by Wipro would be foreigners on H-1B visas, Mr. Stoffel said, while the rest would be American workers.
  Mr. Peña said he had been told at first that he would train his Wipro replacements. But after Senator Durbin's rebuke, Wipro workers were trained only by employees who would be remaining with Abbott, he said.
  He and 13 other former Abbott employees filed federal claims saying they faced discrimination because of their ages and American citizenship, said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing them. Those claims are confidential. Ms. Blackwell organized the tavern meeting where Abbott workers were invited to mourn their jobs. Of the small group that came, only Mr. Peña spoke up.
  On April 20, about two dozen employees of EmblemHealth, a health insurer, protested outside its offices in Manhattan after the company announced that it would transfer about 200 tech jobs to Cognizant, another technology outsourcing company. Even though they were in the street holding signs, the employees declined to have their names used in news reports.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/12/us/laid-off-americans-required-to-zip-lips-on-way-out-grow-bolder.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Technology workers from Abbott Laboratories and supporters gathered in a North Chicago bar after the company laid off about 150 people in April. (A16)
 Marco Peña, laid off by Abbott, would not sign an agreement with a nondisparagement clause. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSHUA LOTT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: LAYOFFS (99%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); AGREEMENTS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NONDISPARAGEMENT AGREEMENTS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SEVERANCE PAY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); DISMISSALS (78%); EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); RESIGNATIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); IMMIGRATION (77%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (77%); LAWYERS (77%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (76%); CONGLOMERATES (73%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (73%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (70%); RANKINGS (62%)

Company:  ABBOTT LABORATORIES (84%)

Ticker: ABT (SWX) (84%); ABT (NYSE) (84%); ABT (LSE) (84%); ABL (FRA) (84%)

Industry: NAICS339113 SURGICAL APPLIANCE & SUPPLIES MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS339112 SURGICAL & MEDICAL INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325413 IN-VITRO DIAGNOSTIC SUBSTANCE MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325412 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325411 MEDICINAL & BOTANICAL MANUFACTURING (84%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); LAWYERS (77%)

Person: JEFF SESSIONS (79%); RICHARD DURBIN (78%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (50%)

Geographic: ILLINOIS, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: June 12, 2016


End of Document
Trump: Why Waste a Crisis?
The New York Times 
April 24, 2020 Friday 12:32 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1343 words
Byline: The Editorial Board
Highlight: The global pandemic is his latest rationale for enacting longstanding conservative goals.
Body


The global pandemic is his latest rationale for enacting longstanding conservative goals.
When things aren’t going smoothly for President Trump, his go-to move is to change the subject to topics that cheer his supporters and drive his critics into paroxysms of outrage. Mr. Trump’s decision on Wednesday to, as he proclaimed on Twitter, sign an “Executive Order prohibiting immigration into our Country today” seems designed as just such a distraction.
The president first announced his intention in a late-night tweet on Monday, claiming it was a necessary response to “the attack from the Invisible Enemy” — his latest nickname for the coronavirus — and “to protect the jobs of our GREAT American citizens.” Like clockwork, Democrats denounced his “xenophobia” and accused him of trying to shift the nation’s focus away from his handling of the pandemic.
But the outcry is also behind the curve. In the name of protecting the nation, the Trump administration has already shut down most legal immigration through more piecemeal moves. In recent weeks, it has imposed tougher travel restrictions and has stopped processing most visas. Visa interviews are not taking place, nor are citizenship ceremonies. Migrants crossing the border are now turned back without the usual protections for minors and asylum seekers.
As Mr. Trump elaborated at his Tuesday news briefing, there will be a 60-day “pause” in issuing new green cards — though he said that could be extended “based on economic conditions.” Responding in part to a backlash from business, the ban, for now at least, will not affect guest worker programs, including seasonal farm workers and individuals with H-1B visas.
To recap: The president is trumpeting a temporary ban on immigration to protect American jobs that exempts many employment-based programs.
While Mr. Trump’s executive order is flashy, in policy terms, it is less an announcement of what he is going to do than what he has already done in realizing an anti-immigration vision formed long before anyone had ever heard of Covid-19.
As for immigrants already here, on Tuesday, the Department of Education issued guidelines that will bar undocumented college students, including Dreamers, from receiving federal emergency aid for expenses, including food, housing and child care.
Choking off legal immigration is just one aspect of the administration’s longstanding agenda that’s being cast as a pandemic response. In the midst of the crisis, the administration has plowed ahead with non-Covid priorities that, in more normal times, most likely would have  been met with fierce pushback.
Environmental regulations have been a top target. In late March, the Environmental Protection Agency announced that, during this national emergency, power plants and factories would be allowed to self-monitor their pollution and would not be fined for violating certain reporting requirements. The administration also issued its new rule gutting vehicle fuel efficiency standards. In mid-April, the agency changed the way it calculates the benefits of regulating mercury, effectively weakening regulation of it and other toxic metals released by power plants. Most if not all of these moves are likely to be ensnarled in lengthy, costly legal challenges.
Going forward, the administration is poised to use executive actions to roll back regulations on business, according to The Washington Post. Measures said to be under consideration include directing federal agencies not to enforce regulations on small businesses, as well as making permanent many of the regulatory waivers temporarily granted in response to the pandemic by agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration and the E.P.A.
Those who have stood in the way of Mr. Trump’s preferred prescriptions for the pandemic have not fared well. This week, Dr. Rick Bright was bumped from his post atop the agency charged with developing a coronavirus vaccine. Dr. Bright told The Times that he was dismissed for demanding that the emergency funding be invested in “safe and scientifically vetted solutions” rather than remedies “that lack scientific merit.” He specifically cited his resistance to the “broad use” of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, which Mr. Trump was hawking as wonder drugs until the past few days, when additional research emerged spotlighting the medicines’ lack of proven efficacy and potentially lethal risks in treating Covid-19 patients.
Mr. Trump is also eager to restore and expand tax cuts, always a popular move with his party. He has been pushing Congress to bring back the corporate meal and entertainment deduction. “It’ll keep our restaurants going,” he insisted at a briefing early this month. “In fact, I think the restaurant business will be actually bigger and better than it is right now.”
Beyond policy, Mr. Trump is working to dismantle oversight of his administration. Immediately after signing the $2 trillion relief bill, he issued a signing statement saying that he would be ignoring some of the oversight measures written into the bill. “These provisions are impermissible forms of congressional aggrandizement with respect to the execution of the laws,” the statement said.
Less than two weeks later, the president ousted Glenn Fine, the acting inspector general for the Pentagon, who had been tasked with overseeing the administration’s handling of the relief funding.
Mr. Fine is not the only administration watchdog Mr. Trump has put down. On April 3, he fired Michael Atkinson, the inspector general of the intelligence community, who alerted Congress to the existence of the whistle-blower complaint that ultimately led to Mr. Trump’s impeachment.
Along with Mr. Atkinson’s firing, the president announced “his intent to nominate” a handful of people to serve in inspector general positions throughout government, indicating a more expansive makeover.
The White House has also taken advantage of a preoccupied nation to further its project of packing the judiciary with conservatives. On April 3, Mr. Trump tapped Judge Justin Walker for a seat on the influential United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Judge Walker is a 37-year-old protégé of Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, and has been serving as a Federal District Court judge in Kentucky for around six months. The American Bar Association rated him “unqualified” for that post because of his inexperience. Mr. McConnell reiterated on Tuesday that the Senate would continue to confirm judicial nominees during the crisis.
There is nothing inherently wrong about Mr. Trump pursuing his agenda during this pandemic, or even using it to help make his case for action. On the other side of the aisle, Democrats are putting a coronavirus-spin on their priorities, from health care reform to paid family leave to an expansion of mail-in voting. As Rahm Emanuel, the former White House chief of staff for President Barack Obama, memorably opined during the 2008 financial meltdown: “Never allow a good crisis go to waste. It’s an opportunity to do the things you once thought were impossible.”
But this president has repeatedly demonstrated his eagerness to exploit any available opening, or to invent new ones when necessary, to expand his authority and advance his own interests. Recall his reallocating billions of dollars from the Pentagon’s budget to build a wall across a tiny portion of the southern border, for instance, under the guise of a national emergency last year. While presidential tweets and briefings are shiny objects to distract the news media and public, the Trump administration’s lower-profile activity begs for even stricter scrutiny — especially in the midst a global crisis.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PANDEMICS (91%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); DISASTER & EMERGENCY RELIEF (89%); DISEASE REPORTING (89%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); CONSERVATION (78%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (78%); POLLUTION (78%); UNDOCUMENTED STUDENTS (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (74%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); CORONAVIRUSES (73%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (73%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (73%); POLLUTION MONITORING, PREVENTION & REMEDIATION (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); SEASONAL WORKERS (69%); FARM LABOR (68%); ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION & POLICY (67%); AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (65%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (65%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (65%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (64%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (62%); POLLUTION & ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (60%); VIRUSES (58%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); Trump, Donald J (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (2020) (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (78%); TRAVEL BANS (78%); FARM LABOR (68%); AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY & ENVIRONMENT (65%); ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION (64%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
No Headline In Original
The New York Times
April 18, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2; Corrections
Length: 96 words
Body


An article on Saturday about a lottery by immigration authorities to select applicants for 65,000 visas for highly skilled foreign workers misstated the requirements employers must meet in order to sponsor the visas, known as H-1B. For most of these visas, employers must affirm to the Labor Department that they will pay the immigrant at least the prevailing wage for the job and that hiring the immigrant would not negatively affect the labor conditions of United States workers in similar jobs. Employers do not have to show that no American workers were available for the job.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Correction

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); WAGES & SALARIES (88%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (85%); PREVAILING WAGES (85%); Terms not available from NYTimes (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: April 18, 2007


End of Document
Visa Abuses Harm American Workers
The New York Times
June 16, 2016 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22; EDITORIAL
Length: 515 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


There is no doubt that H-1B visas -- temporary work permits for specially talented foreign professionals -- are instead being used by American employers to replace American workers with cheaper foreign labor. Abbott Laboratories, the health care conglomerate based in Illinois, recently became the latest large American company to use the visas in this way, following the lead of other employers, including Southern California Edison, Northeast Utilities (now Eversource Energy), Disney, Toys ''R'' Us and New York Life.
The visas are supposed to be used only to hire college-educated foreigners in ''specialty occupations'' requiring ''highly specialized knowledge,'' and only when such hiring will not depress prevailing wages. But in many cases, laid-off American workers have been required to train their lower-paid replacements. 
  Lawmakers from both parties have denounced the visa abuse, but it is increasingly widespread, mainly because of loopholes in the law. For example, in most instances, companies that hire H-1B workers are not required to recruit Americans before hiring from overseas. Similarly, companies are able to skirt the rules for using H-1B workers by outsourcing the actual hiring of those workers to Tata, Infosys and other temporary staffing firms, mostly based in India.
  Criticism of the visa process has been muted, and reform has moved slowly, partly because laid-off American workers -- mostly tech employees replaced by Indian guest workers -- have not loudly protested. Their reticence does not mean acceptance or even resignation. As explained in The Times on Sunday by Julia Preston, most of the displaced workers had to sign agreements prohibiting them from criticizing their former employers as a condition of receiving severance pay. The gag orders have largely silenced the laid-off employees, while allowing the employers to publicly defend their actions as legal, which is technically accurate, given the loopholes in the law.
  The conversation, however, is changing. Fourteen former tech workers at Abbott, including one who forfeited a chunk of severance pay rather than sign a so-called nondisparagement agreement, have filed federal claims with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission saying they were discriminated against because of their ages and American citizenship. Tech workers from Disney have filed federal lawsuits accusing the company and two global outsourcing firms of colluding to supplant Americans with H-1B workers. Former employees of Eversource Energy have also begun to challenge their severance-related gag orders by publicly discussing their dismissals and replacement by foreign workers on H-1B and other visas.
  Congressional leaders of both parties have questioned the nondisparagement agreements. Bipartisan legislation in the Senate would revise visa laws to allow former employees to protest their layoffs. Beyond that, what Congress really needs to do is close the loopholes that allow H-1B abuses.
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. 

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/16/opinion/visa-abuses-harm-american-workers.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAYOFFS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (90%); AGREEMENTS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); RESIGNATIONS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); NONDISPARAGEMENT AGREEMENTS (87%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (78%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (73%); CONGLOMERATES (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); PREVAILING WAGES (73%); LEGISLATION (72%); SEVERANCE PAY (67%); SUITS & CLAIMS (62%); LITIGATION (50%)

Company:  ABBOTT LABORATORIES (84%);  EVERSOURCE ENERGY (84%);  NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO (57%);  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (57%);  INFOSYS LTD (55%)

Ticker: ABT (SWX) (84%); ABT (NYSE) (84%); ABT (LSE) (84%); ABL (FRA) (84%); ES (NYSE) (84%); INFY (PAR) (55%); INFY (NYSE) (55%); INFY (NSE) (55%)

Industry: NAICS339113 SURGICAL APPLIANCE & SUPPLIES MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS339112 SURGICAL & MEDICAL INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325413 IN-VITRO DIAGNOSTIC SUBSTANCE MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325412 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS325411 MEDICINAL & BOTANICAL MANUFACTURING (84%); NAICS221210 NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (84%); NAICS221122 ELECTRIC POWER DISTRIBUTION (84%); SIC6311 LIFE INSURANCE (57%); NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (57%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (57%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (55%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (78%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (78%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: June 16, 2016


End of Document
For Indian Diaspora, Panic and Anger Over Trump’s Immigration Plans
The New York Times 
April 28, 2020 Tuesday 15:19 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1201 words
Byline: Kai Schultz and Sameer Yasir
Highlight: Indian citizens fill critical jobs in the United States in tech and business. Now, they fear for their futures — the “upending of life by a tweet.”
Body


Indian citizens fill critical jobs in the United States in tech and business. Now, they fear for their futures — the “upending of life by a tweet.”
NEW DELHI — When President Trump announced via a late-night tweet that he would “suspend immigration” to protect American jobs from an economic tailspin caused by the coronavirus, Priyanka Nagar prepared for the worst.
For more than a decade, Ms. Nagar, an Indian citizen, had steadily built a life in the United States but she was now back in India, awaiting a visa extension. She and her husband, who works for Microsoft, have applied for green cards. They hung an American flag from their balcony in their home in Washington State, where Ms. Nagar had given birth to the couple’s 5-year-old daughter.
But when Ms. Nagar read Mr. Trump’s tweet posted late Monday, while separated from her family in the United States, the thought of leaving her hard forged life behind without even a goodbye was devastating, she said.
“I beg the government not to think of us as enemies,” Ms. Nagar, 39, a software developer, said. “I want the U.S. to prosper. It has given us so much.”
By Tuesday, Mr. Trump had ordered a 60-day halt in issuing green cards to prevent people from immigrating to the United States, backing away from his harder-edged plans to suspend guest worker programs after business groups erupted in anger at the prospect of losing labor from countries like India.
But as millions of Americans file for unemployment, flooding food banks and hospitals, foreign workers worry that the pandemic will uproot them sooner rather than later.
Immigrant groups warn that driven by what they call the Trump administration’s protectionist impulses, the United States could purge some of its most talented workers, cutting into the vibrant multiculturalism that has made the United States such an attractive destination for decades.
“I cannot tell you the panic this has caused in the legal immigration community,” Nandini Nair, an immigration lawyer based in New Jersey, said of Mr. Trump’s “upending of life by a tweet.”
[Update: Unified in coronavirus lockdown, India splinters over reopening.]
Further immigration restrictions could have particularly acute consequences for India, which sends thousands of highly skilled workers to the United States every year and counts a four million strong diaspora in the country, representing one of the largest contingents of immigrants to the United States.
Visa programs like H-1B help fill specialty positions at companies like Google, Apple and Facebook. Indian-Americans are some of the country’s most successful and wealthiest immigrants, with a particular stronghold in Silicon Valley’s start-up scene.
These days, Harkamal Singh Khural, 34, a software developer living in an Atlanta suburb, said he was barely sleeping. Even if the government did not push him out, he said a volatile job market meant his immigration status was already tenuous.
The company that sponsors his H-1B visa has already let go of half of his team. His two daughters are United States citizens, meaning it was possible that his family could get separated.
“I am afraid of losing everything,” Mr. Khural said. “This is not really about a job. It is about dreams.”
For now, programs like H-1B are unlikely to be immediately affected by the new restrictions. But on Tuesday, Mr. Trump left open the possibility of extending the ban on new green cards “based on economic conditions at the time.”
He suggested that he may also introduce a second executive order that could further restrict immigration, brushing aside studies showing that a flow of foreign labor into the country has an overall positive effect on the American work force and wages.
“We must first take care of the American worker,” President Trump said, insisting that newly jobless citizens should not have to compete with foreigners when the economy reopens.
Rights groups say the immigration process has become increasingly complex and frustrating in recent years, with Mr. Trump fanning the flames of anti-immigrant sentiment by pushing for an extensive wall along the Mexican border and labeling a group of African nations “shithole countries.”
For Indian citizens, building a more permanent base in the country was never easy.
Most of the 800,000 immigrants currently waiting for a green card are Indian citizens. Because of quotas that limit the number of workers from each country, Indians can expect to wait up to 50 years for a green card since their representation among immigrants is so high in the United States.
Last summer, the Fairness for High-Skilled Immigrants Act, which sought to address the backlog by eliminating country quotas, sailed through the House. But it stalled in the Senate, where critics like Senator Dick Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, argued that the bill would not solve the problem because it does not increase the overall number of green cards.
Many Indian citizens said the back-and-forth was exhausting.
“I likely won’t receive a green card in this lifetime unless the laws change,” said Somak Goswami, an electrical engineer who applied for a green card in 2011. “I have colleagues who came to the U.S. in 2017 and have a green card already. My only fault was I was born in India.”
Analysts said immigration restrictions could strain the delicate but increasingly amicable relationship between India and the United States, the world’s most populous democracies.
In recent months, Mr. Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India have sought to build an even stronger alliance, trading compliments about each other onstage at glittering events in Houston and Ahmedabad, India.
Milan Vaishnav, the director of the South Asia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington, said, “Any action that appears to infringe on the mobility of Indians or Indian-Americans will be strongly resisted.”
“Suffice it to say, this will not go over well in India,” he said of stricter immigration controls. “Prime Minister Modi has made outreach to the diaspora community in America and elsewhere a cornerstone of his foreign policy.”
In India, Ms. Nagar, who is staying with her parents in the state of Uttar Pradesh, said she was trying to remain hopeful, telling herself to “live today and wait for tomorrow.”
But with international airspace largely closed, embassies shut for visa processing and the added stress of immigration restrictions, Ms. Nagar worried that the extension of her H-1B visa might be delayed by many more months, prolonging the separation from her family and raising the possibility that they may have to leave the United States entirely.
Over a video call, Ms. Nagar’s daughter, a kindergarten student, told her: “Mommy, when the virus dies, you’ll come. I’ll wait for the virus to die.” When video conversations with her daughter end, Ms. Nagar said she sometimes lies in bed and cries.
“In the U.S., you have the whole world working together toward a common goal,” she said. “You cannot find that diversity anywhere else. I love this country.”
PHOTO: Families at a Hindu temple in New York City in 2016. Indians are one of the largest immigrant groups in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SASHA MASLOV FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ESSENTIAL BUSINESSES & WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); CORONAVIRUSES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); EPIDEMICS (78%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (78%); JOBLESS CLAIMS (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (74%); VIRUSES (73%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (68%); FOOD BANKS & SOUP KITCHENS (68%); LAWYERS (60%); FOOD CHARITIES (50%); Green Cards (US) (%); Visas (%); Foreign Workers (%); India (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Indian-Americans (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (75%); LAWYERS (60%)

Person: Trump, Donald J

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (95%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Immigration Deal: A Step Forward?
The New York Times
May 19, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 819 words
Body


 To the Editor:
  Re ''Senators in Bipartisan Deal on Broad Immigration Bill'' (front page, May 18):
While I applaud the effort in the Senate to end the illegal immigration stalemate, it is far too early to expect the measure to become law. 
  A year ago, the Senate passed the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2006 to much fanfare. That bill also represented bipartisan compromise and promised a realistic resolution to the chaotic situation, but failed in the House. 
  With a Democratic Congress, this latest attempt might survive opponents' doomsday warnings of amnesty and the end of American culture. The danger is that politicians, skittish about next year's partisan primaries in both presidential and Congressional races, will bypass another opportunity for comprehensive immigration reform. 
  Until the politicians emerge from the shadows of silence and indecision, the American dream will resemble a pipe dream to millions of illegal immigrants.  Wayne Trujillo  Lakewood, Colo., May 18, 2007  The writer is the editor of Latino Suave.   To the Editor:
  The immigration reform negotiators in the Senate announced an unworkable deal. Our elected leaders, in their politically expedient maneuvering, excluded from the dialogue the millions of working-class, undocumented immigrants who came out and marched all across the United States demanding a real, comprehensive reform. 
  Republicans and Democrats wanted to cater to both the conservative and liberal voters, and thus paid more attention to the 2008 elections than the lives and suffering of the immigrants who do not have a vote. 
  The so-called bipartisan move is a huge disappointment, because among other flaws the proposal takes away a family-based immigration path, prevents temporary workers from earning legalization, thereby perpetuating an indentured servitude, and links national security with immigration reform, rationalizing an increased border militarization, interior enforcement and national ID system.   Partha Banerjee Brooklyn, May 18, 2007  To the Editor:
  It is commendable that the Senate finally seems to have reached a consensus on a bipartisan proposal for immigration reform. But it is disheartening to see that illegal immigrants would be given a path to citizenship, while people who have gone through the impossible to stay here legally are not being offered a naturalization program. 
  I have lived here for almost nine years. Four on a student visa that I duly renewed every year, one on Optional Practical Training permit, two more years doing my M.B.A. on yet another student visa and now on a H-1B working visa, for which my company shelled out more than $1,500 in government fees and much more in attorney fees. 
  In addition to paying all visa-related fees, I have dutifully paid government, state and local taxes (even on a portion of my university scholarship), as well as Social Security and Medicare while working. Am I not as entitled as an illegal immigrant to a green card, senators?   Issidor Iliev-Wollitzer New York, May 18, 2007  To the Editor:
  The new immigration law smells, looks and walks a lot like the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
  That act did not stop the flow of undocumented migration; rather, it created a black market for false Social Security cards, hence shifting the burden and criminal activity from business to the immigrant. In addition, the bureaucratic hoops that immigrants would have to jump through for residency are out of reach for many undocumented migrants since it requires time, money and information to maneuver through our complicated system. 
  As immigrants have adapted to the Immigration Reform and Control Act, newcomers and potential immigrants will do the same. It is naive to think that border control and sanctions, which have not worked in the past, will change the deeply embedded social and economic conditions that drive immigration in this country.  Sang Lee Oakland, Calif., May 18, 2007  To the Editor:
  The new immigration bill misses the point entirely. It will not stop the flow of illegal immigrants across our borders with Mexico. All the money spent so far to build fences and hire new border agents has not stopped the flow of unemployed poor people coming to a country that welcomes their lawbreaking with a job. 
  Employers get major advantages by hiring illegal workers. They don't have to pay minimum wage, overtime pay, benefits and in many cases taxes because they pay cash. This country needs to punish the real lawbreakers: employers who hire illegal workers. 
  If the penalties were high enough and if repeat offenders were sent to jail, the illegal workers would stop coming because no employer would hire them; then and only then will the flow stop. 
  Most illegal immigrants are honest, hard-working people. As long as there are jobs for them here, they will continue to come.  Mike Mitte Edmonds, Wash., May 18, 2007  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (Drawing by Tim Gough)                                                        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (92%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (89%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); PARTISANSHIP (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (75%); CONSERVATISM (74%); VOTERS & VOTING (74%); LOCAL & STATE TAXES (73%); NATIONAL IDENTITY CARDS (73%); WRITERS (73%); LAWYERS (71%); FAMILY (69%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (66%); STUDENT EXPENSES & FINANCING (64%); NATIONAL SECURITY (62%); MEDICARE (60%); Immigration and Refugees (%); Law and Legislation (%); Illegal Immigrants (%); Citizenship (%); Immigration and Refugees (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); WRITERS (73%); LAWYERS (71%); MEDICARE (60%)

Person: Wayne Trujillo; Issidor Iliev-Wollitzer; Partha Banerjee; Sang Lee; Mike Mitte

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); COLORADO, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); United States

Load-Date: May 19, 2007


End of Document
Fix the Gap in H-1B Visas
The New York Times
June 21, 2016 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24; LETTER
Length: 212 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Visa Abuses Harm American Workers'' (editorial, June 16): 
  Fixing the flaws in our high-skilled immigration system need not wait for comprehensive legislation. In fact, Congress's continued tolerance of H-1B outsourcing is an obstacle to comprehensive reform, because it is the single most powerful evidence that anti-immigration forces have for the bogus claim that new green-card recipients cost jobs.
  This Congress should seize the opportunity to do one simple thing to fix a gaping hole in the system: Repeal the special treatment that Congress provided H-1B outsourcing companies in 1998.
  Contractors whose business model is to replace American workers who must train their replacements are actually specifically exempted from the requirement not to displace Americans, provided that they pay a salary that amounts to half the market rate for these jobs.
  Narrow language to eliminate this special treatment for H-1B outsourcers could be enacted on any legislation this Congress considers.
  BRUCE A. MORRISON
  Bethesda, Md.
  The writer, a former Democratic member of Congress and the principal author of the Immigration Act of 1990, is a legislative advocate for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers-U.S.A., a professional group. 

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/21/opinion/fix-the-gap-in-h-1b-visas.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); WRITERS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%)

Company:  INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS INC (68%)

Organization: INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); WRITERS (78%)

Geographic: MARYLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: June 21, 2016


End of Document
Laughing and Crying
The New York Times
May 23, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 754 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Body


First I had to laugh. Then I had to cry. 
  I took part in commencement this year at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, one of America's great science and engineering schools, so I had a front-row seat as the first grads to receive their diplomas came on stage, all of them Ph.D. students. One by one the announcer read their names and each was handed their doctorate -- in biotechnology, computing, physics and engineering -- by the school's president, Shirley Ann Jackson.
The reason I had to laugh was because it seemed like every one of the newly minted Ph.D.'s at Rensselaer was foreign born. For a moment, as the foreign names kept coming -- ''Hong Lu, Xu Xie, Tao Yuan, Fu Tang'' -- I thought that the entire class of doctoral students in physics were going to be Chinese, until ''Paul Shane Morrow'' saved the day. It was such a caricature of what President Jackson herself calls ''the quiet crisis'' in high-end science education in this country that you could only laugh.
  Don't get me wrong. I'm proud that our country continues to build universities and a culture of learning that attract the world's best minds. My complaint -- why I also wanted to cry -- was that there wasn't someone from the Immigration and Naturalization Service standing next to President Jackson stapling green cards to the diplomas of each of these foreign-born Ph.D.'s. I want them all to stay, become Americans and do their research and innovation here. If we can't educate enough of our own kids to compete at this level, we'd better make sure we can import someone else's, otherwise we will not maintain our standard of living.
  It is pure idiocy that Congress will not open our borders -- as wide as possible -- to attract and keep the world's first-round intellectual draft choices in an age when everyone increasingly has the same innovation tools and the key differentiator is human talent. I'm serious. I think any foreign student who gets a Ph.D. in our country -- in any subject -- should be offered citizenship. I want them. The idea that we actually make it difficult for them to stay is crazy. 
  Compete America, a coalition of technology companies, is pleading with Congress to boost both the number of H-1B visas available to companies that want to bring in skilled foreign workers and the number of employment-based green cards given to high-tech foreign workers who want to stay here. Give them all they want! Not only do our companies need them now, because we're not training enough engineers, but they will, over time, start many more companies and create many more good jobs than they would possibly displace. Silicon Valley is living proof of that -- and where innovation happens matters. It's still where the best jobs will be located.
  Folks, we can't keep being stupid about these things. You can't have a world where foreign-born students dominate your science graduate schools, research labs, journal publications and can now more easily than ever go back to their home countries to start companies -- without it eventually impacting our standard of living -- especially when we're also slipping behind in high-speed Internet penetration per capita. America has fallen from fourth in the world in 2001 to 15th today.
  My hat is off to Andrew Rasiej and Micah Sifry, co-founders of the Personal Democracy Forum. They are trying to make this an issue in the presidential campaign by creating a movement to demand that candidates focus on our digital deficits and divides. (See: http://www.techpresident.com.) Mr. Rasiej, who unsuccessfully ran for public advocate of New York City in 2005 on a platform calling for low-cost wireless access everywhere, notes that ''only half of America has broadband access to the Internet.'' We need to go from ''No Child Left Behind,'' he says, to ''Every Child Connected.''
  Here's the sad truth: 9/11, and the failing Iraq war, have sucked up almost all the oxygen in this country -- oxygen needed to discuss seriously education, health care, climate change and competitiveness, notes Garrett Graff, an editor at Washingtonian Magazine and author of the upcoming book ''The First Campaign,'' which deals with this theme. So right now, it's mostly governors talking about these issues, noted Mr. Graff, but there is only so much they can do without Washington being focused and leading. 
  Which is why we've got to bring our occupation of Iraq to an end in the quickest, least bad way possible -- otherwise we are going to lose Iraq and America. It's coming down to that choice. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); CITIZENSHIP (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (78%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (73%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (71%); LIVING STANDARDS (66%); Colleges and Universities (%); Engineering and Engineers (%); Science and Technology (%); Graduate Schools and Students (%); Immigration and Refugees (%); Law and Legislation (%); Citizenship (%); Foreign Labor (%); Foreign Study, Teaching and Travel (%); Colleges and Universities (%); Labor (%)

Industry: EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); ENGINEERING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%)

Person: THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (59%); Thomas L Friedman

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); United States

Load-Date: May 23, 2007


End of Document
Trump Wants to Cut Visas He Used for His Own Models
The New York Times
August 17, 2016 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1283 words
Byline: By RON NIXON; Jeremy Bowers contributed reporting from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York.
Body


WASHINGTON -- On the campaign trail, Donald J. Trump has excoriated the nation's visa program for high-skilled workers as a job killer, pledging to end it with ''no exceptions.'' But his own companies have used it to bring in hundreds of foreign workers, including fashion models for his modeling agency who need exhibit no special skills.
The little-known corner of the H-1B visa program for models has been controversial for years, questioned not only by Americans facing competition from foreign models but by technology companies whose engineering and scientific visas may instead go to men or women with no more specialized skills than their cheekbones. 
  Mr. Trump, the Republican nominee for president, has said the H-1B program allows companies to import foreign workers to replace American workers at lower pay.
  ''I will end forever the use of the H-1B as a cheap labor program, and institute an absolute requirement to hire American workers first for every visa and immigration program. No exceptions,'' Mr. Trump said in March.
  But his companies have asked the federal government for permission to bring in more than 1,000 foreign workers on guest visas, according to Labor Department data. More than 200 of them were fashion models for Trump Model Management who qualify by possessing only ''distinguished merit and ability,'' unlike other H-1B applicants who must possess ''highly specialized knowledge.''
  The issue has been further muddied by questions about the immigration status of his wife, Melania, when she arrived for a nude modeling session in 1995, a year before she says she was legally able to work the United States. Ms. Trump has said she never violated the nation's immigration laws. She also said she might not have been paid for the nude modeling shoot, but her legal pathway from tiny Slovenia to the runways of New York remains murky.
  Such questions have reinvigorated opponents of the H-1B visas for fashion models, shining a fresh light on the people who shaped it and used it -- including Mr. Trump; Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who sponsored legislation to add fashion models to the H-1B program; and the disgraced former New York congressman Anthony Weiner, who tried to reshape it. Mr. Weiner's wife, Huma Abedin, is a senior aide to Hillary Clinton.
  The Trump campaign did not respond to requests for comment.
  Legal authorization for a model is easier to attain than it is for most professionals. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services declined to say how government screeners evaluated applicants who were models on their ''distinguished merit and ability.'' Angelo A. Paparelli, an immigration lawyer in Los Angeles, said, ''As the Supreme Court said: It's like porn. You know it when you see it.''
  Such standards raise concerns about exploitation. A Jamaican model sued Mr. Trump's modeling agency in 2014, saying she was paid a fraction of what she was promised when she was brought to the United States on an H-1B visa. Those concerns fit with broader worries that the visa program is being used to import cheap labor at the expense of American workers.
  Since 2001, American companies have filed nearly 5,000 applications to hire fashion models from abroad, according to Labor Department data. Last year, 67 applications were filed for 76 models (employers can ask for more than one worker on an application). The high-water mark for fashion models was 2004, when there were more than 800 requests. Since then, the numbers have declined to fewer than a hundred a year on average, the data shows.
  Once the Labor Department approves an application, it is forwarded to the Citizenship and Immigration Services, which decides whether to approve the H-1B classification for the worker. The State Department then issues a visa.
  The immigration agency declined to say how many visas it had approved for fashion models.
  The H-1B program for fashion models has long been a source of controversy. The suit against Mr. Trump's modeling management company in 2014 was filed by Alexis Palmer of Jamaica, who said that instead of being paid the $75,000 a year she had been promised, she received less than $4,000 over four years.
  The company found work for her just 21 days during the years she worked for Mr. Trump's modeling agency, Ms. Palmer said in her lawsuit.
  Alan Garten, a lawyer for Mr. Trump's agency, said Trump Modeling Management helped Ms. Palmer with the immigration process and fronted her the money to pay for it against future earnings.
  ''But she was never an employee, she was self-employed,'' he said. ''She hired us to be her manager. The way she was handled is standard across the fashion industry.''
  Judge Analisa Torres of Federal District Court dismissed the case this year, saying Ms. Palmer should have first exhausted the administrative procedures at the Labor Department or raised it in a state court.
  ''This is not the end of this case by any means,'' said Naresh Gehi, an immigration lawyer in New York representing Ms. Palmer, who added that the case was pending at the Labor Department.
  A broader controversy has been stoked by the technology sector. Businesses clamor for the H-1Bs, which are intended to help companies fill positions for high-skilled jobs when they cannot find Americans with the necessary qualifications. Trade groups for engineers and programmers complain that including models in the visa program eats into the supply of skilled scientists, engineers and other professionals they need. The visas are capped by Congress at 65,000 per year.
  Last year, it took just five days for the number of H-1B applicants to reach that limit, according to the Department of Homeland Security. The visas are initially approved for three years and can be extended for another three.
  ''It is odd that fashion models are grouped in with visas for these high-skilled workers,'' said Neil G. Ruiz, director for the Center on Law, Economics and Finance at George Washington University Law School. ''And it makes you scratch your head that it's the only H-1B category that does not require a bachelor's degree.''
  Mr. Ruiz said that while the number of visas for models was small -- fewer than 1 percent -- it still affected the overall program because every visa granted to a model means one less goes to other workers in the H-1B categories.
  Fashion models, which were overlooked in the original 1990 immigration reform laws that created the worker category in the H-1B visa program, were added a year later by Mr. Kennedy, a liberal stalwart and pro-union Democrat.
  Other categories were created that allowed the universities and sports teams to bring in workers with ''extraordinary ability'' in the areas of science, the arts, education and athletics.
  In 2006, Mr. Weiner tried to move models into the category of actors and athletes but he was criticized after it was disclosed that a lawyer representing fashion models had sponsored a fund-raiser that added $10,000 for his failed campaign in 2009 to be mayor of New York City.
  In an interview, Mr. Weiner said he sought the change after the being approached by New York publishing and modeling industry representatives about the effect of having models compete for visas in same category as tech workers.
  ''They had to jump through all these hoops for people who come in for a day or two at a time to do a photo shoot and then want to go back home,'' he said. ''Some people just got tired and said, 'We'll just go to Europe and do the shoots.' It was creating a burden for the industry here.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/17/us/politics/donald-trump-wants-to-cut-visa-program-he-used-for-his-own-models.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (74%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (73%); LEGISLATION (71%); LITIGATION (67%); LAWYERS (60%); SUPREME COURTS (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (60%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); ANTHONY D WEINER (58%); TED KENNEDY (53%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); SLOVENIA (79%)

Load-Date: August 17, 2016


End of Document
Senate Votes to Keep Plan To Make Immigrants Legal
The New York Times
May 25, 2007 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 941 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 24 
Body


The Senate on Thursday turned aside the most significant challenge to the comprehensive immigration bill now under debate, voting 66 to 29 to keep a provision that offers legal status to most of the nation's 12 million illegal immigrants.
  The legalization program is, by far, the most contentious part of the bill. But it is also an indispensable element of the fragile bipartisan compromise that the bill embodies.
Senator David Vitter, Republican of Louisiana, who offered the proposal to eliminate the program, called it ''amnesty, pure and simple.'' He said it would act like a magnet, encouraging more illegal immigration.
  Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, the chief Democratic architect of the bill, defended the program. To obtain legal status, he said, illegal immigrants would have to pay fines, pass background checks and, in most cases, hold jobs.
  ''Legalization is important for our national security,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''We have to know who is in the United States. Legalization is important in terms of our economic prosperity. And legalization is important for the families. Do we think we're going to deport children -- 3.5 million American children who have parents that are undocumented?''
  President Bush endorsed that argument. Referring to illegal immigrants, he said, ''You can't kick them out.'' That solution is ''just not real,'' he said Thursday at a news conference, where he urged the Senate to pass the immigration bill.
  The bill, a product of secret negotiations between the White House and a dozen senators, has survived four days of impassioned debate on the Senate floor. It is uncertain whether it has gained enough momentum to survive continuing attacks from both ends of the political spectrum.
  Senators return home on Friday for a weeklong recess over the Memorial Day holiday. Many said they expected a barrage of questions from constituents upset with the legalization program.
  But architects of the bill said they were pleased. 
  One of them, Senator Mel Martinez, Republican of Florida, said: ''It's been a good week. The bill is moving forward.'' 
  A co-author of the bill, Senator Ken Salazar, Democrat of Colorado, said, ''We are still together, and we are moving forward,'' despite opposition from ''bomb-throwers'' on the right and the left.
  Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, said the architects of the bill were confident that they would prevail when the Senate resumes work next month.
  ''We've got a long, tough road ahead of us,'' Mr. Specter said. But he added, ''We see essentially no enormous roadblocks, no poison pills, no killer amendments ahead that we can't deal with.''
  Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said: ''Time is on our side. The longer we have to discuss the bill among our colleagues, the bigger the buy-in.'' 
  Critics, Mr. Graham said, will feel better if they have time ''to vent their frustrations about the bill and to amend it.''
  In other action on Thursday, the Senate approved an amendment that would increase fees imposed on employers who hire highly skilled temporary workers with H-1B visas. The money would be used to finance scholarships for American citizens studying mathematics, engineering, health care and computer science.
  The vote was a victory for Senator Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont, who had proposed the amendment, which was approved 59 to 35. 
  With the scholarships, he said, ''young Americans can get the education they need for these jobs, so employers don't have to go abroad.'' 
  The Senate narrowly rejected two proposals that could have upset the deal on immigration. In both cases, the vote was 49 to 48.
  One proposal would have ended a guest worker program for less-skilled workers after five years. 
  The other would have encouraged state and local officials to help enforce federal immigration laws -- its purpose being to prevent cities from offering sanctuary to illegal immigrants.
  Many Republicans see the guest worker program as an essential element of the bill. 
  But the proposal to end it after five years looked as if it might pass. During the roll call, Mr. Kennedy persuaded another Democratic senator, Daniel K. Akaka of Hawaii, to switch his vote, thereby preserving the program.
  Defending the guest worker program, President Bush said, ''I would much rather have people crossing the border with a legitimate card, coming to work on a temporary basis, than being stuffed in back of an 18-wheeler.''
  The proposal encouraging state and local agencies to help enforce the immigration laws was offered by Senator Norm Coleman, Republican of Minnesota. It said that state and local employees could ask people about their immigration status whenever the employees had ''probable cause'' to believe that the people were not here legally.
  ''Several cities have passed ordinances or issued executive orders forbidding local law enforcement to even ask the question as to whether a person is in the United States lawfully,'' Mr. Coleman said.
  In adopting such ''gag orders,'' Mr. Coleman said, cities prevent their employees from finding and arresting illegal immigrants who may go on to commit violent crimes.
  Senator Salazar denounced the proposal, saying it would force schoolteachers and hospital emergency room workers to become ''the cops of our immigration laws.''
  Mr. Kennedy said Mr. Coleman's amendment would deter illegal immigrants from reporting crimes or cooperating with the public health authorities.
  For example, he said, illegal immigrants with tuberculosis might be reluctant to seek treatment, and they could infect United States citizens.  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, at a hearing on immigration yesterday. (Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)                                                                 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); FAMILY (73%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (72%); FINES & PENALTIES (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%)

Person: TED KENNEDY (73%); ARLEN SPECTER (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); KEN SALAZAR (58%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%); MEL MARTINEZ (58%); DAVID VITTER (56%)

Geographic: LOUISIANA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: May 25, 2007


End of Document
U.S. Proposes Immigration Rule Aimed at Entrepreneurs
The New York Times 
August 26, 2016 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 794 words
Byline: STACY COWLEY
Highlight: The proposal, which doesn’t require congressional approval, would grant temporary entry for up to five years to people building start-ups in the U.S.
Body


Foreign entrepreneurs building new companies in the United States could soon gain a new immigration option that would grant them temporary entry for up to five years, under a rule proposed on Friday by the Department of Homeland Security.
The proposal, which does not require congressional approval, would allow immigration officials to admit entrepreneurs case by case. To qualify, an applicant must have an “active and central role,” and a significant ownership stake, in an American company founded in the last three years.
The move is one of many piecemeal efforts by the Obama administration to expand America’s immigration policies without action from Congress. Entrepreneurs in any industry would be eligible to apply, but the new rule would be especially significant for the technology field. Creating an immigration route for start-up founders has been one of Silicon Valley’s political priorities.
“This is a big step in the right direction,” said Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant and the chief executive of Stripe, a payment processing company based in San Francisco. “I think it will have major impact on U.S. entrepreneurship, and potentially on the broader economy.”
More than half of American tech start-ups valued at $1 billion or more had at least one immigrant founder, according to a recent study by the National Foundation for American Policy, a research group that focuses on immigration issues.
Mr. Collison and his brother John started Stripe five years ago while attending colleges in Massachusetts. Dealing with the brothers’ visa issues was one of the biggest challenges Stripe had to overcome in its early days, Mr. Collison said. The company now has more than 500 employees, and Mr. Collison is part of a group of Silicon Valley executives and investors pressing for immigration reform.
President Obama made it a signature policy issue, speaking frequently about the need for a path that would allow skilled entrepreneurs to build new companies and create jobs, but efforts to create a “start-up visa” for foreign entrepreneurs have repeatedly died in Congress.
In 2014, Mr. Obama changed tactics, using an executive action to order federal officials to draft a plan for granting some entrepreneurs temporary immigration status.
The proposal put forth on Friday circumvents visas by relying on a federal law that lets the secretary of homeland security temporarily admit people whose entry into the United States would create “significant public benefit.” Around 3,000 entrepreneurs a year may qualify, according to an estimate from the Department of Homeland Security.
Sophie Alcorn, an immigration lawyer in Mountain View, Calif., said the new rule, if adopted, could significantly ease the challenges faced by fledgling entrepreneurs, especially those who came to the United States to attend college and began working on a new venture.
“I get calls every day from desperate start-up founders who are brilliant and accomplished, but they get into this chicken-and-egg problem,” she said. “Investors won’t give them money unless they can be confident that people can get into the country, or remain here.”
Immigration has become a major flash point in this year’s presidential race, with the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, calling for stricter limits on entry and his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, proposing automatic green cards for foreign students who earn advanced degrees in technical fields from American universities.
Deepak Kamra, a venture capitalist, testified before Congress three years ago in favor of a visa for entrepreneurs. The idea had broad bipartisan backing, he said, but kept falling apart over the issue’s politics.
“Establishment Republicans and Democrats all support this, but they all then back up and say, ‘It should be part of comprehensive immigration reform,’ which is code for, ‘It’s not going anywhere,’” Mr. Kamra said.
The main immigration pathway for foreign workers with specialized skills, the H-1B visa program, has been plagued by controversy and            abuses, and labor groups generally oppose efforts to expand it. But past proposals to create pathways for entrepreneurs have drawn fairly little criticism, in part because the suggested programs are typically small and targeted.
The Department of Homeland Security’s 155-page proposal will be open for public comment for 45 days. After that, the department can move forward with a final rule, which could take effect as soon as next year.
PHOTO: When Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant, co-founded Stripe, visa issues were a significant hurdle. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAU BARRENA/BLOOMBERG)
Related Articles
    • Countries Seek Entrepreneurs From Silicon Valley
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
    • Tech Incubators on a Mission of Diversity
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); APPROVALS (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); NEW BUSINESSES (90%); STARTUPS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); JOB CREATION (73%); LAWYERS (73%); EXECUTIVES (67%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Entrepreneurship (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Foreign Workers (%); Start-ups (%)

Ticker: Homeland Security Department

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); LAWYERS (73%)

Person: PATRICK COLLISON (79%); BARACK OBAMA (78%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: February 1, 2017


End of Document
Immigration Agency That Issues Visas, Green Cards Struggles to Stay Afloat
The New York Times 
May 17, 2020 Sunday 21:27 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1251 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has asked Congress for a lifeline amid the coronavirus pandemic, which has caused applications to plummet and brought it to the brink of insolvency.
Body


U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has asked Congress for a lifeline amid the coronavirus pandemic, which has caused applications to plummet and brought it to the brink of insolvency.
LOS ANGELES — A precipitous drop in applications for green cards, citizenship and other programs has threatened the solvency of the federal agency that administers the country’s lawful immigration system, prompting it to seek a $1.2 billion cash infusion from Congress as well as fee hikes to stay afloat.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which relies on the fees that it charges applicants to fund its operations, said that it could run out of money by the summer because the coronavirus pandemic had resulted in far fewer people applying for visas and other benefits.
“Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, U.S.C.I.S. has seen a dramatic decrease in revenue,” said a spokesman for the agency, noting that its receipts could plummet by more than 60 percent by the close of the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30.
Without the $1.2 billion injection from Congress, the agency, he said, would be unable to fund its operations in a matter of months. The agency plans to impose a 10 percent “surcharge” on applications, on top of previously proposed increases, that it is expecting to implement in the coming months.
Critics blamed the Trump administration’s stringent policies, which have caused backlogs, red tape and application denials to skyrocket, for dissuading an untold number of people from applying for visas and other immigration benefits.
“This administration is asking taxpayers to bail out an agency as a result of the very policies it put in place which have caused revenue loss,” said Melissa Rodgers, the director of programs at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco.
“With extreme vetting, they are making every single application take longer to review, and processing fewer,” said Ms. Rodgers, who oversees a program to promote citizenship among legal immigrants. “Word gets out that it’s not worth applying.”
Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, an immigration hard-liner who is acting deputy secretary for the Department of Homeland Security and at the helm of the agency, has stressed upholding immigration laws over granting visas and citizenship as the agency’s mission. “We are not a benefit agency, we are a vetting agency,” he has said.
Last summer, Mr. Cuccinelli announced a “public charge” rule that denied immigrants green cards if they were deemed likely to use government benefit programs like food stamps and subsidized housing, a move that is believed to have deterred many people from applying. The reason: Applying for legal permanent residency in itself could be considered a negative factor by immigration officers when determining whether a person could become a public charge.
Some critics said that the agency was ill-prepared for the economic shock from the coronavirus pandemic because of policies that had rendered its adjudication process less efficient while bloating its payroll.
Since President Trump took office, the agency, for example, has bolstered resources devoted to fraud detection as well as added new requirements for in-person interviews for hundreds of thousands of employment- and marriage-based green card applicants.
It also has been returning large numbers of visa applications with “requests for further evidence” of eligibility, which adjudicators must then review again. Extensions for H-1B visas, issued to skilled workers already in the United States, are now reviewed from scratch, as if the person were a first-time applicant.
“This administration has made every single application much more expensive and time-consuming to adjudicate,” said Doug Rand, who worked on immigration policy in the Obama administration.
In fiscal year 2016, the agency had 15,828 positions, including full-time and contract workers. Three years later, that number had climbed to almost 18,866, a 19 percent increase.
“If they had kept the same staff levels and not put in place these policies, would they still have run out of cash? Maybe not,” said Mr. Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps people apply for green cards and citizenship.
As in previous years, Citizenship and Immigration Services in fiscal 2020 had counted on fees paid by applicants to cover the lion’s share of its expenditures: 97 percent of its $4.8 billion budget.
But after applications took a nosedive, the agency, the spokesman said, was seeking “a one-time emergency request for funding to ensure we can carry out our mission of administering our nation’s lawful immigration system, safeguarding its integrity and protecting the American people.”
The agency already had been trying to limit spending to paying salaries and critical expenses to avert a financial crisis, he said, and would have to take further “drastic actions,” which he did not specify, to keep operating. Those could include staff reductions that would affect the adjudication of citizenship, green cards, asylum and work visas.
The agency has not released data that attests to the decrease in applications. But an officer at the agency, speaking on condition of anonymity because the person was not authorized to talk to the news media, said that the staff had been notified recently that the agency was “severely strapped for cash due to the low number of new applications being filed,” adding that overtime, travel and purchases had been scrapped.
Ana Maria Schwartz, an immigration lawyer in Houston, said that half as many clients had retained her to apply for green cards, citizenship and other immigration benefits between March 15 and May 15 compared with the same period in 2019. “That’s a seismic shift, even for my tiny firm,” she said.
In November last year, the agency’s leadership proposed steep increases in fees to file for legal immigration and naturalization. For the first time, the agency would also charge those fleeing persecution and seeking protection in the United States.
Mr. Cuccinelli, the agency’s chief, said that the fee hikes would help cover the agency’s deficits.
Immigrant advocates balked at the justification, saying that the goal was to reduce the number of immigrants who become citizens before the 2020 presidential election and, more broadly, cut legal immigration by making fees prohibitive for low-income people.
The fee assessed on petitions for naturalization would jump more than 60 percent, to $1,170 from $725, for most applicants. The government would also begin charging asylum seekers $50 for applications and $490 for work permits, which would make the United States one of just four countries to charge people for asylum.
The government also announced its intention to increase the cost of renewals for hundreds of thousands of participants of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, also known as DACA. They would be required to pay $765, rather than $495.
Thus far, the fees have remained unchanged. The government has issued three public notices about them in the Federal Register, attracting more than 40,000 public comments that it is mandated to review and consider before announcing a final rule.
“The administration turned the fee changes into a hyper ideological policy vehicle that slowed them down,” Mr. Rand said.
PHOTO: A 2019 naturalization ceremony in Los Angeles. The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services is facing a 60 percent revenue drop. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ETIENNE LAURENT/EPA-EFE/SHUTTERSTOCK)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (95%); EPIDEMICS (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (92%); CORONAVIRUSES (91%); PANDEMICS (91%); VIRUSES (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); FOOD STAMPS (73%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); WELFARE BENEFITS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); Green Cards (US) (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Cuccinelli, Kenneth T II (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Finances (%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (95%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%)

Person: Cuccinelli, Kenneth T II

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2021


End of Document
Many Employers See Flaws as Immigration Bill Evolves - Correction Appended
The New York Times
May 27, 2007 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 993 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Dateline: WASHINGTON, May 26 
Body


Employers, a major force in the national debate over immigration, say their discontent with the bill shaping up in the Senate has deepened over the last week because of changes that could make it more difficult for them to hire foreign workers.
  High-tech companies, like Microsoft and Oracle, and employers of lesser skilled workers, like restaurants and construction contractors, already had qualms about the original version of the legislation, forged in three months of talks between the White House and a dozen senators.
But from the point of view of many employers, the bill has become worse in the last week.
  E. John Krumholtz, director of federal affairs at Microsoft, said senators were well intentioned and ''really wanted to help us'' find the skilled professionals needed to design computers and write software.
  But Mr. Krumholtz said: ''The deal is worse than the status quo, and the status quo is a disaster. We are troubled by the grand bargain.''
  The deal was announced on May 17, and the text of the legislation became available two days later. The Senate began debating it on Monday.
  Mr. Krumholtz said, ''The package would have benefited from greater scrutiny -- the hearings, review and analysis that occur in the normal legislative process.''
  Supporters of the bill had a good week on the Senate floor. On Monday, they got 69 votes to begin consideration of the bill. They mustered 66 votes on Thursday in favor of the most contentious provision in the bill, which would offer legal status to most of the nation's estimated 12 million illegal immigrants.
  The bill calls for a ''merit-based system'' of awarding green cards, which gives greater weight to education and job skills.
  But Daryl R. Buffenstein, a former president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association whose clients include many Fortune 500 companies, said: ''The reforms in the Senate bill do not help the business community. Indeed, they hurt the business community. Under the current system, employers file petitions with the government to show why a particular employee is needed and should get a green card. The Senate bill would eliminate the employers' ability to petition for specific workers.''
  The bill would increase the number of visas for highly skilled workers, a goal long sought by the high-tech industry. Senator Bernard Sanders, independent of Vermont, won adoption of an amendment that would increase the fee charged to employers for such a visa, known as an H-1B, to $5,000, from $1,500. The money would be used to finance scholarships for American citizens studying engineering, mathematics, computer science or health care. 
  Robert P. Hoffman, a vice president of Oracle, said the higher fees represented ''an onerous tax increase on America's most innovative companies.''
  Companies that employ lower-skilled workers also objected to changes made on the Senate floor.
  The bill, as drafted by senators and the Bush administration, would have allowed American companies to bring in 400,000 lower-skilled workers on two-year visas. The number could have increased to 600,000 in response to employers' needs.
  The Senate lowered the limit to 200,000 and eliminated the automatic adjustment for market conditions. Senator Byron L. Dorgan, Democrat of North Dakota, said the foreign workers would put ''downward pressure on American wages.''
  R. Craig Silvertooth, director of federal affairs at the National Roofing Contractors Association, said employers were dismayed by the Senate's action.
  ''It's a travesty,'' Mr. Silvertooth said. ''It eviscerates the temporary worker program, which was one of the central reasons for the business community to be involved in the immigration debate.''
  Employers strongly support the provision that would offer legal status to illegal immigrants.
  With a legal work force, employers say, they could avoid fines and raids by immigration officers. Such raids have disrupted operations at some companies, forcing them to recruit and train replacement workers.
  Jeffrey S. Passel, a former Census Bureau demographer who works at the Pew Hispanic Center, estimates that more than 7 million of the 12 million illegal immigrants are employed. They account for nearly 5 percent of the nation's civilian labor force, with higher shares in some occupations: 29 percent of roofers, 24 percent of agricultural workers and 25 percent of construction laborers.
  But employers said they were still deeply concerned about a provision of the Senate bill that would require them to check federal and state databases to verify that employees were eligible to work in the United States. The requirement applies to all current and future employees, whether they are citizens or not.
  If the employee verification system had even a small error rate, it could cause big problems for large companies like Wal-Mart, which has 1.3 million employees.
  John F. Gay, senior vice president of the National Restaurant Association, said the verification system should be phased in, to make sure it could handle the large number of inquiries that would be made.
  Farmers, by contrast, are generally pleased with the bill, which has many provisions tailored to their needs. Under the bill, the government would create a special program to legalize the status of illegal immigrants working in agriculture, and it would speed the approval of employers' petitions to bring in seasonal workers.
  ''The bill would secure the essential labor force in agriculture today, and it would go a long way to meet our need for seasonal labor in the future,'' said Luawanna M. Hallstrom, a tomato grower in Oceanside, Calif., who is a vice president of the National Council of Agricultural Employers.
  John H. Young, director of the New England Apple Council, said the new procedure for seasonal farm workers would be ''more reliable than the current system, which is so cumbersome that you can't be sure you'll have workers when you need them.''  

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


A chart on Sunday about occupations in which illegal immigrants account for a large proportion of all workers misstated the size of the civilian labor force in 2005. It was 148.6 million, not 48.6 million.
Correction-Date: June 1, 2007

Graphic

 
Chart: ''Working Under the Radar'' Occupations in which illegal immigrants account for a large proportion of all workers.  OCCUPATION: Insulation workers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 56,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 36%  OCCUPATION: Miscellaneous agricultural workers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 839,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 29  OCCUPATION: Roofers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 325,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 29  OCCUPATION: Drywall installers and ceiling tile installers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 285,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 28  OCCUPATION: Contruction helpers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 145,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 27  OCCUPATION: Meat, poultry and fish processing workers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 322,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 27  OCCUPATION: Pressers of textile, garment and related materials Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 83,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 26  OCCUPATION: Grounds maintenance workers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 1,204,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 25  OCCUPATION: Construction laborers Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 1,614,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 25  OCCUPATION: Brickmasons, blockmasons and stonemasons Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 198,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 25  OCCUPATION: Overall civilian labor force Estimates based on 2005 Census data TOTAL WORKERS: 48,615,000 PERCENTAGE UNAUTHORIZED: 4.9%  (Source by Pew Hispanic Center analysis)                                        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL DEBATES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PETITIONS (86%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (79%); FOREIGN LABOR (79%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); ENGINEERING (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (74%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (74%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); TAXES & TAXATION (72%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (68%); SCHOLARSHIPS & GRANTS (68%); STUDENT EXPENSES & FINANCING (67%)

Company:  ORACLE CORP (84%);  GEOPHARMA INC (60%);  MICROSOFT CORP (57%)

Ticker: ORCL (NYSE) (84%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (84%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (84%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (84%); SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (84%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (84%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (84%); NAICS325412 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (60%); SIC2834 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATIONS (60%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (77%); CONSTRUCTION (76%); ENGINEERING (76%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (68%)

Person: BERNIE SANDERS (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: May 27, 2007


End of Document
U.S. Immigration Option Could Aid Entrepreneurs
The New York Times
August 27, 2016 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 750 words
Byline: By STACY COWLEY
Body


Foreign entrepreneurs building new companies in the United States could soon gain a new immigration option that would grant them temporary entry for up to five years, under a rule proposed on Friday by the Department of Homeland Security.
The proposal, which does not require congressional approval, would allow immigration officials to admit entrepreneurs case by case. To qualify, an applicant must have an ''active and central role,'' and a significant ownership stake, in an American company founded in the last three years. 
  The move is one of many piecemeal efforts by the Obama administration to expand America's immigration policies without action from Congress. Entrepreneurs in any industry would be eligible to apply, but the new rule would be especially significant for the technology field. Creating an immigration route for start-up founders has been one of Silicon Valley's political priorities.
  ''This is a big step in the right direction,'' said Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant and the chief executive of Stripe, a payment processing company based in San Francisco. ''I think it will have major impact on U.S. entrepreneurship, and potentially on the broader economy.''
  More than half of American tech start-ups valued at $1 billion or more had at least one immigrant founder, according to a recent study by the National Foundation for American Policy, a research group that focuses on immigration issues.
  Mr. Collison and his brother John started Stripe five years ago while attending colleges in Massachusetts. Dealing with the brothers' visa issues was one of the biggest challenges Stripe had to overcome in its early days, Mr. Collison said. The company now has more than 500 employees, and Mr. Collison is part of a group of Silicon Valley executives and investors pressing for immigration reform.
  President Obama made it a signature policy issue, speaking frequently about the need for a path that would allow skilled entrepreneurs to build new companies and create jobs, but efforts to create a ''start-up visa'' for foreign entrepreneurs have repeatedly died in Congress.
  In 2014, Mr. Obama changed tactics, using an executive action to order federal officials to draft a plan for granting some entrepreneurs temporary immigration status.
  The proposal put forth on Friday circumvents visas by relying on a federal law that lets the secretary of homeland security temporarily admit people whose entry into the United States would create ''significant public benefit.'' Around 3,000 entrepreneurs a year may qualify, according to an estimate from the Department of Homeland Security.
  Sophie Alcorn, an immigration lawyer in Mountain View, Calif., said the new rule, if adopted, could significantly ease the challenges faced by fledgling entrepreneurs, especially those who came to the United States to attend college and began working on a new venture.
  ''I get calls every day from desperate start-up founders who are brilliant and accomplished, but they get into this chicken-and-egg problem,'' she said. ''Investors won't give them money unless they can be confident that people can get into the country, or remain here.''
  Immigration has become a major flash point in this year's presidential race, with the Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, calling for stricter limits on entry and his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, proposing automatic green cards for foreign students who earn advanced degrees in technical fields from American universities.
  Deepak Kamra, a venture capitalist, testified before Congress three years ago in favor of a visa for entrepreneurs. The idea had broad bipartisan backing, he said, but kept falling apart over the issue's politics.
  ''Establishment Republicans and Democrats all support this, but they all then back up and say, 'It should be part of comprehensive immigration reform,' which is code for, 'It's not going anywhere,''' Mr. Kamra said.
  The main immigration pathway for foreign workers with specialized skills, the H-1B visa program, has been plagued by controversy and abuses, and labor groups generally oppose efforts to expand it. But past proposals to create pathways for entrepreneurs have drawn fairly little criticism, in part because the suggested programs are typically small and targeted.
  The Department of Homeland Security's 155-page proposal will be open for public comment for 45 days. After that, the department can move forward with a final rule, which could take effect as soon as next year.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/27/business/entrepreneur-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: When Patrick Collison, an Irish immigrant, co-founded Stripe, visa issues were a significant hurdle. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PAU BARRENA/BLOOMBERG)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (91%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); NEW BUSINESSES (90%); STARTUPS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (74%); LAWYERS (73%); APPROVALS (72%); EXECUTIVES (67%); RESEARCH REPORTS (66%); JOB CREATION (62%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); LAWYERS (73%)

Person: PATRICK COLLISON (79%); BARACK OBAMA (76%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: August 27, 2016


End of Document
Immigration Agency On Brink of Insolvency As Applications Dive
The New York Times
May 18, 2020 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 1233 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has asked Congress for a lifeline amid the coronavirus pandemic that has caused applications to plummet and brought it to the brink of insolvency.
LOS ANGELES -- A precipitous drop in applications for green cards, citizenship and other programs has threatened the solvency of the federal agency that administers the country's lawful immigration system, prompting it to seek a $1.2 billion cash infusion from Congress as well as fee hikes to stay afloat. 
  The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which relies on the fees that it charges applicants to fund its operations, said that it could run out of money by the summer because the coronavirus pandemic had resulted in far fewer people applying for visas and other benefits.
  ''Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, U.S.C.I.S. has seen a dramatic decrease in revenue,'' said a spokesman for the agency, noting that its receipts could plummet by more than 60 percent by the close of the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30.
  Without the $1.2 billion injection from Congress, the agency, he said, would be unable to fund its operations in a matter of months. The agency plans to impose a 10 percent ''surcharge'' on applications, on top of previously proposed increases, that it is expecting to implement in the coming months.
  Critics blamed the Trump administration's stringent policies, which have caused backlogs, red tape and application denials to skyrocket, for dissuading an untold number of people from applying for visas and other immigration benefits.
  ''This administration is asking taxpayers to bail out an agency as a result of the very policies it put in place which have caused revenue loss,'' said Melissa Rodgers, the director of programs at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco.
  ''With extreme vetting, they are making every single application take longer to review, and processing fewer,'' said Ms. Rodgers, who oversees a program to promote citizenship among legal immigrants. ''Word gets out that it's not worth applying.''
  Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, an immigration hard-liner who is acting deputy secretary for the Department of Homeland Security and at the helm of the agency, has stressed upholding immigration laws over granting visas and citizenship as the agency's mission. ''We are not a benefit agency, we are a vetting agency,'' he has said.
  Last summer, Mr. Cuccinelli announced a ''public charge'' rule that denied immigrants green cards if they were deemed likely to use government benefit programs like food stamps and subsidized housing, a move that is believed to have deterred many people from applying. The reason: Applying for legal permanent residency in itself could be considered a negative factor by immigration officers when determining whether a person could become a public charge.
  Some critics said that the agency was ill-prepared for the economic shock from the coronavirus pandemic because of policies that had rendered its adjudication process less efficient while bloating its payroll.
  Since President Trump took office, the agency, for example, has bolstered resources devoted to fraud detection as well as added new requirements for in-person interviews for hundreds of thousands of employment- and marriage-based green card applicants.
  It also has been returning large numbers of visa applications with ''requests for further evidence'' of eligibility, which adjudicators must then review again. Extensions for H-1B visas, issued to skilled workers already in the United States, are now reviewed from scratch, as if the person is a first-time applicant.
  ''This administration has made every single application much more expensive and time-consuming to adjudicate,'' said Doug Rand, who worked on immigration policy in the Obama administration.
  In fiscal year 2016, the agency had 15,828 positions, including full-time and contract workers. Three years later, that number had climbed to almost 18,866, a 19 percent increase.
  ''If they had kept the same staff levels and not put in place these policies, would they still have run out of cash -- maybe not,'' said Mr. Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps people apply for green cards and citizenship.
  As in previous years, Citizenship and Immigration Services in fiscal 2020 had counted on fees paid by applicants to cover the lion's share of its expenditures: 97 percent of its $4.8 billion budget.
  But after applications took a nosedive, the agency, the spokesman said, was seeking ''a one-time emergency request for funding to ensure we can carry out our mission of administering our nation's lawful immigration system, safeguarding its integrity and protecting the American people.''
  The agency already had been trying to limit spending to paying salaries and critical expenses to avert a financial crisis, he said, and would have to take further ''drastic actions,'' which he did not specify, to keep operating. Those could include staff reductions that would affect the adjudication of citizenship, green cards, asylum and work visas.
  The agency has not released data that attests to the decrease in applications. But an officer at the agency, speaking on condition of anonymity because the person was not authorized to talk to the news media, said that the staff had been notified recently that the agency was ''severely strapped for cash due to the low number of new applications being filed,'' adding that overtime, travel and purchases had been scrapped.
  Ana Maria Schwartz, an immigration lawyer in Houston, said that half as many clients had retained her to apply for green cards, citizenship and other immigration benefits between March 15 and May 15 compared with the same period in 2019. ''That's a seismic shift, even for my tiny firm,'' she said.
  In November last year, the agency's leadership proposed steep increases in fees to file for legal immigration and naturalization. For the first time, the agency would also charge those fleeing persecution and seeking protection in the United States.
  Mr. Cuccinelli, the agency's chief, said that the fee hikes would help cover the agency's deficits.
  Immigrant advocates balked at the justification, saying that the goal was to reduce the number of immigrants who become citizens before the 2020 presidential election and, more broadly, cut legal immigration by making fees prohibitive for low-income people.
  The fee assessed on petitions for naturalization would jump more than 60 percent, to $1,170 from $725, for most applicants. The government would also begin charging asylum seekers $50 for applications and $490 for work permits, which would make the United States one of just four countries to charge people for asylum.
  The government also announced its intention to increase the cost of renewals for hundreds of thousands of participants of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, also known as DACA. They would be required to pay $765, rather than $495.
  Thus far, the fees have remained unchanged. The government has issued three public notices about them in the Federal Register, attracting more than 40,000 public comments that it is mandated to review and consider before announcing a final rule.
  ''The administration turned the fee changes into a hyper ideological policy vehicle that slowed them down,'' Mr. Rand said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/17/us/immigration-agency-uscis-budget.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: A 2019 naturalization ceremony in Los Angeles. The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services is facing a 60 percent revenue drop. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ETIENNE LAURENT/EPA-EFE/SHUTTERSTOCK)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (92%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (90%); EPIDEMICS (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (90%); PANDEMICS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); VIRUSES (78%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); FOOD STAMPS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); WELFARE BENEFITS (72%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (94%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: May 18, 2020


End of Document
Senate Rejects Most Efforts to Change Immigration Bill
The New York Times
June 7, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 31
Length: 851 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 6 
Body


The Senate signaled support for major provisions of a comprehensive immigration bill on Wednesday by rejecting many proposed amendments, including one that would have made it much harder for many illegal immigrants to achieve legal status.
  Architects of the legislation said they hoped that by plowing through the amendments, they would gain support for a motion to end debate on the legislation. The motion, scheduled for a vote on Thursday, needs 60 votes to succeed.
The Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, said, ''We have made a lot of progress,'' adding, ''The end really is in sight.''
  Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, who opposes the bill, said, ''The train is moving down the tracks.''
  While senators struggled with the complex legislation, which calls for the biggest changes in immigration policy since 1986, executives from high-tech companies descended on Capitol Hill to express concerns. 
  Steven A. Ballmer, the chief executive of Microsoft, was among the businessmen pleading with Congress to increase the number of H-1B visas and green cards available to skilled foreign professionals. Ginny Terzano, a spokeswoman for Microsoft, said such visas were urgently needed to help meet ''a talent crisis'' in the industry.
  Two amendments intended to reunify families, by providing additional visas for close relatives of United States citizens and lawful permanent residents, failed on procedural votes. The amendments were offered by Senators Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York and Robert Menendez of New Jersey, both Democrats. 
  Republicans raised points of order, saying the proposals violated budget rules because they would increase federal spending with no way to offset the costs.
  The Senate bill, which embodies a fragile bipartisan compromise strongly supported by President Bush, would offer legal status to most of the estimated 12 million illegal immigrants in the United States. Administration officials said they hoped that the Senate would pass the bill with 70 votes, to build momentum in the House, where the legislation faces stiff headwinds.
  By a vote of 51 to 46, the Senate on Wednesday rejected an amendment proposed by Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, that could have made hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants ineligible for legal status.
  Under Mr. Cornyn's proposal, gang members, terrorists and other convicted felons would have been permanently barred from the United States and denied immigration benefits. Most significant, the amendment would have denied legal status to illegal immigrants who had flouted deportation orders or been convicted of identity theft or fraudulent use of identification documents.
  Mr. Cornyn said his purpose was not to cater to ''racists, nativists or know-nothings,'' but to exclude ''felons who have shown contempt for American law.'' But Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, said Mr. Cornyn's amendment would ''gut the bill.'' And Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, the chief Democratic architect of the bill, said: ''Almost every hard-working immigrant in this country has been forced, at one time or another, to use false documents to get a job.''
  Mr. Cornyn said his amendment was a defining issue for presidential candidates. Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, a co-author of the overall bill, voted against Mr. Cornyn's amendment and for a Democratic alternative.
  The four senators seeking the Democratic nomination -- Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, Mrs. Clinton, Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut and Barack Obama of Illinois -- also voted against Mr. Cornyn's proposal.
  Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, voted for it.
  By a vote of 66 to 32, the Senate approved the Democratic alternative, which would increase penalties for illegal immigrants who have been convicted of sex offenses, crimes of domestic violence or the use of firearms in alien-smuggling operations.
  In a surprise, the Senate approved another Cornyn amendment that would give law enforcement and intelligence agencies access to information in applications for legal status that are denied. The vote was 57 to 39.
  Mr. Cornyn said his proposal would give law enforcement ''a critical tool to prevent document fraud and to prosecute those who have broken our immigration laws.''
  But Mr. Kennedy said that without the guarantee of confidentiality, illegal immigrants would be extremely reluctant to come forward and apply for legal status.
  The Senate rejected a proposal to change the structure of the bill's guest worker program. Under the program, foreign workers could get two-year visas, which could be renewed twice, but the guest workers would have to leave the United States for a year in between their stays here.
  Senator Jeff Bingaman, Democrat of New Mexico, said the requirement for workers to leave the country would ''cause enormous instability in the work force.'' Mr. Bingaman proposed an amendment to admit guest workers for a maximum of six consecutive years, but the Senate rejected it, 57 to 41.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (91%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); FELONIES (87%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); DEPORTATION (73%); FOREIGN LABOR (73%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (72%); PUBLIC FINANCE (71%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (64%); FALSE IDENTITY (62%); IDENTITY THEFT (62%); TERRORISM (50%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (55%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); BUDGETS (63%)

Person: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JEFF SESSIONS (79%); JOHN CORNYN (79%); BOB MENENDEZ (58%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); HARRY REID (58%); TED KENNEDY (58%)

Geographic: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); NEVADA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: June 7, 2007


End of Document
When Donald Met Melania, Paolo Was There
The New York Times
September 1, 2016 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Column 0; Style Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1736 words
Byline: By JASON HOROWITZ
Body


A couple of weekends ago, Paolo Zampolli received a text message from Melania Trump, the wife of the Republican candidate for president, urging him to give her a call. The next day, Mr. Zampolli, a former modeling agent who had discovered the Slovene 20 years ago in Milan, listened as Ms. Trump expressed anguish over a gossipy report in the British tabloid The Daily Mail accusing her and Mr. Zampolli of operating an escort service in the 1990s.
''This is outrageous,''' Ms. Trump said on the call, according to Mr. Zampolli, explaining that she was considering filing a suit against The Daily Mail for making false and defamatory statements. He said she sounded ''extremely disturbed.'' 
  Mr. Zampolli, 46, sounded less than disturbed as he spoke over a recent lunch of pasta in his Gramercy Park townhouse, which is decorated with works by Canaletto, de Chirico and Picasso. In his monogrammed dress shirt and Italian-accented English, the onetime mainstay of New York gossip pages called the report ''rubbish'' and ''disgusting,'' but also seemed to relish his return to the public eye.
  He spoke emphatically about his central role in an article earlier this month exploring Ms. Trump's visa history (''reprinted in 550 publications around the world.'') and had lined up more interviews about the Daily Mail article later in the day.
  By stepping back into the spotlight, Mr. Zampolli, a tireless self-promoter of mysterious means, brings into the 2016 presidential race an explicit reminder of the company the Trumps and Clintons kept in the behind-the-velvet-rope heyday of fin-de-20th-siècle New York. For two couples often accused of having an exceptionally transactional worldview, Mr. Zampolli is both Zelig and an open-collared emblem of the social waters in which they swam.
  He secured Ms. Trump's visa to the United States and introduced her to her future husband at a 1998 party he hosted at the Kit Kat Club. (Mr. Zampolli's parties have featured an alligator, tiger cubs and models at nightclubs blowing kisses at Fashion Television cameras.)
  He flew with Mr. Trump on his jet to attend the mogul's wedding at Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach, Fla. There, he said, ''I was introduced to Hillary by Huma,'' referring to Huma Abedin, whom he said he knew from events in New York.
  By then, he said, he had already met Mr. Clinton ''many, many, many'' times. He called Mr. Clinton's former adviser Doug Band ''Dougie'' and used to be close to Ronald Burkle, the billionaire investor who was once a close friend, private-jet provider and business partner of Mr. Clinton. (Mr. Clinton ''was not coming to parties with me and the models,'' Mr. Zampolli said.)
  The Clinton campaign, Mr. Trump and Mr. Burkle declined to comment about Mr. Zampolli. But Ms. Trump wrote in a statement last Thursday: ''I have known Paolo Zampolli since 1995 when we first met at a modeling agency in Milan. He loved my portfolio and encouraged me to expand my career to New York City. Paolo was a very professional agent and still remains a friend today. The defamatory statements reported by The Daily Mail are 100% false.''
  These days, Mr. Zampolli has traded in the fashion business for real estate and diplomatic pursuits. In 2013 he became, by appointment, the United Nations ambassador of Dominica, a country of which he is not a citizen. A Brazilian model, Amanda Ungaro, his wife of a decade and the mother of his young son, herself became ambassador of Grenada to the United Nations, also by appointment.
  In his office, along with pictures of him posing with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Trump's jet, there are hundreds of framed photographs of him with dignitaries. His passion now, he says, is sustaining the life aquatic. (''The ocean dies, we die.'')
  He has started an organization, We Are the Oceans, the flags of which fly outside his house and whose scuba-themed pillows are on his oversize bed. In March, Page Six covered a gala of ambassadors and pouting socialites at his home that in part benefited an organization called Save Our Shark Coalition.
  Asked how he broke into the diplomatic corps, Mr. Zampolli shrugged. ''I have been always good to put people together and make things happen,'' he said.
  An only child, Mr. Zampolli was raised in a wealthy Milanese family. He said his grandmother was a distant cousin of Pope Paul VI and that he spent his summers deep-sea diving in the Mediterranean and his winters skiing in St. Moritz, Switzerland. His mother lives on the fifth floor, where she polishes silverware and tells a visitor she ''would like to be proud of my son.''
  He said his father owned Harbert, a toy company best known for introducing to Italy ''Star Wars'' figures and the Easy-Bake Oven (a.k.a. Dolce Forno.) His father died in a skiing accident when Mr. Zampolli was 18.
  Handsome with slicked-back black hair, Mr. Zampolli left college to take over the toy company but considered Milan ''too small.'' He sold the company to a group under the control of Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian billionaire and eventual prime minister.
  Mr. Zampolli had his eye on other amusements. In 1994, he organized the Look of the Year contest in Ibiza, Spain (''Sponsored by Replay Jeans,'' he said, out of habit). He then became friendly with John Casablancas, the founder of Elite Model Management, who suggested he move to New York to work in the modeling business.
  He rented an apartment in Union Square and met Mr. Trump, whose grandiosity he admired and who, like him, was a fixture on the city's nightclub circuit. ''We both have a common interest,'' Mr. Zampolli said. ''We both like beautiful things.''
  Mr. Zampolli drank Diet Cokes with Mr. Trump, a teetotaler, in the exclusive upstairs area of the hot spot Moomba and joined him at other celebrity and model hangouts like Bowery Bar. He also traveled the world scouting talent for his agency and met Ms. Trump at a Milan casting call.
  Mr. Zampolli recalled that he asked her, ''Would you like to come to New York to try the market?'' where, he explained, she could make more money. ''I would be very interested,'' he said she replied.
  ''She was a very beautiful girl with her head on her shoulders,'' Mr. Zampolli said.
  Mr. Zampolli said that he secured an H-1B visa for the eventual Ms. Trump, calling the process ''very very easy to do.'' She moved into the same Union Square apartment building where he had lived and became friends with his girlfriend, a Hungarian model named Edit Molnar.
  Mr. Zampolli said the photographer of a nude photo shoot of Ms. Trump that surfaced last month on the front page of The New York Post had incorrectly dated the pictures 1995, which raised questions about whether she had worked in the United States before possessing a work visa. ''I spoke to the lawyer that did the visa, my understanding is that she came in '96,'' he said, adding ''I had nothing to do with the green card.''
  In a subsequent email, he wrote: ''If u write something about model taking picture w/ nothing on Yes this is part of the business is like An actor in movies that as an intimate scene .... I Am sure POTUS Regan or Governor Svarzeneger [sic] do have intimate scene in their movies.''
  In 1998, Mr. Zampolli introduced the future couple, but it was not his lone stab at matchmaking. In 2006 Mr. Zampolli, then the president of ID Models, arranged a meeting between Mr. Burkle and a reporter from Page Six, the gossip page where Mr. Zampolli boasted that he and his models had appeared ''close to 54 times'' in one year.
  Mr. Zampolli suggested to Mr. Burkle that a better relationship with the newspaper could improve his treatment. Among other items, Page Six infuriated Mr. Burkle by describing him as someone known for flying around on his Boeing 757 with models and considering buying a modeling agency that he would perhaps run with Mr. Clinton.
  Mr. Zampolli organized the meeting. It didn't go well, with Mr. Burkle ultimately alleging to the F.B.I. that the writer had tried to shake him down in return for better coverage.
  Mr. Zampolli tread carefully on the subject of his relationship with Mr. Burkle and Mr. Clinton. Asked whether he had ever hung out with Mr. Clinton and Mr. Burkle at the same time, he initially said, ''Maybe, I don't recall that much,'' before adding he had met Mr. Clinton ''so many times it may be that Burkle was there.''
  Mr. Zampolli was less reluctant to talk about Mr. Trump, whom he suggested he preferred as a presidential candidate. (''I am scared and we need borders in this country,'' he said.)
  In late 2004, Mr. Zampolli's fortunes in the modeling business had faltered and he lost a public auction to buy Elite Model Management. After taking in a Victoria's Secret fashion show, he squeezed into a small banquette at his favorite restaurant, Cipriani Downtown, where he often ate twice a day, with the Trumps and David Copperfield, the illusionist and one-time boyfriend of the supermodel Claudia Schiffer.
  He had lost his top model, and Mr. Trump told him: ''If you lose your supermodel, you go out of business. But if I lose my superintendent, I have a thousand looking for that job the next day.'' He added that Mr. Trump told him: ''Paolo, you are too good for the fashion industry. You should come work with me.''
  He looked at Melania, who smiled.
  Mr. Zampolli entered the real estate business as Mr. Trump's director of international development. (''Ciao, Paolo! Donald's Matchmaker Goes From Pin-Ups to Penthouses'' a New York Observer headline read.)
  He had some success, but he also found Mr. Trump to be a tough boss. And when Mr. Zampolli negotiated a deal to buy his dream home in Trump Park Avenue, Mr. Trump vetoed it, saying, ''I need much more,'' Mr. Zampolli said.
  Mr. Zampolli said he soon left Mr. Trump because the developer stopped developing and ''there wasn't much to do because there was no inventory.'' Instead, he started shuttling around clients in a Rolls-Royce and helicopters as the founder of Paramount Group. The company made headlines for using former models as brokers to sell luxury apartments.
  Back then, Mr. Zampolli explained his thinking to CNBC. ''The gorgeous ladies,'' he said. ''They meet the most rich and powerful people of the world, and some of them, they keep this connection.''
  Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/01/fashion/donald-trump-melania-modeling-agent-paolo-zampolli-daily-mail.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Paolo Zampolli, at home near Gramercy Park, introduced Donald Trump to his future wife, Melania, in 1998. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HILARY SWIFT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (78%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (78%); FALSE STATEMENTS (71%); LIBEL & SLANDER (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (70%); DEFAMATION (69%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (60%)

Industry: TEXT MESSAGING (78%); NIGHTCLUBS (60%)

Person: MELANIA TRUMP (79%); RON BURKLE (50%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (93%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: September 1, 2016


End of Document
Illinois Threatens to Fine Defiant Businesses as Reopening Tensions Rise Nationally
The New York Times 
May 18, 2020 Monday 07:25 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 5522 words
Highlight: Fed chair warns full economic recovery may await vaccine, while Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York has a public nasal swab to encourage testing.
Body


Fed chair warns full economic recovery may await vaccine, while Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York has a public nasal swab to encourage testing.
This briefing has ended. Follow our latest coverage of the coronavirus pandemic.
Illinois makes it a misdemeanor for business owners who flout pandemic restrictions.
The owners of restaurants, bars and other establishments in Illinois that open too soon can now be charged with a Class A misdemeanor under a measure enacted by the governor.
Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a Democrat, filed an emergency rule on Friday that his office said was intended to prevent the spread of the coronavirus as a growing number of businesses defy stay-at-home orders across the country.
In Illinois, where a stay-at-home order remains in effect through May, a Class A misdemeanor carries a punishment of up to a year in jail and up to a $2,500 fine. The rule also applies to businesses such as barbershops and gyms, according to Mr. Pritzker’s office.
Jordan Abudayyeh, a spokeswoman for Mr. Pritzker, said in an email Sunday that the measure provided an “additional enforcement tool for businesses that refuse to comply with the most critical aspects of the stay-at-home order.”
As of Sunday, 4,177 people had died from Covid-19 in Illinois, according to state health officials, and there have been 94,191 confirmed cases of the virus.
Conservative state lawmakers have criticized the measure. Senator Dan McConchie, a Republican and a member of the Senate’s Public Health Committee, called it “an affront to the separation of powers” in a Twitter post on Sunday.
“Legislatures make laws,” Mr. McConchie said. “Governors enforce them. Period.”
In Texas this month, a salon owner in Dallas was jailed for defying state and county orders for nonessential establishments to remain closed. The state Supreme Court ordered her release two days later. And last Sunday in Colorado, a restaurant that reopened for sit-down dining on Mother’s Day was            shut down and had its license suspended.
Ms. Abudayyeh, the governor’s spokeswoman, said that bringing misdemeanor charges against business owners was not a first resort.
“Law enforcement has relied heavily on educating business owners about the order and always first discusses the regulations with business owners to urge compliance,” she said. “Only businesses that pose a serious risk to public health and refuse to comply with health regulations would be issued a citation. The rule gives law enforcement a tool that may be more appropriate and less severe than closing the business altogether.”
In neighboring Wisconsin last week, the state Supreme Court struck down the state’s stay-at-home extension, siding with Republican legislators in a high-profile challenge of the emergency authority of a statewide official during the pandemic.
Governors struggle to find the right balance on reopening.
The pain of the coronavirus shutdown, in terms of wrecked economies and shattered lives, has been unmistakable. Now, governors across the country are contemplating the risks of reopening, particularly if it produces a surge of new cases and deaths.
“This is really the most crucial time, and the most dangerous time,” Gov. Mike DeWine of Ohio, a Republican, said on the CNN program “State of the Union” on Sunday. “All of this is a work in progress. We thought it was a huge risk not to open. But we also know it’s a huge risk in opening.”
The push to reopen has been fueled by swelling frustration, as unemployment soars, businesses declare bankruptcy or announce they cannot survive the shutdowns, and fears intensify about enduring economic devastation. Some businesses have even reopened in defiance of state orders.
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California, a Democrat, said on CNN, “I deeply understand the stress and anxiety that people have, that entire dreams have been torn asunder because of the shutdowns, their savings account depleted and their credit ratings destroyed.”
“The question is,” he added, “how do you toggle back and make meaningful modifications to the stay-at-home order?”
But governors also acknowledged concerns about a fresh resurgence of the coronavirus, and they are haunted by images of restaurants and stores packed with patrons with uncovered faces.
“This is a virus we’re still learning a lot about,” Mr. DeWine said. 
The response to the virus has been defined by the balance between trying to curb the virus’s spread and trying to minimize the economic harm. In much of the country, the pendulum has swung toward favoring the economy.
The shift has come as the national figures for reported new cases of the virus have declined in recent weeks, and as more states have allowed a wider array of businesses to return to operation. More than two-thirds of states have relaxed restrictions significantly. California, New York and Washington are among those partially reopening on a regional basis. Illinois, Michigan and New Jersey remain fully shut down.
‘This economy will recover; it may take a while.’
Jerome H. Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said that while he expected the U.S. economy to recover from the sharp and painful downturn brought about by the coronavirus, that process would take time — potentially until the end of 2021.
“This economy will recover; it may take a while,” Mr. Powell said in a preview of the CBS program “60 Minutes,” which is scheduled to air Sunday evening. “It may take a period of time, it could stretch through the end of next year, we don’t really know.”
Asked whether the economy could recover without an effective vaccine, Mr. Powell suggested that it could make a start, but not get all the way there.
“Assuming that there’s not a second wave of the coronavirus, I think you’ll see the economy recover steadily through the second half of this year,” he said. “For the economy to fully recover, people will have to be fully confident, and that may have to await the arrival of a vaccine.”
The interview with Mr. Powell, which CBS said was recorded on May 13, follows a blunt speech he gave the same day, warning that the economy may need more financial support to prevent permanent job losses and waves of bankruptcies.
Wondering what a coronavirus test is like? Watch Cuomo get swabbed on live TV.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo provided a lasting image on Sunday for fellow New Yorkers who may be apprehensive about getting tested for the coronavirus — he invited a doctor to stick a swab up his nose during his live news briefing on the pandemic.
“It is so fast and so easy that even a governor can take this test,” Mr. Cuomo said.
Mr. Cuomo then stood up and turned to a doctor, who was holding a cotton swab and was wearing coveralls, a face shield and gloves. Camera shutters clicked furiously as the doctor guided the swab up the Mr. Cuomo’s nostril.
“That’s it?” he said. “That’s it? Nothing else?”
New York has the capability of conducting 40,000 tests per day at 700 sites, said Mr. Cuomo, who noted that testing would be critical to monitoring the spread of the virus as the state begins to reopen.
“There is nothing about this test that should intimidate people from not taking this test,” he said.
Mr. Cuomo, who was expected to get the test results later on Sunday, said he could be squeamish at times when undergoing medical tests. He said he did not like “being poked and prodded.”
Calling into a golf broadcast, Trump says he wants ‘big, big stadiums loaded with people.’
In a telephone appearance during a televised charity golf exhibition Sunday, President Trump said he enthusiastically supported the return of live sporting events during the pandemic.
“We want to get sports back, we miss sports,” Mr. Trump said during NBC’s broadcast of a skins game match involving Rory McIlroy, Dustin Johnson, Rickie Fowler and Matthew Wolff. “We need sports in terms of the psyche of our country. And that’s what we’re doing.”
While Sunday’s exhibition was contested without spectators, Mr. Trump said he hoped that future events would be teeming with fans.
“We want to get it back to where it was, we want big, big stadiums loaded with people,” he said. 
He later added, “We want to get back to normal where you have the big crowds where they’re practically standing on top of each other, not where they’re worried.”
In an interview in April, Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, said he would not feel comfortable returning to a stadium until the infection rate was lower.
“I would love to be able to have all sports back,” Dr. Fauci said. “But as a health official and a physician and a scientist, I have to say, right now, when you look at the country, we’re not ready for that yet.”
Thirteen sick sailors seemed to recover. Then they tested positive again.
Thirteen sailors aboard the virus-stricken aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt have retested positive for Covid-19 after seeming to have recovered from the disease, Navy officials said on Sunday.
The infected sailors, who had all tested negative twice before reboarding the Roosevelt in recent days, have been removed from the warship to self-quarantine. The Roosevelt has been docked in Guam since March 27 as Navy officials wrestle with how to deal with sickened sailors, disinfect the vessel and prepare for it to resume operations in the Western Pacific.
Navy officials have said they are aggressively screening and testing as crew members return to the Roosevelt after quarantining at the U.S. military base in Guam, as well as at hotels and in other lodging there. Officials on the ship are requiring masks and repeatedly cleaning and sanitizing to prevent another outbreak of the virus, which has infected about 1,100 crew members since March. One sailor has died.
About 2,900 of the 4,800 crew members are now back on board. They are under strict orders to report to doctors the slightest cough, headache or other flulike symptom. In the past week or so, the new testing even turned up a sailor who tested positive for tuberculosis. That set off a wild contact-tracing scramble that found no other cases on board, Navy officials said.
The results of the Navy’s latest investigation into events surrounding the Roosevelt are due by the end of this month.
Recent research in South Korea suggested that dozens of patients there who had tested positive a second time after recovering from the illness appeared to be “false positives” caused by lingering — but likely not infectious — bits of the virus.
‘You could feel it going through your veins.’ A teen’s battle with a virus-linked syndrome.
When a sprinkling of a reddish rash appeared on Jack McMorrow’s hands in mid-April, his father figured the 14-year-old was overusing hand sanitizer — not a bad thing during a global pandemic.
When Jack’s parents noticed that his eyes looked glossy, they attributed it to late nights of video games and TV.
When he developed a stomachache and didn’t want dinner, “they thought it was because I ate too many cookies or whatever,” said Jack, a ninth-grader in Woodside, Queens, who loves Marvel Comics and has ambitions to teach himself “Stairway to Heaven” on the guitar.
But over the next 10 days, Jack felt increasingly unwell. His parents consulted his pediatricians in video appointments and took him to a weekend urgent care clinic. Then, one morning, he awoke unable to move.
He had a tennis ball-size lymph node, raging fever, racing heartbeat and dangerously low blood pressure. Pain deluged his body in “a throbbing, stinging rush,” he said.
“You could feel it going through your veins and it was almost like someone injected you with straight-up fire,” he said.
Jack, who was previously healthy, was hospitalized with heart failure that day, in a stark example of the newly discovered severe inflammatory syndrome linked to the coronavirus that has already been identified in about 200 children in the United States and Europe and killed several.
The condition, which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is calling Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children, has shaken widespread confidence that children were largely spared from the pandemic.
Colorado offers an alternative, much lower, count of its Covid-19 deaths.
What is the difference between “deaths among Covid-19 cases” and “deaths due to Covid-19”? In Colorado, that distinction in wording changes the total by about 30 percent.
Until Friday, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment had been including anyone who had Covid-19 at the time of death in the official total, a practice consistent with the C.D.C.’s counting criteria. By that reckoning, Colorado had 1,192 deaths as of Friday.
But the state said it would now also report a lower figure — those for whom the disease is considered the sole cause of death, with no other complicating factors. Counting that way knocks the state’s total down to 892.
Gov. Jared Polis, a Democrat, defended the change on Sunday.
“The C.D.C. criteria include anybody who died with Covid-19,” he said on Fox News. “What the people of Colorado and the people of the country want to know is how many people died of Covid-19.”
Health experts have warned for weeks that inconsistent reporting protocols and insufficient testing have led to an undercounting of coronavirus deaths nationally. North Dakota and Alabama have both experimented with death counts similar to Colorado’s new approach, but have continued to report the C.D.C.’s way.
Mr. Polis acknowledged that the virus, which he called a “bad bug,” can be particularly dangerous for older people and people with underlying medical conditions — those who would be most likely to be excluded from the state’s sole-cause count.
As Alaska’s salmon season opens, another coronavirus case adds to concerns.
A second fisheries worker in Alaska has tested positive for the coronavirus, adding to fears that the isolated fishing towns that have so far avoided infections could face challenges as thousands of seasonal workers pour in for the start of Alaska’s summer seafood rush.
State officials said the positive case was identified Friday in the city of Dillingham. The infected worker, an employee of Trident Seafoods, had recently arrived and tested positive at the end of a mandatory 14-day quarantine.
Earlier this month, a worker who had arrived in the fishing community of Cordova also tested positive.
Some locals have expressed concern about the fishing season, which began in Cordova with the pursuit of the famed Copper River salmon. In Dillingham, hospital leaders at the Bristol Bay Area Health Corporation had requested that the fishing season remain closed, arguing that the arrival of thousands of outsiders put the community at risk.
To prepare for the influx of workers, state and local government officials have put in place strict quarantine procedures, social-distancing requirements and aggressive testing. Some companies are requiring their workers to stay on site, where the seasonal crews often sleep in bunkhouses.
State officials said the worker who tested positive in Dillingham was removed from the area. None of that person’s contacts in the city have so far tested positive.
Congress appears no closer to a deal on further stimulus spending.
The passage of a $3 trillion stimulus package by the House on Friday appeared to bring Congress no closer this weekend to a deal on coronavirus aid, as pleas for more assistance collided with a conservative push to wait and see whether staggered state reopenings and previous aid packages arrest the economic free-fall.
The Republican-controlled Senate is not expected to take up the legislation that the Democratic-controlled House approved on Friday. Instead, the Senate will turn to a number of pending nominations before an expected Memorial Day recess. Speaker Nancy Pelosi urged Republicans to reconsider.
“Time is of the essence,” she said in an interview aired Sunday on the CBS program “Face the Nation.” “In the past bills, they put forth their proposal, and then we worked in a bipartisan way that we anticipate now.”
“They may think it’s OK to pause, but people are hungry across America,” she added. “Hunger doesn’t take a pause.”
Republican leaders have played down what Democrats say is an immediate need for relief, arguing that it was too early to allocate additional funds after Congress previously passed close to $3 trillion in relief.
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, has laid down a “red line,” saying that strengthening liability protections for health workers and businesses moving to reopen must be part of any future package.
Ms. Pelosi said on Sunday that she had “no red lines,” but she singled out a provision in the bill passed on Friday that would strengthen federal protections for essential workers.
“The best protection for our workers and their employers is to follow very good OSHA mandatory guidelines,” she said, referring to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. “That protects the workers, protects their lives, as well as protects the employer if they follow the guidelines. Remember, when people go to work, they go home.”
The legislation the House passed on Friday, which Democratic leaders acknowledged amounted to an opening offer, faces some opposition from within their party, including in the Senate.
“I think what Pelosi did in the House — it is significant,” said Senator Bernie Sanders, a Vermont independent who caucuses with the Democrats. “I have some disagreements with it, and I want to see the Senate improve on it.”
Fall school openings are shrouded in uncertainty.
A major question on the minds of many parents is whether their children’s schools will reopen in the fall. So far the plans and guidelines that have emerged are a patchwork, and state leaders are divided about whether it is possible to have the schools ready in time and what it will take to do it safely.
Gov. Jared Polis of Colorado said on Sunday that starting the school year open would not guarantee that they stayed that way. “There might be times, if there’s an outbreak at a school, that it has to convert to online for a period of weeks until it’s reasonably safe to return to school,” he said on “Fox News Sunday.”
Governor Polis said his state was considering measures like staggering start times, class schedules and breaks to minimize crowds in hallways.
California will proceed slowly and methodically in allowing crowds to gather again anywhere, including schools, Gov. Gavin Newsom said on Sunday, and that may mean that some schools in the state reopen while others remain closed.
“It’s all predicated on data, on science, not just observed evidence,” he said on CNN. “Each part of California is unique.”
Both governors noted that while children were not often affected as severely by the virus as adults are, they were potential spreaders.
“This is no question from an epidemiological perspective that this is a less severe, almost infinitesimal fatality rate for kids,” Mr. Polis said. “But the thing is, kids live with parents, they live with grandparents, kids are around teachers, so that’s where it gets a little bit more complicated.”
Health issues that affect minority groups are making the pandemic worse, Azar says.
Alex M. Azar II, the secretary of health and human services, suggested in televised remarks on Sunday that the high death toll from Covid-19 in the United States, compared with other nations, was due at least in part to the prevalence of underlying health issues in minority communities.
“Unfortunately, the American population is very diverse, and it is a population with significant unhealthy comorbidities that do make many individuals in our communities, in particular African-American minority communities, particularly at risk,” Mr. Azar said on the CNN program “State of the Union,” adding, “That is an unfortunate legacy of our health care system that we certainly do need to address.”
The host, Jake Tapper, pressed Mr. Azar on whether he was trying to place the blame for the pandemic on its victims. “I want to give you an opportunity to clear it up,” Mr. Tapper said, “because it sounded like you were saying that the reason that there are so many dead Americans is because we’re unhealthier than the rest of the world, and I know that’s not what you meant.”
Mr. Azar responded: “We have a significantly disproportionate burden of comorbidities in the United States — obesity, hypertension, diabetes — these are demonstrated facts that make us at risk for any type of disease burden, of course, but that doesn’t mean it’s the fault of the American people.”
The federal agency that issues visas is almost broke.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the federal agency that administers the country’s lawful immigration system, says it could be insolvent by summer, and has asked Congress for $1.2 billion to stay afloat.
The agency handles applications for green cards, citizenship and other programs, and it relies on fees paid by applicants for 97 percent of its $4.8 billion annual budget. Applications have plummeted because of travel and immigration restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic.
In addition to the money it is requesting from Congress, the agency plans to impose a 10 percent surcharge on its fees, on top of previously proposed increases. The cost of petitioning for naturalization would jump more than 60 percent, to $1,170 from $725, for most applicants.
Critics said the Trump administration’s policies, including new requirements for some green card applicants and more extensive reviews for H-1B visas, hit the agency from two sides — reducing revenue by dissuading people from applying, and increasing the amount of labor involved in handling each case.
“With extreme vetting, they are making every single application take longer to review, and processing fewer,” said Melissa Rodgers, the director of programs at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center in San Francisco, who oversees a program to promote citizenship among legal immigrants. “Word gets out that it’s not worth applying,” she said.
In two graduation speeches, Obama offered advice to students and criticized U.S. leadership.
Former President Barack Obama delivered two virtual commencement addresses this weekend, mixing advice to graduates with criticism of the United States’ response to the coronavirus pandemic.
“More than anything, this pandemic has fully, finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge know what they’re doing,” he said on Saturday in the first address streamed online. “A lot of them aren’t even pretending to be in charge.”
Mr. Obama did not mention anyone by name, but the remarks were largely seen as criticism, albeit mild, of his successor, President Trump. Returning to Washington on Sunday from a weekend at Camp David, Mr. Trump did not address the criticism but attacked Mr. Obama.
“Look, he was an incompetent president, that’s all I can say,” Mr. Trump told reporters. “Grossly incompetent.”
Mr. Obama’s speeches came as more than two-thirds of states have significantly relaxed restrictions, leaving the nation at a delicate moment.
Health effects of living in poorer areas may align with the pandemic’s impact.
Across the United States, low-income communities of color are exposed to significantly higher levels of pollution, studies have found, and also have higher levels of lung disease and other ailments. Now, scientists are racing to understand whether long-term exposure to air pollution plays a role in the pandemic, particularly since minorities in the country are dying disproportionately.
The science is preliminary, because the coronavirus remains poorly understood. But researchers are finding reason to look closely.
People with two conditions tied to air pollution — inflammatory lung disease and            coronary heart disease — face a higher risk for severe Covid-19, preliminary research has shown.
And while it is impossible to say with certainty that any one person was made more vulnerable to the virus because of pollution, earlier studies of other respiratory diseases have established that long-term exposure to air pollution            increases the risk of those illness.
Said Dr. Abdul El-Sayed, an epidemiologist and Detroit’s former health director: “The system has allowed, basically, low-income people and people of color to have to breathe the pollution.”
Thousands of students experienced a technical glitch while taking A.P. exams online.
Technical glitches during Advanced Placement online exams are the latest problem that high school students have confronted as they navigate testing, college applications and college visits remotely during the pandemic, adding stress to a process that is anxiety inducing even under the best of circumstances.
The College Board, a nonprofit organization that administers the A.P. exams, said that submission issues had affected under 1 percent of the roughly 2.2 million tests taken last week and that students would be able to retake the tests next month.
“We share the deep disappointment of students who were unable to complete their exam — whether for technical issues or other reasons,” Zach Goldberg, a College Board spokesman, said in a statement. “We’re working to understand these students’ unique circumstances in advance of the June makeup exams.”
The College Board said in March that it would administer digital versions of the A.P. exams, which can allow high school students to receive credit for introductory-level college courses.
The organization — which also oversees the SAT, a standardized test that serves as a gateway to college for millions of applicants each year — also said it would develop digital versions for students to take at home in the fall if social distancing continues to be necessary.
U.S. health care workers are hurting.
Medical workers have been celebrated for their commitment to treating coronavirus patients. But even as applause to honor them swells nightly from city windows, and cookies and thank-you notes arrive at hospitals, many doctors, nurses and emergency responders are battling a crushing sense of inadequacy and anxiety.
Every day, they become more susceptible to post-traumatic stress, mental health experts say. And their psychological struggles could impede their ability to continue working with the intensity and focus that their jobs require.
Although the causes for the suicides last month of Dr. Lorna M. Breen, the medical director of the emergency department at NewYork-Presbyterian Allen Hospital, and           John Mondello, a New York emergency medical technician, are unknown, the deaths served as a wake-up call about the mental health of medical workers. Even before the pandemic, their professions were            pockmarked with burnout and even suicide.
On Wednesday, the World Health Organization issued a report about the pandemic’s impact on mental health, highlighting health care workers as vulnerable. Recent studies of            medical workers in China,            Canadaand            Italy who treated Covid-19 patients found soaring rates of anxiety, depression and insomnia.
“Physicians are often very self-reliant and may not easily ask for help” said Dr. Chantal Brazeau, a psychiatrist at the Rutgers New Jersey Medical School. “In this time of crisis, with high workload and many uncertainties, this trait can add to the load that they carry internally.”
In U.S. resort towns, little or no money will be made this year.
In summer resort towns across the United States, livelihoods for the year are built in the 15 weeks between Memorial Day and Labor Day. It is during that time that tourists arrive to bask on the beach and gather for festivals and weddings. It is also when associated tour operators, hoteliers, innkeepers, restaurant employees and others earn the bulk of their income.
But this year, with Memorial Day — the kickoff for summer — approaching next weekend, there will be fewer guests to welcome and likely no sizable weddings or festivals to host. Business owners in resort areas, from Cape Cod, Mass., to Lake Chelan, Wash., say that as the start of summer approaches, they are facing the difficult reality that little money will be made this year.
Between canceled trips and uncertainty about how willing and able people will be to travel once shelter-in-place rules are lifted, business owners say that even if summer travel starts late, it won’t make up for losses already incurred.
For this weekend and Memorial Day weekend, “everything has been canceled and we have zero income,” said Barb Rishel, the owner of the Wellington Inn, a bed-and-breakfast in Traverse City, Mich. “It’s devastating. It’s bleak.”
Oil prices rise, but analysts eye the rest of 2020 cautiously.
Driving is picking up a little. Refineries in China are buying more oil. Saudi Arabia and Russia ended their price war and slashed production, and U.S. oil companies are decommissioning rigs and shutting wells.
All of those developments helped push up oil prices modestly in recent weeks — just enough for some of the best oil wells in the United States to break even, and what may seem like a minor miracle given that the price is more than $60 above where it was about a month ago.
“May, it seems, is a month when traders can finally sit back more comfortably for a moment and take a breath,” said Bjornar Tonhaugen, the head of oil market research at Rystad Energy, a research and consulting firm. “But we warn that the second half of the year will not be met with precrisis oil prices again.”
Even after the rally, oil prices are roughly half of what they were at the start of the year. And the average price for regular gasoline in the United States is 99 cents a gallon less than it was a year ago, according to AAA.
Energy experts say that oil prices may dip again if there is another surge in coronavirus cases and deaths. Prices could also fall when tankers filled with more than 50 million barrels of crude oil from Saudi Arabia reach the United States in the next two months.
But there are signs that demand for petroleum products is beginning to rise again, especially the demand for gasoline.
New York looks for ways residents can enjoy summer without fueling the virus.
A day after several New York regions were cleared to begin reopening, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said this weekend that horse racing tracks in the state, as well as the Watkins Glen International auto racing track, would be allowed to open without fans on June 1.
“We can have economic activity without having a crowd — that’s great,” Mr. Cuomo said in his daily briefing on Saturday. “We can do that in this state. But no crowds, no fans.”
With the coronavirus’s grip on the region easing, Mr. Cuomo’s announcement paved the way for events to begin at tracks, including Belmont Park on Long Island, which hosts the Belmont Stakes. Watkins Glen International is an annual stop for NASCAR, which is set to resume its top series in South Carolina on Sunday.
The steps were announced as major indicators, such as new hospitalizations and virus-related deaths, continued to decline.
Across the Hudson River, Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey also announced reopening steps in preparation for the state’s beaches to reopen, with some restrictions, by Memorial Day weekend, along with those in New York, Connecticut and Delaware.
Mr. Murphy said that fishing charters and other boating rental services would be allowed to open on Sunday, but that they must ensure social distancing and track customers in logs to help state officials with contact tracing, if necessary.
Mr. Murphy also announced the approval of $1.4 billion in federal funding for the New Jersey Transit system, which has taken an enormous financial hit during the shutdown. “I cannot overstate how vital this funding is,” Mr. Murphy said.
There were 115 new coronavirus deaths reported on Saturday in the state, bringing the total to 10,249.
As both New York and New Jersey looked ahead to plot ways for residents to enjoy the summer without a surge in virus cases, police officers in New York City continued to work to control crowds during a warm weekend, temporarily closing the entrance to the popular Sheep Meadow in Central Park after the area became crowded.
Coronavirus updates from Times correspondents around the globe.
Unable to travel, some turn to backyard camping.
Think s’mores, stars, the air mattress deflating with a cartoony hiss. Picture children’s faces, fire-lit and, for just another minute, little else. It could happen in farmland, suburbia or the Bronx — and it could be lovely. In lieu of summer vacation, there are also ways to vacation at home.
Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker, Karen Barrow, Pam Belluck, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Emily Cochrane, Melina Delkic, Rebecca Halleck, Jan Hoffman, Julia Jacobs, Sheila Kaplan, Clifford Krauss, Michael Levenson, Tariro Mzezewa, Bill Pennington, Rick Rojas, Katherine Rosman, Andrea Salcedo, Eric Schmitt, Hiroko Tabuchi, Jim Tankersley and Neil Vigdor.
PHOTO: In the face of increasing disregard of stay-at home-orders, Gov. J.B. Pritzker has increased the penalty for businesses that violate efforts to slow the rate of Covid-19 infections. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Nam Y. Huh/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EPIDEMICS (92%); VIRUSES (91%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); MISDEMEANORS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); PANDEMICS (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (90%); SHELTER IN PLACE (90%); VACCINES (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); EMERGING MARKETS (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); GOVERNORS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL (79%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (79%); DISEASE REPORTING (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); CLOSINGS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (76%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (70%); PUBLIC HEALTH & WELFARE LAW (70%); LICENSES & PERMITS (68%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%)

Industry: VACCINES (90%); RESTAURANTS (89%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); HEALTH CARE POLICY (73%); DRINKING PLACES (72%); FULL SERVICE RESTAURANTS (72%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (70%); BARBER SHOPS (67%)

Person: J B PRITZKER (79%); ANDREW CUOMO (73%)

Geographic: DALLAS, TX, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (94%); TEXAS, USA (79%)

Load-Date: May 18, 2020


End of Document
Anxiety in the Land of the Anti-Immigration Crusader
The New York Times
June 24, 2007 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 4; THE NATION
Length: 1025 words
Byline: By KIRK JOHNSON
Body


PARKER, Colo.
  IT'S hardly news that illegal immigrants lead fitfully uncertain, insecure lives. The storm winds of capitalism, uneven immigration-law enforcement and international border politics can blow unpredictably and fiercely at any time.
  But very similar tones of anxiety about the universe and its curveballs can be easily found in this upper-middle-class suburb southeast of Denver  -- in the home district of Representative Tom Tancredo, the man waging a one-note anti-immigration campaign  for the Republican presidential nomination.
  Mr. Tancredo's district is the richest, best educated and most family friendly in Colorado (the latter based on numbers of children counted by the census). Housing prices are high and there are few immigrant-based industries like manufacturing, meat-packing or agriculture. Nearly 9 of every 10 residents are white, while less than 1 in 10 are Hispanic. In several dozen interviews across the district, most people said they didn't even know an illegal immigrant.
  So why would illegal immigration be a cause celebre in a place like this, the whitest Congressional district in Colorado? 
  Residents and local political leaders say the answer comes down, at least partly, to words like ''order'' and ''stability.'' Those concerns may mask a certain amount of bigotry or bias. But the residents say they are motivated by  concerns about borders they consider broken,  leaving America open and vulnerable, especially in the post-9/11 world. Government, which many people here talk about with far more scorn and rage than they do about immigrants, has become a puppet to economic forces that demand cheap and mobile labor, they say.
  In short, local residents and immigration experts say, beneath the anger about immigration is great anxiety about a global economy that has made people feel less in control of their lives, their country and the culture they grew up with -- wherever they work, and however nice their house is.
  ''Globalization causes Mexicans to come because the jobs in their country are going to China,'' said Chris H. Lewis, a senior lecturer at the University of Colorado who teaches Western immigration history and globalization. ''And globalization makes the middle class in this country feel we don't have a voice, that our future is being created somewhere else.''
  Both illegal immigrants and many here in Mr. Tancredo's district endure transience and isolation, albeit in different ways  -- from corporate relocation and outsourcing on the one hand, to old-fashioned immigrant job insecurity on the other. And both sides see the hard truth of the global job market: jobs flow downhill toward lower wages.
  ''I've got all kinds of people in my district  -- engineers, computer-science people especially  --  whose jobs have been eliminated by H1B,'' Mr. Tancredo said in a telephone interview, referring to the federal visa program aimed at attracting foreign technical workers. ''They believe, and I believe, it's because the company found a source of cheaper labor.''
  Yet jobs created Parker, which had only a few hundred people as recently as 1980, and now has 45,000. The nearby Highlands Ranch area grew from literal ranch land in that same period to more than 130,000 people today. While some people surely came for the climate or to take advantage of Colorado's outdoor lifestyle  -- far more came for a job, especially in the high-tech industries in Denver, to which many people commute. Illegal immigrants have followed, as well, typically commuting to work here from enclaves in Denver where rents are relatively cheap.
  Stanley A. Renshon, a psychoanalyst and a professor of political science at the City University of New York, said Americans have developed what he calls a ''de facto identity'' that allows for diversity and individualism as long as a few core beliefs and values are shared, like personal responsibility and respect for the country. If people don't assimilate into the broader culture, he said, then the idea that communities can coalesce is challenged  -- especially in new places like Mr. Tancredo's district where cohesion is still weak.
  ''I've done a lot of review of the public-opinion polls, and Americans are foursquare against illegal immigration and foursquare for immigrants becoming Americans,'' he said. ''When people talk about becoming an American, that to me is the hidden core of the immigration debate.''
  Some Mexican immigrants  -- legal and illegal  -- cling to their old culture and language because they say that American life, whether in the new suburbs or the cities, is fragmented and rootless, lacking the richness of their traditions and culture. Equally protective of their culture, many in Mr. Tancredo's district say illegal immigrants who don't assimilate and learn English are in fact a major contributing cause of the cultural fragmentation. 
  ''Portugal is Portugal because of the Portuguese language; Spain is Spanish; France is  --  God knows  -- France is French; Germany is Germany, all because of language,'' said Dick Hanson, 71, a retired Navy man who came to Parker in the 1980s. ''That, to me, is the thing that holds, that builds a country.'' 
  Mr. Tancredo makes much the same point. ''The impact of immigration  -- legal and illegal  --  on jobs, schools, health care, the environment, national security, are all very serious problems,'' he said. ''But more serious than all of them put together is this threat to the culture. I believe we are in a clash of civilizations.''
  Bill Lieb, a 52-year-old business-owner and Republican from Highlands Ranch, said he generally supported Mr. Tancredo. He said nonetheless that the American economy had become dependent on immigrants, both legal and illegal, and that the challenge was to come up with a policy to provide for those labor needs and fix what he said was ''unregulated, uncontrolled chaos'' at the borders. 
  He said his business trips to Mexico and China have made him more sympathetic to the plight of illegal immigrants. The Mexican government supports only the rich, he said.
  ''If I lived there, I'd want to get the hell out, too,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The skyline of Highlands Ranch, a booming suburb of Denver that is largely white.(PHOTOGRAPH BY Marc Piscotty/Polaris, for The New York Times) CHART: A Slice Of America: Here is how Colorado's Sixth Congressional district, represented by Tom Tancredo, compares with the nation as a whole. Chart details statistics within a for Colorado suburb. (Source: Census Bureau 2005 survey of households (excludes those living in institutions, college dormitories or other group quarters)
 percentages may not add up to 100 because of rounding)                               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); POLITICS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); GLOBALIZATION (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); HOUSING MARKET (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (76%); FAMILY (75%); CENSUS (74%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (74%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (73%); PROPERTY PRICES (73%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (71%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (71%); HOME PRICES (69%); LABOR MARKET (68%); WAGES & SALARIES (63%)

Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU (59%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); MANUFACTURING (78%); REAL ESTATE (78%); HOUSING MARKET (76%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (73%); PROPERTY PRICES (73%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (71%); ANIMAL SLAUGHTERING & PROCESSING (69%); HOME PRICES (69%)

Person: THOMAS G TANCREDO (78%)

Geographic: DENVER, CO, USA (79%); COLORADO, USA (94%); CHINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: April 22, 2008


End of Document
Visa Program Up for Renewal Amid Allegations of Fraud
The New York Times 
September 11, 2016 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1216 words
Byline: RON NIXON
Highlight: The merits of the EB-5 program, which allows foreign investors to gain citizenship by putting money into economic development projects, are being debated again.
Body


Correction Appended
WASHINGTON — A contentious visa program that allows wealthy foreigners to obtain a green card by investing in economic development projects will expire at the end of this month unless Congress acts to extend it.
The program, called EB-5, allows foreign investors to gain a quicker path to citizenship by investing from $500,000 to more than $1 million to finance a business that eventually employs, directly or indirectly, at least 10 American workers in economically depressed areas.
Developers and supporters in Congress say the program, run by the Department of Homeland Security, has brought billions of dollars to areas that would otherwise not have access to capital.
But the program has been marred by fraud and used to build large projects in wealthier areas like Manhattan and the Las Vegas Strip instead of high-unemployment or rural areas. Federal investigators have also discovered that attempts to infiltrate the program were made by people with possible ties to Chinese and Iranian intelligence, and that international fugitives who laundered money in their home countries gained citizenship through the program.
More recently, federal prosecutors in April charged two Vermont developers, Ariel Quiros and William Stenger, with defrauding investors from at least 74 countries. Federal and state officials said the two raised $350 million through the EB-5 program for an array of projects including a ski resort.
According to a 52-count civil complaint filed by the federal            Securities and Exchange Commission and a            15-count complaint by Vermont, the developers engaged in a “massive eight-year fraudulent scheme” in which they “systematically looted” millions of dollars from the foreign investors. Mr. Quiros was accused of using $50 million for personal expenses including a luxury condominium at Trump Place in New York.
Mr. Stenger announced in a statement this month that he had reached a settlement with the federal government. The case against Mr. Quiros is pending.
Critics of the EB-5 program, like Senators Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, see reauthorization of the program as an opportunity to fix problems with how the money is used, increase oversight and address national security issues. They sent a letter on Thursday to Senate leaders opposing reauthorization of the program without a significant overhaul.
“The program has become plagued by fraud and abuse and, if not reformed, it should be allowed to expire on September 30th,” they wrote.
Proponents, including the United States           Conference of Mayors, have urged Congress to leave the program intact, although they say they support some of the changes lawmakers are expected to consider.
“There is a need for more oversight and transparency,” said Ronald R. Fieldstone, a Miami lawyer who has been involved in using EB-5 funding for development projects. “If there is no independence in the administering and the distribution of the funds, it exposes the program to instances of fraud.”
But Mr. Grassley and Mr. Leahy say other changes are needed.
The program, which was created in 1990, has expanded well beyond its original intent, they say. EB-5 requires an investment in either a rural area or a “targeted employment area,” which is defined as an urban area with an unemployment rate of at least 150 percent of the national average.
But Mr. Grassley and Mr. Leahy said developers had broadly defined these areas by adding a few low-income communities to wealthier neighborhoods so they could use EB-5 funding to build luxury condos, convention centers and hotels, amounting to what the senators said was economic gerrymandering.
Angelique Brunner, owner of a Washington-based center that raises capital through the EB-5 program, said many of the examples that critics point to as EB-5 investments in upscale areas failed to note that the program helped transform places that were previously economically depressed.
“One of the challenges of EB-5 investment is that people look at what an area looks like after the investment,” she said. “It’s hard to convince them what it looked like before.”
The EB-5 program has grown rapidly. About 10,000 visas are awarded annually, primarily to wealthy Chinese citizens, who make up about 80 percent of the investors and see the program as an easier way to gain United States citizenship for themselves and their families.
Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the EB-5 program has sent a terrible message to millions of immigrants waiting their turn to enter the United States through normal channels. A number of other members of Congress echo her concerns, in large part because while most visa applicants must meet education or work requirements, the primary requirement for the EB-5 program is a “lawful source of investment income,” as a Homeland Security memo put it.
Many lawmakers say there are also national security concerns. A Government Accountability Office report released last year found that the agency could not be sure that money used for the visas was not coming from “the drug trade, human trafficking or other criminal activities.”
Officials at Homeland Security Investigations, a division of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said they were concerned that those who prepare overseas documents “may try to use increasingly sophisticated methods to circumvent” the program. In a 2013 memo, the agency suggested that the EB-5 regional center program end because “there are no safeguards that can be put in place that will ensure the integrity” of the regional center model.
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency that oversees the EB-5 program, said it was taking additional steps to increase the vetting of applicants for the program and its oversight of the regional centers The S.E.C. said it would increase oversight as well.
Lawmakers have not said when they would take up the EB-5 reauthorization. Last year, the program was extended as part of the omnibus spending bill.
Correction: September 14, 2016, Wednesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Monday about the EB-5 visa program referred incorrectly to one aspect of the process. The program allows foreign investors to gain permanent residency when they invest between $500,000 and $1 million in a business that creates 10 jobs directly or indirectly. They do not gain citizenship by doing so. (They can apply for full citizenship after five years.) The article also referred incorrectly to Angelique Brunner, a spokeswoman for the EB-5 Investment Coalition, which is made up of investors and developers. Ms. Brunner is the owner of a Washington-based center that raises capital through the EB-5 program; she is not a developer.
PHOTOS: Redevelopment is stalled in Newport, Vt., above, after a fraud case involving the use of foreign investors’ money. Senators Charles E. Grassley, far left, and Patrick J. Leahy see a program’s reauthorization as a chance to fix problems. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JACOB HANNAH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; GABRIELLA DEMCZUK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Visa Abuses Harm American Workers
    • Program That Lets Foreigners Write a Check, and Get a Visa, Draws Scrutiny
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); CITIZENSHIP (91%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (91%); BUSINESS NEWS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); ECONOMIC DEPRESSION (78%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); MONEY LAUNDERING (73%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (73%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (71%); SKIING (70%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (68%); MAYORS (60%); United States Politics and Government (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Securities and Exchange Commission (%); Grassley, Charles E (%); Leahy, Patrick J (%); Area Planning and Renewal (%); Foreign Investments (%)

Ticker: Citizenship and Immigration Services (US); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US); Homeland Security Department; Citizenship and Immigration Services (US); Homeland Security Department; Securities and Exchange Commission

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); CONDOMINIUMS (78%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (73%)

Person: CHUCK GRASSLEY (89%); PATRICK LEAHY (59%); Grassley, Charles E; Leahy, Patrick J

Geographic: LAS VEGAS, NV, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEVADA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
Police Reform, Peru, Bob Dylan: Your Friday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
June 12, 2020 Friday 18:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1264 words
Byline: Remy Tumin and Marcus Payadue
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) 
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. The sweeping calls for policing reforms are inching toward policy.
In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed an expansive package of bills aimed, in the wake of George Floyd’s death, at combating police misconduct. The measures included a ban on the use of chokeholds and a repeal of a decades-old statute that has allowed the police to keep disciplinary records of officers secret. Above, police in Brooklyn last week.
In Minnesota, where Mr. Floyd died after an officer pressed his knee into Mr. Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes, state lawmakers convened a special session to consider Democratic-backed bills that would create community alternatives to policing and restore voting rights for paroled prisoners. Republicans said they would oppose some of the measures.
And in Louisville, Ky., City Council members voted unanimously to ban “no-knock” warrants, a controversial procedure that the city’s police force used during the fatal shooting of Breonna Taylor in March.
2. Texas, Florida and California all recently reported their highest daily toll of new coronavirus cases, a concerning sign as the U.S. continues to reopen. Above, Long Beach, Calif.
The rise in cases helps explain why the nation continues to record more than 20,000 new cases a day even as some of the original hot spots, including New York, have seen drastic declines. Here’s where cases are rising the fastest.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said the highest-risk gatherings are large, packed ones that draw people from outside the local area and where it is difficult for people to stay apart. The guidance came a day after Republicans moved President Trump’s convention speech to Jacksonville, Fla., after he demanded an event without social distancing rules.
3. And in Peru, the coronavirus toll is quickly turning tragic. 
The crisis has exposed deep-rooted inequality and corruption that have thwarted pandemic response, making Peru one of the world’s worst coronavirus hot spots. The country has about 6,000 confirmed Covid-19 deaths and more than 200,000 infections, and experts say those numbers understate the true extent of the pandemic.
Poverty forced many to continue working; one in three Peruvians lacks access to running water, and only half of Peruvian homes have refrigerators, forcing many families to return daily to crowded markets. Above, a cemetery on the southern outskirts of Lima last month.
4. The Trump administration finalized a rule to erase Obama-era protections for transgender people facing discrimination in health care. The move was announced on the fourth anniversary of the Pulse nightclub massacre in Orlando, Fla., and in the middle of Pride Month.
The rule is part of a broad Trump administration push to narrow the legal definition of sex discrimination so that it does not include protections for transgender people. Above, a rally last August.
Separately, the White House is moving to solidify “emergency” restrictive immigration policies put in place for the coronavirus. Officials proposed a rule this week that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum. Officials also plan to examine restrictions on skilled-worker H-1B visas.
5. The rubber bullets used on protesters in marches around the country, like those above, have been deemed “nonlethal weapons” by officials. But their impact can be devastating.
The common crowd-dispersal methods, including tear gas, flash bangs and beanbag rounds, have caused brain damage and other disabilities, prompting growing calls to ban them.
“Instead of calling them nonlethal, we now call these weapons ‘less lethal,’ and that is in comparison to a standard bullet,” said one doctor.
Early demographic data shows a significant presence of white protesters, a striking difference from years past. Why now? Among the factors: a shift in attitudes on race, anger toward President Trump, and the pandemic, according to researchers.
6. There’s one thing voters can agree on: The future isn’t looking so good.
Battered by a health crisis and an economic downturn, and boiled over with fury about racial injustice, many Americans are mourning the past, worried about the present and fearful of what comes next. We spoke with more than two dozen voters in key political battleground states.
“It’s all screwed,” a construction worker in Milwaukee said. “It seems to me that we’re pretty close to a fall.”
In the days since George Floyd’s killing, Democratic politicians have taken to calling out the problem of “systemic racism” in America. But many people say their policy solutions seem to leave the system intact. Above, a memorial for Mr. Floyd in Minneapolis.
7. Do police officers make schools safer or more dangerous?
School resource officers were supposed to prevent mass shootings and juvenile crime. But some schools in Minneapolis, Seattle and Portland, Ore., are eliminating them amid a clamor from students after George Floyd’s death. More school districts are considering the move. Teachers’ unions in Los Angeles, above, and Chicago are pushing to get the police out.
New graduates from around the nation, some still in their caps and gowns, have gone to protests after their online ceremonies to make a statement: that they should not inherit the same discrimination that previous generations faced.
8. Robert Frank crossed America by car in search of broader horizons. What he found fascinated and disturbed him.
“That trip I got to like black people so much more than white people,” he told The Times Magazine in 2015.
He selected the image above for the cover of his eye-opening book of 83 photographs, “The Americans,” published in 1959. “Trolley — New Orleans” is all about divisions, and each portrait within the composition tells its own story. We broke it down frame by frame.
We also spoke to Bob Dylan in a rare interview. The musician talks about mortality, George Floyd, the gospel music of Little Richard and his new album.
9. You’ve probably played a few games while in lockdown. So what draws us to them?
“Games give us the power to transform our living rooms, backyards, and Zoom calls into different playful realities,” writes Sam Von Ehren, the resident Game Maker for The Times. (Yes, we have a Game Maker!)
He and other journalists explore how games shape us, rile us, entertain us and teach us about ourselves, including the remorseless confessions of a champion underbidder.
And we have one more game for you. Here’s a hint: What’s black and white and can be turned into hours of entertainment
10. And finally, about those funky pandemic dreams.
Our Opinion section expected a few head scratchers when it asked readers earlier this year to share their dreams. Dreams, after all, tend not to be good stories — they lack a beginning, middle and end. But going through more than 500 responses, there were some pleasant surprises. Here are 20 favorites.
“A few nights ago I dreamed that I got to meet Oprah, but I could only ask her one question,” one reader wrote in. “My question was, ‘Is thread count really a thing? Like, when you are a guest at someone’s house, does it really matter what the thread count of the sheets is?’”
Have a well-rested weekend.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ryan Christopher Jones for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORM (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); EPIDEMICS (89%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (89%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (88%); CORONAVIRUSES (87%); EPIDEMIOLOGY (87%); VIRUSES (87%); DISCRIMINATION (84%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (77%); DEATH & DYING (77%); MISCONDUCT (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (76%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (76%); PANDEMICS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (75%); VOTING LAWS (75%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (74%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); PAROLE (73%); VOTER DISQUALIFICATION (73%); 2016 ORLANDO NIGHTCLUB SHOOTING (71%); ANNIVERSARIES (71%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (71%); SHOOTINGS (71%); SOCIAL DISTANCING (71%); ACCESS TO WATER (68%); CITY GOVERNMENT (68%); PRISONER VOTING (68%); PRISONERS' RIGHTS (68%); RIGHT TO VOTE (68%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (66%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (64%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (62%); GENDER IDENTITY (60%); CITIES (53%); VOTING RIGHTS RESTORATION (53%)

Industry: EPIDEMIOLOGY (87%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (64%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); BREONNA TAYLOR (79%); ANDREW CUOMO (58%)

Geographic: JACKSONVILLE, FL, USA (79%); LOUISVILLE, KY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%); LIMA, PERU (73%); FLORIDA, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (91%); KENTUCKY, USA (79%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); PERU (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
High-Tech Titans Strike Out on Immigration Bill
The New York Times
June 25, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1317 words
Byline: By ROBERT PEAR
Laurie J. Flynn contributed reporting.
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 24 
Body


Bill Gates and Steven A. Ballmer of Microsoft have led a parade of high-tech executives to Capitol Hill, urging lawmakers to provide more visas for temporary foreign workers and permanent immigrants who can fill critical jobs.
  Google has reminded senators that one of its founders, Sergey Brin, came from the Soviet Union as a young boy. To stay competitive in a ''knowledge-based economy,'' company officials have said, Google needs to hire many more immigrants as software engineers, mathematicians and computer scientists. 
  The top executives of these and other high-tech companies have been making a huge effort to reshape the Senate immigration bill to meet their demand for more foreign workers. But they have had only limited success, as is often the case when strong-willed corporate leaders confront powerful members of Congress. 
  The Senate plans to resume work on the bill this week.  Much of the debate will focus on proposals for granting legal status to illegal immigrants. But the sections of the bill affecting high-tech industries could prove to be very important as well.
  High-tech companies want to be able to hire larger numbers of well-educated, foreign-born professionals who, they say, can help them succeed in the global economy. For these scientists and engineers, they seek permanent-residence visas, known as green cards, and H-1B visas. The H-1B program provides temporary work visas for people who have university degrees or the equivalent to fill jobs in specialty occupations including health care and technology. The Senate bill would expand the number of work visas for skilled professionals, but high-tech companies say the proposed increase is not nearly enough. Several provisions of the Senate bill are meant to enhance protections for American workers and to prevent visa fraud and abuse.
  High-tech companies were surprised and upset by the bill that emerged last month from secret Senate negotiations. E. John Krumholtz, director of federal affairs at Microsoft, said the bill was ''worse than the status quo, and the status quo is a disaster.''
  In the last two weeks, these businesses have quietly negotiated for changes to meet some of their needs. But the bill still falls far short of what they want, an outcome suggesting that their political clout does not match their economic strength.
  Stephen W. Yale-Loehr, a co-author of a treatise on immigration law, said: ''High-tech companies are very organized. They have numerous lobby groups. When Bill Gates advocates more H-1B visas and green cards for tech workers, everyone listens.
  ''But that supposed influence has not translated into legislative results,'' Mr. Yale-Loehr, who teaches at Cornell Law School, continued. ''High-tech companies have been lobbying unsuccessfully since 2003 for more H-1B visas. It's hard to get anything through Congress these days. In addition, anti-immigrant groups are well organized. U.S. computer programmers are constantly arguing that H-1B workers undercut their wages.''
  The Republican architects of the Senate bill, like Senators Jon Kyl of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, thought they were doing a favor for high-tech companies when they proposed a ''point system'' to evaluate immigrants seeking green cards. The point system would reward people who have advanced degrees and job skills needed in the United States.
  But the high-tech companies were upset because the bill would have stripped them of the ability to sponsor specific immigrants for particular jobs.
  The companies flooded Senate offices with letters, telephone calls and e-mail messages seeking changes to the bill. Mr. Ballmer, the blunt-spoken chief executive of Microsoft, Craig R. Barrett, the chairman of Intel, and other executives pressed their concerns in person. 
  These advocates have made some gains, which are embodied in an amendment to be proposed by Mr. Kyl and Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington.
  Edward J. Sweeney, senior vice president of National Semiconductor, based in Santa Clara, Calif., said, ''I've spent many hours in Washington talking with senators to get their support on this amendment.''
  Likewise, William D. Watkins, the chief executive of Seagate Technology, the world's largest maker of computer disk drives, said he met with five or six senators two weeks ago.
  Under the Kyl-Cantwell proposal, 20,000 green cards would be set aside each year for immigrants of extraordinary ability, outstanding professors and researchers and certain managers and executives of multinational corporations. The original bill would have eliminated the existing preference for such workers.
  In addition, the amendment would give employers five years to adjust their hiring practices to the new ''merit-based'' point system for obtaining green cards.
  ''For the first five years, employers would still have a say,'' Ms. Cantwell said in an interview. ''They could recruit the best and the brightest.''
  The number of green cards for employer-sponsored immigrants would gradually decline, to 44,000 in the fifth year from 115,000 in each of the first two years. No green cards would be set aside for employer-sponsored immigrants after that.
  Many high-tech companies bring in foreign professionals on temporary H-1B visas. The government is swamped with petitions. On the first two days of the application period in April, it received more than 123,000 petitions for 65,000 slots.
  The Senate bill would raise the cap to 115,000 in 2008, with a possible increase to 180,000 in later years, based on labor market needs.
  Many high-tech businesses want to hire foreign students who obtain advanced degrees from American universities, and many of the students want to work here, but cannot get visas.
  Under current law, up to 20,000 foreigners who earn a master's degree or higher from an American university are generally exempt from the annual limit on new H-1B visas. The Kyl-Cantwell proposal would double the number.
  The amendment would also establish a new exemption, providing 20,000 additional H-1B visas for people who have earned advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering or mathematics from a university outside the United States.
   The technology companies face a serious challenge from a different direction, as lawmakers of both parties worry about possible abuses in the H-1B program. 
  Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the Democratic whip, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, have a proposal that would overhaul the H-1 B program and give priority to American workers. Their proposal would also define, in great detail, the wages that must be paid to workers who have H-1B visas.
  Mr. Durbin contended that some companies have used foreign workers to undercut the wages of American workers. And in some cases, he said, foreign workers come to this country for a few years of training, then return home ''to populate businesses competing with the United States.''
  ''The H-1B visa program is being abused by foreign companies to deprive qualified Americans of good jobs,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''Some companies are so brazen, they say 'no Americans need apply' in their job advertisements.''
   High-tech companies said that the wage standards in the Durbin-Grassley proposal would, in effect, require them to pay some H-1B employees more than some equally qualified American workers who are performing the same duties. 
  The Government Accountability Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said that thousands of H-1B workers have been paid less than the prevailing wage. 
  One company, Patni Computer Systems, agreed this month to pay more than $2.4 million to 607 workers with visas after Labor Department investigators found that they had not been paid the wages required by federal law. The company's global headquarters are in Mumbai, India, and its American operations are based in Cambridge, Mass.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LOBBYING (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); US CONGRESS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (88%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); NEW ECONOMY (78%); WORKFORCE DEMAND (78%); ESSENTIAL BUSINESSES & WORKERS (77%); LABOR MARKET (77%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (77%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (77%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (75%); ENGINEERING (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); GLOBALIZATION (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); MATHEMATICS (72%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (71%); LAWYERS (70%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (64%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (64%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (58%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (58%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); BIG TECH (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (77%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (75%); ENGINEERING (75%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); LAWYERS (70%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (70%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (64%)

Person: BILL GATES (89%); SERGEY BRIN (79%); STEVEN A BALLMER (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: June 25, 2007


End of Document
Judge Says Disney Didn’t Violate Visa Laws in Layoffs
The New York Times 
October 13, 2016 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 553 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Two former workers’ argued that Disney and two contractors colluded to make false statements when they applied for temporary visas for foreign replacements.
Body


A federal judge in Florida dealt a blow on Thursday to legal claims by American technology workers who were laid off by the Walt Disney Company and forced to train foreign replacements, dismissing lawsuits by two workers who said Disney had conspired with outsourcing companies to violate visa laws.
In a terse decision, Judge Gregory A. Presnell of the United States District Court in Orlando rejected the former workers’ arguments that Disney and the two contractors had colluded to make false statements when they applied for temporary visas, known as H-1B, for the foreign replacements.
The judge found that “none of the allegedly false statements put at issue in the complaint are adequate” to sustain the former workers’ case. The outsourcing companies that were sued with Disney were Cognizant Technology Solutions and HCL America.
The plaintiffs, Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, were laid off early in 2015 from jobs with Disney in Orlando. In their final weeks on the job, they were required to show foreigners on H-1B visas, brought in by the outsourcing contractors mainly from India, how to do their work.
A spokeswoman for Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, Jacquee Wahler, said, “As we have said all along, this lawsuit was completely baseless, and we are gratified by the decision.”
The former workers’ cases hinged on their argument that the companies had violated clauses of the visa law requiring employers to show that hiring H-1B workers “will not adversely affect the working conditions” of other workers in similar jobs. The law also requires large outsourcing companies that employ many H-1B workers to certify in some circumstances that those workers “will not displace any similarly employed U.S. worker” within six months of applying for the visa.
The outsourcing companies argued that the law would apply to them only if the American workers who were displaced by visa holders they hired had originally been their employees, not Disney’s. Judge Presnell was persuaded by that argument, although he did not entirely reject the idea that the Americans were “adversely affected” by being fired.
The decision was a broad victory for Disney and its contractors, but Judge Presnell left the former workers a small window to amend their lawsuits and to try again.
Mr. Perrero said the decision was a dismaying surprise. “This has become an effective business model in the IT industry where two companies can come together and wipe out American jobs without much fear of legal action,” he said. “I just hope that greed isn’t taking our country in the wrong direction.”
Sara Blackwell, the lawyer who represented the Disney workers, said, “I wanted to see if there was any legal avenue we could use to protect our American citizens, but it seems we can’t.”
Congress considered bills this year to amend provisions in the H-1B visa laws that tech workers say have led to thousands of layoffs, but no action was taken.
The Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, said early in his campaign that he would seek to change the law to prevent layoffs. But he has not addressed the issue recently.
Related Articles
    • Lawsuits Claim Disney Colluded to Replace U.S. Workers With Immigrants
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
    • Toys ‘R’ Us Brings Temporary Foreign Workers to U.S. to Move Jobs Overseas
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: LAYOFFS (96%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); JUDGES (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FALSE STATEMENTS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); DISPLACED PERSONS (63%); Labor and Jobs (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); Outsourcing (%); Foreign Workers (%); Walt Disney Company (%); Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation (%); HCL Technologies (%); Moore, Dena (%); Perrero, Leo (%)

Ticker: Walt Disney Company; Walt Disney Company; Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation; Walt Disney Company; Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation; HCL Technologies

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (75%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (73%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%)

Person: Moore, Dena; Perrero, Leo

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: March 17, 2017


End of Document
Bill Dies, Views Divide and Immigrants Work On
The New York Times
June 30, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2335 words
Byline: By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD
Dateline: SAN DIEGO, June 29 
Body


Ediberto Perez pedaled his bicycle out of a canyon shantytown in this border city's northern outskirts where he and other migrant workers scratch out a living.
  ''So I won't get papers?'' he asked at  dawn on Friday, more curious than deflated about the defeat in the Senate of an overhaul to immigration law. ''Well, I am just going to keep working. What more can I do?''
  John Ladd, a rancher in southern Arizona, emerged at daybreak, too, to inspect a fence that illegal crossers routinely damage. Once, he called in a civilian patrol group to help deter illegal traffic but now he contemplated the inevitable.
  ''Until they dry up the jobs, they're never going to secure the border,'' Mr. Ladd said.
  The day after the Senate failed to move on a proposal for the broadest change in immigration law in two decades, it was a time to take stock of a debate that played out something like a neutron bomb: blasts of rhetoric, of speeches, marches and convulsing in Congress and on talk radio and television that has left everything pretty much standing as is. 
  And now in the fallout, the mayor of a small city in Pennsylvania that passed its own anti-immigrant ordinance found triumph in the federal government's inertia. A disappointed New York conservative engaged in some wishful plotting about what might come next. Townsfolk in a Mexican village worried that getting into the United States would become more perilous. Mr. Ladd braced for more crossers on his land.
  And Mr. Perez pedaled off to work, as the daily churn of immigration across the nation carried on. Farm work. Landscaping. Construction. Day jobs. It is all here in northern San Diego, where the stirrings of immigration largely reflect the national debate.
  With the first light of day, they trickle out of canyons and hills here, mostly men from the Mexican state of Oaxaca, their chattering in Spanish and Mixteco, an Indian language, filling the air.
  ''I was in an apartment downtown when the agents came and took us all to Tijuana,'' said Margarito Brito, describing his apprehension in March by Immigration and Customs Enforcement. ''But I came back in April. There is always work here. I have been coming for 20 years.''
  A crush of migrant workers and day laborers crowd street corners and parking lots and, with a dearth of affordable apartments and farm-worker housing in the area, they drag tarps, crates and spare wood into the hills and canyons for makeshift housing.
  At night they can see the glitter of million-dollar homes that brush against tomato fields and hills and ravines less than a mile away, at a closeness that has made some residents of those homes uncomfortable. 
  The migrant camps have been vandalized. Anti-immigration groups have protested the migrant workers' presence.
  But men like Mr. Brito keep coming, filling a demand for cheap, convenient labor. He said he never thought legalization would happen for him or his companions, but it is just as well.
  ''I have my wife and four children in Mexico,'' Mr. Brito said, sitting on a roadside crate, waiting for work. ''It would be good to be legal, but I am not, and I am still working.''
  THE FRONT LINE
  A Rancher Takes
  His Daily Inventory
  NACO, Ariz., June 29 -- It was 8 a.m., and John Ladd was taking a daily inventory to see what illegal immigration had done the night before to his 14,000-acre cattle ranch on the border here in southeastern Arizona. 
  Mr. Ladd pulled his Dodge pickup out of his driveway, through a gate and onto a dirt road leading into a rolling pastureland of desert grasses, mesquite scrub and darting jackrabbits. A few hundred yards away, he pointed to a section of cutaway fencing.
  ''They used to be somewhat responsible and just pull the fence apart,'' he said of the estimated 200 immigrants who cross his property from Mexico every day. ''Now it's just, 'Let's go as fast as we can.' ''
  Mr. Ladd has long been disappointed with Congress for not having solved the problems on the border, and though only lukewarm about the Senate bill, he was not particularly surprised that the politicians in Washington botched it again.
  In recent years, tighter border security, including three camera towers that the Ladds allowed the Border Patrol to install on the 111-year-old family ranch, have only made human smugglers more frantic, as well as more organized, Mr. Ladd said.
  And as illegal immigration has become more lucrative, he suggested, the drug cartels in the neighboring state of Sonora have taken a stepped-up role.
  Mr. Ladd said he had seen it in the way that the vehicles from sleepy Naco, Sonora, that used to shuttle illegal immigrants through the desert, had been replaced by taxicabs from an organized-crime hotbed, Cananea, Sonora, 45 minutes away on a bumpy dirt road.
  And he has heard it from his Mexican rancher buddies, whom he meets at the border fence to chat over a can of beer.
  ''I asked one guy about it, and he said, 'Oh, it's that darned cartel from Cananea,' '' Mr. Ladd recounted. 
  Even so, Mr. Ladd said, he is more concerned with his cut fences than with the people who send the fence cutters. 
  ''That's what irritates me more than anything,'' said Mr. Ladd, who manages two distinct herds on the ranch. ''I can't keep my cows separated anymore.''  JONATHAN CLARK 
  THE POST-MORTEM 
  Wishful Plotting
  For the Next Round
  After the Senate bill was stopped cold, Tamar Jacoby, a conservative Republican who helped to organize the movement to support it, went for a stiff drink and a few hours sleep. Then Ms. Jacoby returned for more Washington meetings for gloomy post-mortems and a little wishful plotting about what might come next. 
  Ms. Jacoby, 52, went from desk-chair intellectual to phone-calling door-knocking advocate in the last few years, after reading about illegal immigrants who died in the Arizona desert trying to cross into the United States.
  For her, defeat came at the hands of American voters from her conservative camp who, she acknowledged, did better at galvanizing their forces.
  ''The polls show that the public supports a practical answer to immigration,'' she said. ''We just didn't tap into those sentiments as well to sell the compromise.''
  Ms. Jacoby, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, a conservative research group in New York, helped organize business people, who are often hesitant to come forward, into groups in 13 states supporting the Senate package. Their button-down appeals were no match for the scorching radio, television and Internet blitz by the opponents. 
  ''Amnesty is a bumper sticker,'' she said, using the word that opponents used to tar the bill as rewarding illegal immigrant lawbreakers. ''We had a complicated compromise to defend. Some of us were ambivalent about it. They didn't have an ounce of ambivalence.''
  JULIA PRESTON
  THE FACE-OFF 
  Disappointment
  And Satisfaction
  HAZLETON, Pa., June 29 -- Wyoming Street, the heart of the Hispanic business district here, has been struggling because many customers are afraid. The fear set in about a year ago when the City Council passed an ordinance intended to crack down on illegal immigration.
  It turned to despair on Thursday, as many illegal residents across the country saw one of their few opportunities to become United States citizens evaporate.
  ''It's a tragedy for people in this situation that the Congress couldn't agree,'' said Rudy Espinal, 39, a real estate agent who is a citizen. He came to this city about 100 miles northwest of Philadelphia in 2001 from the Dominican Republic and is president of the Hazleton Hispanic Business Association.
  But one man's tragedy is often another man's triumph. Mayor Louis J. Barletta, who championed the town's assertive approach to immigration, used a breakfast in honor of Hazleton's 150th anniversary to welcome the demise of the legislation, which he characterized as amnesty. 
  ''I'm pleased that the American people's voice was heard loud and clear,'' Mr. Barletta, a Republican, said at the breakfast, where organizers sold T-shirts with the motto ''Hazleton: A City With Attitude.'' 
  Mr. Barletta said the pressure was back on places like Hazleton to deal with the country's illegal immigrants, a pressure he welcomes. The city's ordinance, which is the subject of a federal injunction pending court challenges, would penalize businesses that hire illegal immigrants, fine landlords who rent to them and establish English as the  official language.
  ''We had no confidence the federal government would solve this problem,'' he said.
  About a third of Hazleton's 31,000 residents are immigrants from Central and South America, many of whom have arrived in the last five years, drawn by affordable housing and factory jobs. According to some estimates, before the ordinance was passed, about a quarter of the immigrant population was illegal. -- JON HURDLE
  THE ANXIETY
  The Asian Face
  Of Immigration
   Flushing is one of New York City's most heavily Asian neighborhoods, and the immigrants who take job-training classes at the Chinese-American Planning Council in the shadow of the Whitestone Bridge are either United States citizens, like Jason Li, or green-card holders.
  ''I'm angry'' about the immigration bill, Mr. Li said in Mandarin as he took a break from a class in interviewing skills. ''It's difficult for the undocumented in America. They make their contributions to this country by working hard, mostly overtime; they work harder than the people who live here legally.''
  ''I talked to them after hearing about the vote,'' Mr. Li, 37, said, ''and they're scared. They're more scared than ever.''
  A Chinese construction worker, who is 28 and did not want his name used because he is in the United States illegally, agreed, but said he had never expected it to pass.
  ''This bill was about politicians playing games,'' he said. ''They never paid attention to what immigrants need. But my life won't be disturbed by the decision. I will still work day and night, go home, cook dinner and start over the next day. The main inconvenience is that I can't drive.'' KAI MA
  THE NEXT STEP 
  Technology Prepares
  To Go It Alone
  SAN FRANCISCO, June 29 -- Lesson learned. Ralph Hellman, a lobbyist for the technology industry, is now preparing to fly solo.
  With a tone befitting someone who has endured his share of Congressional battles, Mr. Hellman said technology companies had a better shot at getting what they wanted on immigration by staying away from measures that offered too much to too many.
  ''Some of the most hardcore opponents of the immigration bill are some of our strongest proponents,'' he said of the failed Senate bill. ''They really understand our issues, but they didn't support the comprehensive bill.''
  Above all, Mr. Hellman and other technology lobbyists wanted a bill that would have provided more temporary visas for scientists and engineers. Three years ago, a law tripling the number of H1B temporary visas expired, reducing them to 65,000 from 195,000 a year.
  The technology field never wanted the visas addressed in the comprehensive bill, Mr. Hellman said. Although the bill would have raised the cap on H1B visas, it did not adequately address the problems of workers who wanted to remain in the United States after their visas had expired. 
  Looking ahead, Mr. Hellman said technology representatives would act fairly quickly, perhaps creating a new bill for the fall. Where it goes from there, of course, is anyone's guess.
  ''We're patient,'' said Mr. Hellman, a senior vice president at the Information Technology Industry Council in Washington. ''We've been patient for three years.''  LAURIE J. FLYNN
  THE DISTANCE
  Broken Dreams,
  Broken Families
  TULCINGO DEL VALLE, Mexico, June 29 -- On most every street corner in this sun-baked town, dominated by a bright yellow church and a market cluttered with fresh produce, there are stories of sundered families and twisted versions of the American dream.
  Almost every family here has sent someone to the United States to find work, mostly in New York City.
  Miguel Romero, 36, loitered outside a restaurant, looking as forlorn as a deflated balloon. For 16 years, he had worked as a glazier in Brooklyn. He married and was raising five children.
  But earlier this year, immigration officials arrested him while he was installing glass in a storefront in lower Manhattan, Mr. Romero said. He was deported on May 21. 
  His wife, also in the United States illegally, decided not to join him, and he says he does not blame her, since wages here average about $10 a day. He has no idea where his family is living or how they are surviving. He does not dare cross the border illegally again, for fear of getting caught and serving time in jail.
  ''My whole life I spent up there, and it's hard for me to come back,'' he said in perfect English. ''We have been up there so many years, and most of us don't commit crimes. People that do nothing but work should get a break.''
  He shook his head. ''It's never going to happen,'' he said.
  Residents here are used to promises of change in United States immigration laws that never pan out, just as they are accustomed to being separated from family members and to lining up at money-transfer agencies to collect remittances from far-flung relatives.
  ''It's the same that they have always done -- they say they will do it but they don't,'' said Rene Leon, as he left a Western Union office where he had picked up some money wired by his brothers in New York. ''It's a game to them.''
  Palemon Gomez, a local hotel owner, said this town of 11,000 about 125 miles southeast of Mexico City had been watching the Senate immigration bill's fortunes with a mix of fear and hope. Many residents have relatives in the United States who would have benefited from it.
  ''There were a lot of people betting that they were going to get their residency papers through this law,'' Mr. Gomez said. ''If they had approved this law, the whole world would be happy.''  JAMES C. McKINLEY JR.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos: TULCINGO DEL VALLE, MEXICO: Many in this city, where most have a family member in the United States, were let down. Silvester Sergio, 14, seated with his cousin Anderson Valle, 6
they were born in the Bronx.(Photograph by Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
SAN DIEGO: Day laborers hoping for jobs in construction, farming or landscaping, gathering at dawn in the northern part of the city, whose immigration dynamics reflect those of the nation, and where shantytowns exist less than a mile from million-dollar homes. (Photograph by Monica Almeida/The New York Times)(pg. A12)
NEW YORK CITY: Jason Li, a citizen, said he was angry the bill died. ''It's difficult for the undocumented in America,'' he said. ''They make their contributions to this country by working hard, mostly overtime
they work harder than the people who live here legally.'' (Photograph by Michael Nagle for The New York Times)(pg. A12)
 HAZLETON, PA.: Mayor Louis J. Barletta, who has led an assertive approach to immigration was relieved that the legislation died. ''I'm pleased that the American people's voice was heard loud and clear,'' he said at the city's 150th anniversary celebration.(Photograph by Mike Mergen for The New York Times)(pg. A12)      
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MIGRANT WORKERS (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); FARM LABOR (89%); SLUM DWELLINGS (89%); BICYCLES (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); DAY LABORERS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); ORDINANCES (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); MAYORS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); VANDALISM (76%); PRIVATE LANDS (63%); HOUSING AFFORDABILITY (60%)

Industry: FARM LABOR (89%); BICYCLES (78%); HOUSING AFFORDABILITY (60%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (50%)

Geographic: SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (92%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); MEXICO (93%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: April 2, 2008


End of Document
Federal Judge Says Disney Didn't Violate Visa Laws in Layoffs
The New York Times
October 14, 2016 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 522 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


A federal judge in Florida dealt a blow on Thursday to legal claims by American technology workers who were laid off by the Walt Disney Company and forced to train foreign replacements, dismissing lawsuits by two workers who said Disney had conspired with outsourcing companies to violate visa laws.
In a terse decision, Judge Gregory A. Presnell of the United States District Court in Orlando rejected the former workers' arguments that Disney and the two contractors had colluded to make false statements when they applied for temporary visas, known as H-1B, for the foreign replacements. 
  The judge found that ''none of the allegedly false statements put at issue in the complaint are adequate'' to sustain the former workers' case. The outsourcing companies that were sued with Disney were Cognizant Technology Solutions and HCL America.
  The plaintiffs, Leo Perrero and Dena Moore, were laid off early in 2015 from jobs with Disney in Orlando. In their final weeks on the job, they were required to show foreigners on H-1B visas, brought in by the outsourcing contractors mainly from India, how to do their work.
  A spokeswoman for Walt Disney Parks and Resorts, Jacquee Wahler, said, ''As we have said all along, this lawsuit was completely baseless, and we are gratified by the decision.''
  The former workers' cases hinged on their argument that the companies had violated clauses of the visa law requiring employers to show that hiring H-1B workers ''will not adversely affect the working conditions'' of other workers in similar jobs. The law also requires large outsourcing companies that employ many H-1B workers to certify in some circumstances that those workers ''will not displace any similarly employed U.S. worker'' within six months of applying for the visa.
  The outsourcing companies argued that the law would apply to them only if the American workers who were displaced by visa holders they hired had originally been their employees, not Disney's. Judge Presnell was persuaded by that argument, although he did not entirely reject the idea that the Americans were ''adversely affected'' by being fired.
  The decision was a broad victory for Disney and its contractors, but Judge Presnell left the former workers a small window to amend their lawsuits and to try again.
  Mr. Perrero said the decision was a dismaying surprise. ''This has become an effective business model in the IT industry where two companies can come together and wipe out American jobs without much fear of legal action,'' he said. ''I just hope that greed isn't taking our country in the wrong direction.''
  Sara Blackwell, the lawyer who represented the Disney workers, said, ''I wanted to see if there was any legal avenue we could use to protect our American citizens, but it seems we can't.''
  Congress considered bills this year to amend provisions in the H-1B visa laws that tech workers say have led to thousands of layoffs, but no action was taken.
  The Republican presidential nominee, Donald J. Trump, said early in his campaign that he would seek to change the law to prevent layoffs. But he has not addressed the issue recently.

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/14/us/judge-says-disney-didnt-violate-visa-laws-in-layoffs.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: LAYOFFS (96%); JUDGES (93%); SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); CONSPIRACY (77%); FALSE STATEMENTS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); DISPLACED PERSONS (62%)

Company:  WALT DISNEY CO (94%);  WALT DISNEY PARKS & RESORTS (68%);  COGNIZANT TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS CORP (56%)

Ticker: DIS (NYSE) (94%); CTSH (NASDAQ) (56%)

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (94%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (94%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (94%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (94%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (68%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (56%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (56%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (75%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (73%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: October 14, 2016


End of Document
2 Doctors Held In a British Plot Looked to U.S.
The New York Times
July 7, 2007 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1558 words
Byline: By ALAN COWELL and SCOTT SHANE; Alan Cowell reported from London, and Scott Shane from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Jane Perlez from London, Serge F. Kovaleski and Ariana Green from Glasgow, Eric Lipton from Washington, and Maria Newman from New York.
Alan Cowell reported from London, and Scott Shane from Washington. Reporting was contributed by Jane Perlez from London, Serge F. Kovaleski and Ariana Green from Glasgow, Eric Lipton from Washington, and Maria Newman from New York.
Dateline: LONDON, July 6 
Body


Two of the medical doctors arrested in connection with the bungled London and Glasgow car bomb attacks had made preliminary inquiries about practicing medicine in the United States, an American law enforcement official said Friday.
  The official confirmed a report in The Philadelphia Inquirer that the doctors had contacted the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates, a nonprofit organization in Philadelphia that screens foreign citizens wishing to train or work as doctors in the United States. 
  Nancy O'Dowd, a spokeswoman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said one of them ''was applying'' for approval to practice in the United States. ''But we don't believe he took the test,'' she told The Associated Press.
  The law enforcement official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the continuing investigation in Britain, said investigators had found no evidence that any of the eight people arrested in the case had ever been in the United States.
  In London on Friday, an Iraqi doctor, Bilal Abdulla, became the first to be charged since Britain was plunged into its newest terrorism alert one week before, when the police discovered two Mercedes sedans in London packed with nails, gasoline and gas canisters. Dr. Abdulla, 27, was identified as one of the two men who drove a Jeep Cherokee into the entrance to a check-in area at Glasgow Airport and set it afire.
  The second man, identified as Khalil Ahmed, was badly burned in the attack and was moved for clinical reasons from the Royal Alexandra Hospital near Glasgow to a burn unit in the city's infirmary, medical authorities said Friday. The British authorities have said they suspect that the two men set the failed car bombs in London, then raced 400 miles back to the Glasgow area and worked frantically to carry out the airport attack before the police closed in. 
  Dr. Abdulla was seen in amateur television video being led away by police officers as the Jeep Cherokee went up in flames. The Crown Prosecution Service ruled that he should be charged with ''conspiracy to cause explosions following incidents in London and Glasgow on 29 June  2007 and 30 June 2007.''
  The charge, brought under a law dating to 1883, accused him of conspiring ''with others to cause explosions of a nature likely to endanger life or cause serious injury.'' It carries a maximum life sentence. The police said Dr. Abdulla would be arraigned Saturday.
  The investigation widened in Australia as well, where the police this week detained Mohammed Haneef, 26, who had worked in Britain and was seeking to fly to his native India when he was arrested. On Friday, the authorities questioned and released five more Indian doctors and raided two hospitals in a search for evidence on computers, the Australian police said.
  Citing federal law enforcement officials, NBC News reported Friday that Dr. Haneef was one of the two doctors who had inquired about practicing medicine in the United States. The other was Mohammed Jamil Asha, 26, a Jordanian born in Saudi Arabia, who was arrested last week in Britain.
  Word that two of the doctors implicated in the British attacks had asked, however preliminarily, about working in the United States sent tremors through the American medical community, particularly among foreign-born physicians. 
  ''I'd like to think there would not be concerns,'' said Dr. Susan D. Wolfsthal, director of the internal medicine residency program at the University of Maryland School of Medicine. ''But there have been times in our history when entire groups of people have been blamed for the actions of a few.''
  Foreign citizens or American graduates from foreign medical schools accounted for more than 228,665 of the 902,053 practicing physicians in the United States in 2005 -- just over 25 percent, according to the American Medical Association. The Congressional Research Service said their presence ''in many rural communities of the United States has allowed states to ensure the availability of medical care to their residents.''
  Most states require that foreign-trained doctors participate in a medical residency in the United States before they can be licensed to practice here, even if they already practiced overseas, said Stephen S. Seeling, vice president for operations of the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates.
  In a typical year, the organization certifies the educational qualifications of about 11,000 foreign-trained doctors, nearly 20 percent of whom are American citizens who trained overseas. Of that number, only about 7,000 a year are able to land one of the highly competitive residency posts, Mr. Seeling said. 
  Only after securing such a post can a noncitizen receive  a visa -- generally a J-1 visa or H-1B visa -- from the State Department. The visa application process includes a security background check, which includes a check against names on the terrorism watch list, as well as a comparison of the applicant's fingerprints and a digital photograph against databases of known or suspected terrorists and previous visa applicants. Applicants generally must also undergo a brief  interview.
  Inevitably, given the news from Britain, some foreign-born doctors -- particularly Muslims who moved to the United States in recent years -- are likely to face new suspicions from some patients and co-workers.
  Dr. Khaled Hamid, an Egyptian-born allergy and asthma specialist, helped organize a news conference of local Muslim physicians in St. Louis on Friday to denounce the terrorist plots in Britain. When he heard that those arrested in Britain were doctors, Dr. Hamid said in an interview, ''I felt sick. The idea that a physician would participate in that is incomprehensible to me.''
  He and others called the news conference to ''make it very clear where we stand,'' said Dr. Hamid, who is active in the local chapter of the Council on American-Islamic Relations. ''We're hurt as Muslims and as physicians who believe sacred life must be protected.''
  Silence, he said, ''can wrongly be interpreted as approval.''
  How many practicing physicians in the United States are Muslims is hard to say. The Islamic Medical Association of North America, based in Lombard, Ill., has 3,500 members, but the total is likely to be several times that number. 
  In Britain, there is a similar reliance on foreign doctors, particularly in the government-run National Health Service. Of the nearly 239,000 doctors registered with Britain's General Medical Council, some 90,000 qualified outside its borders.
  Dr. Abdulla, who had been working as a junior doctor under supervision in a diabetes ward at Royal Alexandra Hospital, was one of at least seven and possibly eight medical doctors arrested in connection with the attacks. They included two trainee doctors, ages 25 and 28, from the same hospital.
  Mr. Ahmed, who apparently doused himself with gasoline during the attack last Saturday, had initially been described as a medical doctor, but some British news reports have since identified him as an  engineer.
  Shortly before Dr. Abdulla was charged, Prime Minister Gordon Brown said Britain was ''getting to the bottom'' of the attacks but warned that heightened security would still be enforced in crowded public places. London was bracing Friday for a weekend of high-profile events planned for the second anniversary of the London bombings of July 7, 2005, when four suicide bombers killed 52 people on the city's mass transportation network.
  Investigators in Britain and Australia have been trying to understand whether and how the suspects came together and what family, ideological and organizational ties might have bound them.
  Several of the detainees in Britain first met in Cambridge, the university city 60 miles from London, in 2005, according to a person with knowledge of the police inquiry, who like others here spoke on condition of anonymity because of government rules. However, it is likely that any plot between them ''matured much later,'' this person said.
  A British security official said investigators were considering ''the big questions about what overseas links there might have been and how they were radicalized,'' including any ties to Iraq.
  The police planned a major security operation for the anniversary weekend. Events include the start of the Tour de France, atypically starting in Britain; a Live Earth concert, one of a series of eight around the globe; and the finals of the Wimbledon tennis championships. The victims of the 2005 bombings themselves are being memorialized in low-key ceremonies.
  Prime Minister Brown said in a BBC interview, ''From what I know, we are getting to the bottom of this cell that has been responsible for what is happening.''
  But he warned that at ''crowded places and airports, I think people will have to accept that the security will be more intense.'' He added, ''We have got to avoid the possibility -- and it is very, very difficult -- that people can use these crowded places for explosions.''
  The latest foiled attacks have raised fresh concerns of a backlash among Britain's 1.6 million Muslims. Many British newspapers carried a full-page advertisement on Friday rejecting ''any heinous attempt'' to link the attacks to Islam's teachings.
  ''Islam forbids the killing of innocent people,'' the advertisement said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: A police officer reflected in glass at a checkpoint in Houston, Scotland, where two men arrested in a failed attack at Glasgow Airport once lived. (Photograph by Todd Heisler/The New York Times)                                                              
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (92%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (91%); ARRESTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); CONSPIRACY (89%); EXPLOSIONS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); WEAPONS & ARMS (89%); ARSON (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (77%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (77%); FIRES (75%); TRENDS & EVENTS (75%); MEDICAL EDUCATION (73%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (73%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SENTENCING (70%); WOUND CARE (67%)

Company:  NBC UNIVERSAL INC (81%)

Organization: EDUCATIONAL COMMISSION FOR FOREIGN MEDICAL GRADUATES (58%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%)

Industry: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (81%); SIC4833 TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATIONS (81%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); HOSPITALS (78%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (73%); PRESS AGENCY RELEASES (72%)

Geographic: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%); GLASGOW, SCOTLAND (90%); PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); AUSTRALIA (92%)

Load-Date: July 7, 2007


End of Document
International Readers on How a Trump Presidency Could Affect Them
The New York Times 
November 12, 2016 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; americas
Length: 1434 words
Byline: HANNA INGBER
Highlight: We asked our readers outside the United States to tell us how the election might affect their family and country. We received more than 800 responses.
Body


David Parting, a reader in Germany, wrote that a Donald J. Trump presidency could mend ties between the United States and Russia, which would "overall reduce the potential for international conflicts."
Nadim Kobeissi, a Lebanese immigrant living in France, said he feared personal ramifications from the election of Mr. Trump.
"My partner and I, both Arab immigrants, already witness enough xenophobia, and there is a fear that Trump's victory only further legitimizes this sort of discourse around the world," he wrote to The Times.
We asked our readers outside of the United States to tell us how the election might affect their family and country. We received more than 800 responses. Nearly every region of the world was represented, but almost 40 percent came from Western Europe and almost 20 percent from Canada.
A large group of readers focused on how the new administration would affect trade and their nation's - and family's - economic prospects. Many others discussed security issues. And some people of color and women raised questions about how Mr. Trump's inflammatory language might change discourse worldwide and possibly lead to more hate crimes.
Here is a selection of the responses; they have been edited and condensed, and some have been translated into English.
Security and Aid
"Trump's antiterror policies might give Pakistan a jolt and help us curb terror and save many hundreds of lives that are lost to these terrorists from across the border."
Kartikey, India
"The impact shall be likely on the scaling down of humanitarian aid."
Simon Ruwuke Hove, Zimbabwe
"I think the most tangible is that we as NATO allies should start to take our own security more serious. I believe that is only fair, so we should prepare to pay our share of the bill."
Peter Hendrikx, the Netherlands
"When it comes to relations to Russia, which are a bit tense, I'm quite sure Trump is better than Clinton. In my opinion the attitude toward Russia has been way too negative here in Europe. Of course, there are a lot of problems with Russia not being a democracy and all, but that big country in the East has been in far worse condition and extremely more dangerous in the past than it is now."
Sven Jans, Sweden
"I hope he can apply his skill in bullying people this time for good - and his own place in history - by getting Netanyahu and the Palestinians to make peace for their people's future and the world's stability. My husband, son and daughter have served in the army; I hope my grandchildren will never be in danger in the same way."
Elinore Liebersohn Koenigsfeld, Israel
"I am deeply concerned with president-elect Mr. Trump for obvious reasons, but I am honestly relieved that Ms. Clinton couldn't get the job. Her foreign policy frightened me in terms of going back to the Cold War era. She is, unlike Mr. Obama, an interventionist, who would have inflamed international tensions, leaving Germany (and Europe) in an acid test between the West and East, facing armament."
Christian Weidner, Germany
"I think it brings hard time and aggression from Washington as Mr. Trump is unpredictable."
Khawar Mehmood, Pakistan
"It will be good for Europe, once President Trump is clear about his policy in fighting ISIS alongside Russia, holding a strong position in the region just like Russia, by doing the right thing, killing terrorists."
Maria da Graça, Portugal
Economic Impact
"His plan to send back migrants will have a very deep impact in the social and economic conditions of my home country, place of origin of thousands of migrant workers."
Otton Solis, Costa Rica
"It has already take down the value of our currency."
Jose Franco, Mexico
"Heads of state who succeed in generating wealth are rare. When that happens everyone is benefited, unfortunately the world lacks leaders with this ability, but there is no doubt that Donald Trump is one of these men. It will surely bring great progress to the United States and to the world."
George Monteiro, Brazil
"If America proceeds with protectionism and nixes Nafta, it might force Canada to seek out other trade partners. This would be painful in the short-term, but could potentially be beneficial in the future, where we are not so dependent on the U.S."
Jia Lu, Chinese-Canadian
"Locals are concerned that Trump will stir up trouble with China, and destabilize the region. China is easily Australia's largest trading partner, and a lot of our economic prosperity rests on stable relations with them."
James King, Australia
"Trump has called Nafta a disaster, the worst trade deal ever. Presumably, he will revoke it, or try to renegotiate its terms. Trade deals don't work as zero-sum equations. Nafta works because it has benefited all three of our North American economies. The Canadian market for consumer goods is relatively small and spread out along an east-west axis. If north-south trade is disrupted in both manufactured goods and agricultural products, the impact on the Canadian economy will be devastating."
Wally Seccombe, Canada
"Our economy might benefit if Trump and the Republicans manage to get the Keystone XL pipeline built. However, I doubt this would offset the many negative effects his presidency could have on the Canadian economy generally and Alberta's nonoil industries, such as agriculture and forestry."
Robert Bott, Canada
Access to the United States
"I have two kids studying in the U.S. and an ex-spouse who holds H-1B visa. If he insists on deporting people with certain religious backgrounds and clamping down on the said visa, of course the future will be bleak for my family."
Zunaibi Abdullah, Malaysia
Political Repercussions
"One of the major impacts on my country is many people are going to highlight the flaws of democracy and we are going back to an era of strongman politics. This is the last thing I want to see and it is actually happening. And I don't think Trump's election means the failure of democracy."
Young, Beijing
"I believe it is highly likely that Mr. Trump's election will contribute [to] fueling the ambition of outsiders and would-be populist candidates in my country Chile, and the entire Latin American region for that matter.
"Populism, mostly left-wing oriented populism, is already getting traction among Chileans, most notably among the youngest generations. The whole idea that with your vote you can now actually shake the status quo and bring about deep changes across the board is becoming stronger within the Chilean society."
Luis Alberto Pino, Chile
"In Africa in general and Central Africa in particular, we are afraid that Trump policy will be concentrated only on the United States. There will be no African policy at all. This situation will advantage dictators who are presently ruling."
Gabriel Nyangwile, Democratic Republic of Congo
"I just would want to tell him one thing: It's been hundreds of years and we still don't even know what a ballot looks like. Can you make sure the American beacon of freedom continues to shine brightly enough for us to see it all the way from China? Can you do your job so that one day China is forced to let us elect our leader too, even if it means we have a leader like you?"
Li Dashan, China
Climate Change
"Me and my family's biggest immediate fear is a reversal of the climate-change agreement. That would make it so much easier for other countries around the world to also neglect the treaty. It scares us to think about the consequences for the next generations."
Dr. Jan-Ulrich Sobisch, Germany
Xenophobia and Misogyny
"My son studies in the U.S. If xenophobia and racism become acceptable behavior, life will certainly become unpleasant for him.
"Economically, a lot of employment is created by the I.T. industry, which relies heavily on the U.S. demand for services. This would be impacted negatively if he clamps down on outsourcing and free trade."
Bala Sathiapalan, India
"Being a young ambitious woman in Russia means being routinely subjected to misogynism, harassment and patronizing remarks both at work and in life. I was hoping that by electing the first woman president the United States would show the world and especially the girls who grow up in Russia that a woman should never, ever be simplified to an object of desire or hate, a kitchen gadget who gives birth to children and watches men make decisions for her concerning her health, her future, and her life. Now, with Donald J. Trump, it would be as hard as ever to explain these things to them."
Ann, Russia
Follow Hanna Ingber on Twitter @hannaingber.
PHOTO: Television screens in Seoul, South Korea, show a news broadcast after the election. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ED JONES/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE - GETTY IMAGES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); GRANDCHILDREN (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMANITARIAN AID (77%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (76%); DEMOCRACIES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); TERRORISM (65%); Presidential Election of 2016 (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States International Relations (%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (92%); RUSSIA (90%); FRANCE (79%); ISRAEL (79%); LEBANON (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); STATE OF PALESTINE (79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (78%); NETHERLANDS (71%)

Load-Date: November 30, 2016


End of Document
Businesses Brace for Possible Limits on Foreign Worker Visas
The New York Times 
June 19, 2020 Friday 23:35 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1562 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Citing the economic slump, the president is looking at a limit on H-1B, L-1 and other visas as well as a program allowing foreign students to work in the United States after they graduate.
Body


Citing the economic slump, the president is looking at a limit on H-1B, L-1 and other visas as well as a program allowing foreign students to work in the United States after they graduate.
Maya Nasr was admitted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology at 16 to study aerospace engineering. Currently a doctoral student there, she has been working on NASA’s next Mars rover, slated for launch this summer.
“By the time I finish my Ph.D., I will have spent 10 years in the U.S. researching what I am passionate about — getting people to Mars and human space exploration,” said Ms. Nasr, 23, who is Lebanese. “I would really like to stay here and work in this field.”
But recently she has been wracked with worry that the economic downturn that has left millions of Americans unemployed could threaten the visa program that would allow her to work as a foreigner in the United States once she graduates. “If I had to, I would consider Canada, the U.K. or Europe, but the U.S. is the place,” she said.
President Trump is expected to issue an executive order within days to temporarily suspend various work visas that businesses rely on to hire foreigners, and also lay the groundwork for regulatory changes that would limit employment opportunities for foreign graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr.
The details and scope of the plan remain unclear, and it is still a work in progress. But the coming order has elicited an extraordinary response from a diverse coalition that includes universities and sectors spanning manufacturing, technology and consulting, which have been inundating the White House with letters and phone calls.
“What is scaring so many different groups here is that the order is going to impact everyone,” said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations at the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
Mr. Trump on April 22 signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards for applicants outside the country, describing it as protection for unemployed Americans amid the coronavirus pandemic. But he stopped short of suspending visas and programs that allow U.S. employers to hire foreign workers.
Additional limitations on foreign skilled and seasonal workers are now in the works, said several people who have been communicating with the administration in an attempt to narrow the scope of the proposed new limitations. “What is being proposed is significant; we just don’t know how far it will go,” Ms. Dalal-Dheini said.
A key target is expected to be the H-1B visa, often issued to computer programmers and other skilled workers who critics say often displace Americans from such jobs. The order is also expected to temporarily halt other visas, including L-1s, for executives transferred within companies; H-2Bs, for seasonal workers who often work in landscaping and hospitality; and J-1s, issued to au pairs, students on work-study summer programs and others.
The administration is also likely to freeze or downsize a popular program, Optional Practical Training, that enables graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr to work in the country for up to three years if they are in science, technology or mathematics fields. Once in the program, the graduates are often sponsored for H-1Bs by their employers, who eventually may help them get green cards.
In the 2019 fiscal year, almost 139,000 new H-1B petitions were approved; 77,000 L-1 visas were issued, as well as 66,000 H-2Bs, visas for unskilled workers that Mr. Trump has regularly used to staff his resorts. There were about 200,000 new J-1 workers hired in 2018, according to the latest data available. About 225,000 graduates of U.S. universities were authorized to remain in the country to work.
The visa suspensions would likely extend into the next fiscal year, starting Oct. 1, according to people familiar with the planning.
The proposed limits on foreign worker visas, if adopted, would be the latest restriction on immigration imposed by the Trump administration since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
Immigration opponents argue that recipients of “nonimmigrant” visas compete with Americans for jobs, and that the present unemployment level justifies a clampdown.
“The president should insist that certain employers who have found it to be cheaper and more convenient to hire visa workers instead cast down their bucket here first, and get used to hiring U.S. workers again,” said Jessica Vaughan, policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which lobbies to curb immigration. She said she was regularly consulted by White House aides on the matter.
The planned new restrictions could hamper the ability of companies to relocate personnel, affecting both American multinationals that transfer employees from abroad to the United States and foreign firms that send employees to do stints in U.S. cities.
The National Association of Manufacturers, which represents 14,000 small and large companies, sent a letter to the White House on June 1 warning that the planned immigration restrictions would stymie recovery efforts.
“We urge you to avoid immigration actions, either temporary or long term, that would cause uncertainty and impose great costs on our nation at this critical time,” said the letter, signed by the association’s president, Jay Timmons.
Two groups affiliated with the industrialist Charles Koch last week sent a letter to Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, and Jared Kushner, senior adviser to Mr. Trump, urging the administration to “refrain from imposing additional barriers” on visas.
The letter from Americans for Prosperity and the Libre Initiative said research had shown that immigrants were key to an economic rebound.
Thomas J. Donohue, chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also sent a letter to Mr. Trump last week calling on him to reconsider a visa ban.
Several Republican senators have voiced their opposition to elements of the proposed order. But influential members of Mr. Trump’s entourage believe that a pause in visas, coupled with additional regulations, would induce employers to hire Americans and pay them higher wages.
There could be risks in seriously reducing the number of foreign workers. Many businesses have learned during the pandemic that employees can work remotely from almost anywhere. If immigration is further restricted, companies might feel compelled to move jobs abroad, defenders of the visa programs caution, a trend that could undermine the U.S. economy in the long term.
“I have spoken to the administration and they are open-minded about this, but I emphasized that if we go too far on restricting immigration, from C.E.O.s I talked to, there is a risk companies will move jobs outside the country,” said Rich Lesser, chief executive of the Boston Consulting Group, an American global management consultancy.
The additional regulatory changes now under review would affect many other people already in the United States.
Among the changes under consideration are eliminating the H-4 visa, which allows spouses of H-1B visa holders to work; ending the Optional Practical Training program, or shortening the time foreign graduates can work in the United States; and tightening H-1B requirements along with a $20,000 fee per applicant sponsored for the visa.
While some Republican lawmakers have called for rescinding the O.P.T. program, 21 Republican members of Congress this month called for it to remain intact, saying in a letter to the Trump administration that it was a magnet for foreign students — a key source of revenue for many universities, whose numbers have been falling.
The Association of American Universities issued an action alert to presidents and chancellors, urging them to engage the administration on the executive order.
“The message you are sending to international students here, and those considering coming here, is that we don’t value them,” said Benjamin Lane, vice chair of the external affairs board at M.I.T.’s graduate student council. International students represent 45 percent of M.I.T. graduate students.
Fan Chen, a data scientist from China, was hired by a U.S. multinational in Washington after earning a master’s degree at the University of Michigan.
For three consecutive years, the company, which initially had hired her under the O.P.T. program, sponsored her for an H-1B visa. However, she was not selected in the lottery that U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services holds when the number of applications exceeds the allotted annual number of visas.
To keep employing Ms. Fan, the company transferred her last year to its branch in the United Kingdom, where she has continued to work with her U.S.-based team.
Ms. Chen and her manager were ecstatic when she was chosen for a visa in this year’s round. Then news began to circulate about the impending executive order, and it is no longer certain that she will be able to return to the United States in the fall.
The company’s lawyer and human resources personnel have been trying to reassure her. “They are trying to make it sound like this order isn’t likely to happen,” Ms. Chen said. “But they are also saying we might have to think of Plan B.”
PHOTO: Maya Nasr, an M.I.T. student, is working on the next Mars rover. “I would really like to stay here and work in this field,” she said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HANNAH REYES MORALES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (92%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (91%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); SPACE EXPLORATION (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); SEASONAL WORKERS (89%); TECHNOLOGY (89%); IMMIGRATION (79%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (79%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (78%); ENGINEERING (77%); SPACE TECHNOLOGY (77%); AEROSPACE RESEARCH (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (76%); PLANETS & ASTEROIDS (76%); MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY (72%); AEROSPACE ENGINEERING (71%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (70%); VIRUSES (70%); CORONAVIRUSES (60%); EPIDEMICS (60%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (60%); ECONOMIC NEWS (58%); PANDEMICS (50%); Foreign Workers (%); United States Economy (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Visas (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); SPACE EXPLORATION (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SPACE INDUSTRY (78%); ENGINEERING (77%); SPACE TECHNOLOGY (77%); AEROSPACE RESEARCH (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (76%); SPACE & SATELLITE LAUNCHES (76%); MANUFACTURING (73%); MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY (72%); AEROSPACE ENGINEERING (71%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (71%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (58%)

Geographic: MARS (72%); UNITED STATES (97%); EUROPE (79%); LEBANON (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Attacks in Britain Worry India Muslims
The New York Times
July 12, 2007 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 1120 words
Byline: By HEATHER TIMMONS
Hari Kumar contributed reporting.
Dateline: NEW DELHI, July 11 
Body


The foiled terrorist attacks in Britain last month have prompted anxiety and soul searching in India, a country whose economy is bolstered by its citizens' ability to work overseas. 
  Some of those arrested in connection with the thwarted attacks  in London and Glasgow are Indian Muslims. It is the first time since 1985, when a bomb destroyed Air India Flight 182 near the coast of Ireland, that Indian citizens have been implicated in a major international terrorist event. 
  The arrests have prompted fears that Indians, Muslim or otherwise, will face increasing difficulty finding employment overseas. 
  Concerns that relatives already working abroad will also face recriminations have  been heightened. Some Indians remember that the first hate-crime victim in the United States in the wake of the terrorist attacks of September 2001 was Balbir Singh Sodhi, a Sikh who owned a gas station in Arizona. He was  shot to death by a man who apparently saw Mr. Sodhi's turban as a symbol of terrorism and anti-Americanism. 
  A pledge by Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain last week to review policies for screening foreigners working in the National Health Service in turn elicited a plea from the Indian prime minister, Manmohan Singh, not to single out citizens of any country for scrutiny. 
  ''A terrorist is a terrorist and has no religion or community,'' Mr. Singh said he told Mr. Brown. 
  India relies heavily on remittances from its workers abroad, and the notion of excellence on the part of its expatriate professionals is a source of pride at home. 
  Kafeel Ahmed, an Indian engineer who the police say drove a flaming Jeep Cherokee into the Glasgow airport terminal, is a main suspect in the British car-bomb plot. His brother Sabeel, a doctor, has also been arrested in Britain. Their cousin Mohammed Haneef, a doctor from India, is being held in Australia in connection with the attacks, and five other Indian doctors were questioned and released in Australia. 
  Any curtailment on Indian nationals traveling abroad for work could have a powerful effect at home, economists say. Indian expatriates sent home  $25 billion in 2006, according to a World Bank estimate, or about 3 percent of the country's total output. Expatriate groups estimate that nearly 30 million Indian citizens or people of Indian origin live overseas.
  Money sent from abroad ''provides a huge amount of support to the currency and to the deficit,'' Abheek Barua, chief economist of HDFC Bank, said. ''In the absence of remittances, the dynamic of the exchange rate would be very different.'' 
  The bulk of India's overseas population, though, are not professionals. About two-thirds of the $25 billion  sent home comes from blue-collar workers, whose money provides spending power for families in small towns and villages. 
  ''Rural economies have boomed on the basis of these remittances,'' Mr. Barua said. 
  Indian professionals have helped to plump up stock and real estate prices by sending cash home to relatives and by investing themselves. The Reserve Bank of India estimated last year that money from remittances accounted for 12 percent of the growth in the booming real estate market. 
  The Indian diaspora has its roots in the British colonial era. Indentured servants from India were shipped to the West Indies to work on plantations as early as the 18th century. Later, Indians were recruited by the British to be policemen and midlevel civil servants in the West Indies and Hong Kong. 
  The modern mobility of Indian professionals reflects  a combination of high education standards in engineering, medicine and finance, fluency in English and, until recently, limited earning opportunities at home. 
  In the United States, there has been scant suggestion from politicians or policy makers  that the events in Britain would affect the ability of Indians to travel there. But Indian professionals working in the United States under professional H-1B visas are already facing long delays converting these visas to permanent residents' green cards. The H-1B visa program itself is under review  in Congress, which is mired in conflict over immigration policy.
  Some economists and analysts dismiss concerns about the ability of Indians to work overseas, noting that industries across the world rely on Indian professionals, making it difficult to discriminate against them.
  Up to 40 percent of doctors in the British National Health Service are of foreign origin, for example, and a majority of those are from India or Pakistan.
  R. Vaidyanthan, a professor of finance at the Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore, who has studied the Indian reliance on remittances, said Britain ''requires these doctors more than these doctors require'' Britain. 
  There are 40,000 doctors from India in the United States, according to the American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin, and 300,000 Indian-Americans work in the American high-technology industries, according to the  Census Bureau.
  Like many of the overseas professionals, Dr. Haneef, who has been held in Australia for more than a week for questioning in the thwarted attacks, played an important role for his extended family as breadwinner. Dr. Haneef, who worked at the Gold Coast Hospital south of Brisbane, has not been charged with any wrongdoing. ''Haneef is the source of money to us,'' said his younger brother, Shuaib Mohamed, an engineering student, in a telephone interview from Bangalore. 
  Dr. Haneef is the oldest of three children, whose father, a teacher, died in a road accident. He also supports a wife and daughter in Bangalore, his brother said.  
  The foiled attacks in Britain have emboldened calls in India, particularly by Hindus and Sikhs, for a crackdown on Islamic fundamentalism. ''Tremendous political and emotional capital had long been invested in the asinine argument that there was something radically different about Indian Muslims that had prevented their engagement in any act of international terrorism,'' said a columnist, Kanwar Pal Singh Gill, a former police chief  with a reputation of being tough on terrorism. 
  ''Islamist terrorism is, and has for some time now been, a reality in India,'' he added, ''and it is no use saying 'don't label Indians.' '' 
  Some terrorism experts contend that Indian Muslims may be more attractive as recruits for jihadist activities abroad than Muslims from other countries. 
  They are ''less of a suspect in comparison to a Pakistani or Iraqi national,'' said Ajit Kumar Doval, former chief of India's Intelligence Bureau. Indians working overseas, he said, are plentiful and are ''good raw material for the Islamic hard-liner recruiters, as happened in the case of Kafeel.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TERRORISM (93%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (91%); RELIGION (91%); ARRESTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); BOMBINGS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (78%); ECONOMICS (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); SIKHS & SIKHISM (78%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (67%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (65%); HOUSEHOLD MANAGEMENT (63%); EXCHANGE RATES (60%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (60%); HATE CRIME (56%)

Company:  HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FINANCE CORP BANK OF SRI LANKA (62%);  HDFC BANK LTD (51%)

Ticker: HDFC (CSE) (62%); HDFCBANK (NSE) (51%); HDB (NYSE) (51%)

Industry: NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (62%); SIC6029 COMMERCIAL BANKS, NEC (62%); SIC6081 BRANCHES & AGENCIES OF FOREIGN BANKS (51%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (78%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (72%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (72%); AIRPORTS (71%); EXCHANGE RATES (60%)

Person: MANMOHAN SINGH (78%); GORDON BROWN (58%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); GLASGOW, SCOTLAND (73%); LONDON, ENGLAND (58%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); INDIA (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); AUSTRALIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRELAND (79%)

Load-Date: July 12, 2007


End of Document
International Readers Ponder Trump
The New York Times
November 13, 2016 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 24
Length: 1320 words
Byline: By THE NEW YORK TIMES
Body


David Parting, a reader in Germany, wrote that a Donald J. Trump presidency could mend ties between the United States and Russia, which would ''overall reduce the potential for international conflicts.''
Nadim Kobeissi, a Lebanese immigrant living in France, said he feared personal ramifications from the election of Mr. Trump. 
  ''My partner and I, both Arab immigrants, already witness enough xenophobia, and there is a fear that Trump's victory only further legitimizes this sort of discourse around the world,'' he wrote to The Times.
  We asked our readers outside of the United States to tell us how the election might affect their family and country. We received more than 800 responses. Nearly every region of the world was represented, but almost 40 percent came from Western Europe and almost 20 percent from Canada.
  A large group of readers focused on how the new administration would affect trade and their nation's -- and family's -- economic prospects. Many others discussed security issues. And some people of color and women raised questions about how Mr. Trump's inflammatory language might change discourse worldwide and possibly lead to more hate crimes.
  Here is a selection of the responses; they have been edited and condensed.
  Security and Aid
  ''Trump's antiterror policies might give Pakistan a jolt and help us curb terror and save many hundreds of lives that are lost to these terrorists from across the border.''
  Kartikey, India
  ''The impact shall be likely on the scaling down of humanitarian aid.''
  Simon Ruwuke Hove, Zimbabwe
  ''I think the most tangible is that we as NATO allies should start to take our own security more serious. I believe that is only fair, so we should prepare to pay our share of the bill.''
  Peter Hendrikx, the Netherlands
  ''When it comes to relations to Russia, which are a bit tense, I'm quite sure Trump is better than Clinton. In my opinion the attitude toward Russia has been way too negative here in Europe. Of course, there are a lot of problems with Russia not being a democracy and all, but that big country in the East has been in far worse condition and extremely more dangerous in the past than it is now.''
  Sven Jans, Sweden
  ''I hope he can apply his skill in bullying people this time for good -- and his own place in history -- by getting Netanyahu and the Palestinians to make peace for their people's future and the world's stability. My husband, son and daughter have served in the army; I hope my grandchildren will never be in danger in the same way.''
  Elinore Liebersohn Koenigsfeld, Israel
  ''I am deeply concerned with president-elect Mr. Trump for obvious reasons, but I am honestly relieved that Ms. Clinton couldn't get the job. Her foreign policy frightened me in terms of going back to the Cold War era. She is, unlike Mr. Obama, an interventionist, who would have inflamed international tensions, leaving Germany (and Europe) in an acid test between the West and East, facing armament.''
  Christian Weidner, Germany
  ''I think it brings hard time and aggression from Washington as Mr. Trump is unpredictable.''
  Khawar Mehmood, Pakistan
  ''It will be good for Europe, once President Trump is clear about his policy in fighting ISIS alongside Russia, holding a strong position in the region just like Russia, by doing the right thing, killing terrorists.''
  Maria da Graça, Portugal
  Economic Impact
  ''His plan to send back migrants will have a very deep impact in the social and economic conditions of my home country, place of origin of thousands of migrant workers.''
  Otton Solis, Costa Rica
  ''It has already take down the value of our currency.''
  Jose Franco, Mexico
  ''Heads of state who succeed in generating wealth are rare. When that happens everyone is benefited, unfortunately the world lacks leaders with this ability, but there is no doubt that Donald Trump is one of these men. It will surely bring great progress to the United States and to the world.''
  George Monteiro, Brazil
  ''If America proceeds with protectionism and nixes Nafta, it might force Canada to seek out other trade partners. This would be painful in the short-term, but could potentially be beneficial in the future, where we are not so dependent on the U.S.''
  Jia Lu, Chinese Canadian
  ''Locals are concerned that Trump will stir up trouble with China, and destabilize the region. China is easily Australia's largest trading partner, and a lot of our economic prosperity rests on stable relations with them.''
  James King, Australia
  ''Trump has called Nafta a disaster, the worst trade deal ever. Presumably, he will revoke it, or try to renegotiate its terms. Trade deals don't work as zero-sum equations. Nafta works because it has benefited all three of our North American economies. The Canadian market for consumer goods is relatively small and spread out along an east-west axis. If north-south trade is disrupted in both manufactured goods and agricultural products, the impact on the Canadian economy will be devastating.''
  Wally Seccombe, Canada
  ''Our economy might benefit if Trump and the Republicans manage to get the Keystone XL pipeline built. However, I doubt this would offset the many negative effects his presidency could have on the Canadian economy generally and Alberta's nonoil industries, such as agriculture and forestry.''
  Robert Bott, Canada
  Access to the United States
  ''I have two kids studying in the U.S. and an ex-spouse who holds H-1B visa. If he insists on deporting people with certain religious backgrounds and clamping down on the said visa, of course the future will be bleak for my family.''
  Zunaibi Abdullah, Malaysia
  Political Repercussions
  ''I believe it is highly likely that Mr. Trump's election will contribute [to] fueling the ambition of outsiders and would-be populist candidates in my country Chile, and the entire Latin American region for that matter.
  ''Populism, mostly left-wing oriented populism, is already getting traction among Chileans, most notably among the youngest generations. The whole idea that with your vote you can now actually shake the status quo and bring about deep changes across the board is becoming stronger within the Chilean society.''
  Luis Alberto Pino, Chile
  ''In Africa in general and Central Africa in particular, we are afraid that Trump policy will be concentrated only on the United States. There will be no African policy at all. This situation will advantage dictators who are presently ruling.''
  Gabriel Nyangwile, Democratic Republic of Congo
  Climate Change
  ''Me and my family's biggest immediate fear is a reversal of the climate-change agreement. That would make it so much easier for other countries around the world to also neglect the treaty. It scares us to think about the consequences for the next generations.''
  Dr. Jan-Ulrich Sobisch, Germany
  Xenophobia and Misogyny
  ''My son studies in the U.S. If xenophobia and racism become acceptable behavior, life will certainly become unpleasant for him.
  ''Economically, a lot of employment is created by the I.T. industry, which relies heavily on the U.S. demand for services. This would be impacted negatively if he clamps down on outsourcing and free trade.''
  Bala Sathiapalan, India
  ''Being a young ambitious woman in Russia means being routinely subjected to misogynism, harassment and patronizing remarks both at work and in life. I was hoping that by electing the first woman president the United States would show the world and especially the girls who grow up in Russia that a woman should never, ever be simplified to an object of desire or hate, a kitchen gadget who gives birth to children and watches men make decisions for her concerning her health, her future, and her life. Now, with Donald J. Trump, it would be as hard as ever to explain these things to them.''
  Ann, Russia
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/world/americas/international-readers-on-how-a-trump-presidency-could-affect-them.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Television screens in Seoul, South Korea, show a news broadcast after the election. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ED JONES/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); IMMIGRATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMANITARIAN AID (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); RACE & ETHNICITY (77%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (76%); GRANDCHILDREN (74%); DEMOCRACIES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); TERRORISM (65%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: EUROPE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIA (90%); FRANCE (79%); ISRAEL (79%); LEBANON (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); STATE OF PALESTINE (79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (78%); NETHERLANDS (56%)

Load-Date: November 13, 2016


End of Document
Intel, in Show of Support for Trump, Announces Factory in Arizona
The New York Times 
June 19, 2020 Friday 15:44 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1138 words
Byline: Vindu Goel
Highlight: The world’s largest chip manufacturer, which opposes President Trump’s immigration order but backs his tax and regulatory plans, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory conceived in 2011.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — Intel, the world’s largest computer chip manufacturer, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory in Arizona, adding 3,000 jobs, the company’s chief executive said on Wednesday after meeting with President Trump at the White House.
The completion of the factory, which will complement two other Intel semiconductor plants in Chandler, Ariz., had been under consideration for several years.
Standing beside Mr. Trump in the Oval Office, Brian Krzanich, Intel’s chief executive, said the company had decided to proceed now because of “the tax and regulatory policies we see the administration pushing forward.”
Mr. Trump said: “The people of Arizona will be very happy. It’s a lot of jobs.”
He said Intel called the White House several weeks ago to coordinate the announcement. That outreach illustrates the tightrope that Silicon Valley companies are walking as they deal with a president most of them did not want to see in office.
Intel was one of nearly 130 companies that signed a legal brief challenging Mr. Trump’s Jan. 27 executive order temporarily blocking the entry of all refugees and of immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim nations. Earlier, Mr. Krzanich criticized the order on Twitter, declaring, “As a company co-founded by an immigrant, we support lawful immigration.” (Intel’s third employee and longtime chief executive, Andrew S. Grove, survived the Holocaust and arrived in the United States after fleeing the Soviet invasion of his native Hungary in 1956.)
Yet Intel, like Apple and other large technology companies, also supports the Trump administration’s plans to reduce corporate taxes and regulations. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Krzanich planned and then canceled a fund-raiser for Mr. Trump.
Stacy J. Smith, the executive vice president who oversees manufacturing and sales, said Intel considered itself apolitical. “Intel engages, whatever the administration,” he said in an interview after Wednesday’s announcement. “We focus on the issues that we care about.”
Intel said it agreed with Mr. Trump’s desire to improve the investment climate for American manufacturers. “In places where we believe the policies are in the best interest of the company, we lean in,” Mr. Smith said.
In other areas, such as Mr. Trump’s desire to curb immigration and end free-trade agreements, Intel disagrees, and it is telling the White House so. “We care about hiring the best and brightest people around the world,” Mr. Smith said. “We care about exporting our products all over the world.”
Mr. Krzanich said in a message to employees that he had chosen to announce the expansion at the White House to signal his support for the administration’s efforts to make American manufacturing more competitive.
“When we disagree, we don’t walk away,” he wrote. “We believe that we must be part of the conversation to voice our views on key issues such as immigration, H1B visas and other policies that are essential to innovation.”
Intel’s strategy of engagement mirrors that of Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla Motors and SpaceX, who serves on a presidential advisory council. Other Silicon Valley leaders, such as Travis Kalanick of Uber, have distanced themselves from the administration under pressure from employees and customers.
Intel’s political action committee gave about equally to Democratic and Republican candidates during the last election cycle. Individual employees donated far more to Hillary Clinton’s campaign than to Mr. Trump’s. But over all, the company is not a major political donor.
New chip plants are tremendously expensive, requiring large tracts of land, reliable electricity and water, and a skilled work force that includes people with doctorates in chemistry and technicians who can repair a malfunctioning robot. Sophisticated equipment is necessary to deposit and etch microscopic layers of material on silicon wafers, which are then cut and packaged into the microprocessors that run personal computers, servers, smartphones and, increasingly, other electronic devices.
Countries compete to land such plants, especially modern factories that produce the most valuable chips and bring high-paying research and development jobs. Government subsidies are common, with China vowing to spend tens of billions of dollars to expand its domestic chip industry.
While most technology manufacturing, such as computers and smartphones, has moved overseas, American factories still account for about one-seventh of global chip production and produce many of the most valuable computer chips, including Intel’s flagship processors. Seventy-six chip plants are scattered across the United States, from South Portland, Me., to Newport Beach, Calif., according to the Semiconductor Industry Association.
The industry is seeking corporate tax cuts and incentives for research and development. In addition, chip makers would like to see the United States government relax longstanding national security restrictions on the export of new chip technology. In Intel’s case, the regulations forbid the company from making its high-end processors in China.
Mr. Smith said Mr. Trump had offered Intel no financial incentives to complete the Arizona factory.
The plant was conceived in 2011. President Barack Obama visited the site in 2012, when construction had just begun, and he praised the plant as an example of “an America where we build stuff and make stuff and sell stuff all over the world.”
But it was mothballed in 2014 after sales of personal computers — and the Intel chips that go into them — started to slide. Intel restructured its business and announced last year that it was laying off 12,000 people, including 560 in Chandler. The company now employs about 50,000 people in the United States and 106,000 worldwide.
As Intel looks beyond servers and personal computers to new markets like other Internet-connected devices, cars and tablets, sales are growing again, and it will need the new factory when it is completed in a couple of years. “We’re building it for our own business reasons,” Mr. Smith said.
The plant will build ultradense chips that Intel refers to as seven nanometer, with transistors packed more closely together than in the chips the company now builds. The tighter spacing allows for faster, more energy-efficient chips. “This factory will produce the most powerful computer chips on the planet,” Mr. Krzanich said.
Intel, one of the original chip companies, from which Silicon Valley gets its name, is based in Santa Clara, Calif. But most of its chip production is in Oregon and Arizona. It also has factories in China, Ireland and Israel.
PHOTO: After meeting with President Trump, Brian Krzanich, left, Intel’s chief executive, said the company would invest $7 billion to finish a factory conceived in 2011. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); EXECUTIVES (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (79%); AGREEMENTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); FUNDRAISING (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (72%); EXPORT TRADE (71%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (52%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%); Intel Corporation (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Computer Chips (%); Arizona (%); Factories and Manufacturing (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: MICROPROCESSORS (92%); SEMICONDUCTOR MFG (91%); COMPUTER CHIPS (90%); MANUFACTURING (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); BIG TECH (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); SEMICONDUCTORS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); BRIAN KRZANICH (79%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (59%); ARIZONA, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
A Solution Seen To 'Brain Drain'
The New York Times
August 27, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6; BITS
Length: 241 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Body


A new academic study details the benefits and the threat of a ''reverse brain drain'' -- skilled foreign workers going back to their home countries because they cannot get visas in the United States. One of the study's authors has a solution that is not in step with the high-tech lobby. He advocates getting rid of the H-1B visa, the temporary work permit for skilled workers.
  Vivek Wadhwa, a fellow at the Harvard Law School and executive in residence at Duke, said last week that the H-1B program is ''wonderful for technology companies and employers. They have a captive audience.''
The H-1B, he said, allows the sponsoring company to control employees, and often underpay them, as critics of the visa program contend.
  Instead, Mr. Wadhwa said the United States should simply grant skilled immigrant workers permanent residence visas, so-called green cards. The new report says that more than one million skilled workers -- scientists, engineers, doctors and researchers -- are competing for 120,000 permanent residence visas each year. 
  The surging backlog, the study adds, results in skilled workers returning to their home countries.
  The report, published last week, was conducted by researchers at Harvard, Duke and New York University. 
  ''If these people stay, we win,'' Mr. Wadhwa said. ''If they work with our brightest people and learn American ways and go back, we have a big problem. The risk is they leave and compete with us.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%); RESEARCH REPORTS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); WRITERS (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%); WRITERS (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: February 24, 2009


End of Document
Fed's John Williams Feels Uncertainty Among Business Leaders; Monetary Policy
The New York Times 
December 20, 2016 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: UPSHOT
Length: 3000 words
Byline: BINYAMIN APPELBAUM
Highlight: Mingled optimism and concern in discussions the San Francisco Fed chief has had since the election.
Body


John Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, said his meetings with business leaders in recent weeks had been dominated by uncertainty about the economic plans of President-elect Donald J. Trump.
Trade with China and immigration from Mexico have been huge drivers of economic growth in the western United States. Excitement about tax cuts and regulatory relief has been tempered by worries about the impact of less trade and less immigration.
In an interview on Friday, Mr. Williams described what he has been hearing. He also talked about the postelection shift in his own economic outlook, and what he has learned about the health of the American economy over the last 12 months.
His comments have been lightly edited for clarity and brevity.
Republicans are talking about tax cuts that could provide a jolt of fiscal stimulus. Did that play a role in the decision to raise rates in December?
I'm going to give you my own views on that. The unemployment rate has fallen to well below 5 percent, core inflation has been edging up over the last year or so, and other signs of good momentum, such as job growth, made a very convincing case to make this small step at this time. While there are a lot of tensions around fiscal policy and those developments, in my view this decision stands on its own. From my perspective, my support for the rate increase was based wholly on the data we have seen and the basic economic outlook over the next couple of years.
But surely the pace of future rate hikes will depend in part on fiscal policy?
The thing about conducting monetary policy in this time, it's really important to reiterate that we're focused on our maximum employment and price stability goals. There are decisions that are made by the elected representatives in Congress and the administration, and that's the process that should happen. What we need to do and what we will do is focus on any changes in the economic outlook, what does that mean for achieving our goals and for the right path of policy decisions to achieve those goals. I know everyone likes to talk about fiscal policy in terms of what does it mean for the outlook. In the last couple of years we've also had some big shocks to the economy that came from across the globe. There's a lot of things that can change and we have to stay focused on our goals and continue to be data dependent in terms of analyzing what do these changes mean for our outlook.
The Fed's baseline for next year is three rate increases. Is that your view?
I will say that my underlying view for next year is broadly consistent with the central tendency of the committee. My view is that the economy is going to grow roughly as it did this year, unemployment is going to edge down a little bit, inflation moving back to 2 percent, and that calls for gradual removal of policy accommodation.
So Mr. Trump's election hasn't had a big impact on your economic outlook?
Obviously I don't have any particular insights into what the new Congress or the new administration is going to do around fiscal policy. There's a lot of uncertainty about what policies are going to be enacted, and that matters a lot in terms of thinking about any effects on the economy. I do think, even though I'm definitely "wait and see" in terms of learning what happens, the main effect on my outlook is that my view on the risks to the outlook have shifted a little. Those risks used to be maybe balanced and if anything a little bit to the soft side because of global developments and other factors that might cause growth to weaken. And I think that the possibility of greater fiscal stimulus and other changes in policies would if anything move those risks a little bit to the right. But it's not a big effect.
If the economy is now growing at something close to its sustainable potential, what good can come of fiscal stimulus?
Changes in fiscal or other policies that can increase potential output of the economy or the growth rate of the economy in terms of the supply side obviously would be beneficial in terms of the low equilibrium interest rate. The kind of things I'm thinking about are policies that lead to increased investment, whether it's public investment in infrastructure or productivity: enhancing business investment around research and development or just general expansion of investment in plants and facilities and things like that. We're trying to have a game changer around longer-term growth prospects and boost the long-run strength of the economy. And it's really going to have to come through things that either increase the productivity of the economy or on the other side improve and increase the labor force and give education or job training, improving the productivity of our work force. Those are the things that really matter for the long run.
Is there any value in deficit spending just to stimulate growth?
Any discussion around federal fiscal policy has to - at this juncture, given that the economy is near full employment and it's in pretty good shape in terms of the business cycle - it should be focused on improving the longer-run performance of the economy. I think that's beneficial to everybody in our society. The other issue that's obviously important is that you want to have a federal budget that's sustainable in the long run. So when thinking about fiscal policies, I would really think the key issue is, "What are policies that would improve the long-run performance of our economy and make our economy stronger in the longer run and put the federal budget on a sustainable long-run path?" So hopefully that's the direction that things will go.
In an essay this summer, you argued that the Fed should be preparing for future crises. You suggested in particular that the Fed should consider targeting a higher inflation rate. Is that discussion happening?
There is definitely work going on in the economics community around these topics, among a lot of academics but also among central banks. Particular kudos to the Bank of Canada, who, through a process that the bank has with the government - every five years they review their framework for monetary policy - they have a very serious deep dive and thoughtful consideration of these issues. I think of them as conducting best practice in terms of the willingness to consider these issues and to think long term and to do it in a very open-minded way. So I think other central banks should follow the Bank of Canada's lead here.
I think the important thing to remember on this is that this is not an issue about the U.S. or Canada. It's an issue that according to our research and an increasing number of researchers, this observation that the equilibrium interest rate appears to be at very low level and is likely to stay that way for a long time is more of a global phenomenon. The one piece of advice I give on this is: Stop thinking about this as a national issue. It's really a global phenomenon driven by demographic trends and what economists call the global savings glut or heightened demand for safe assets. I think people around the world are starting to focus on this. The question of what's the right remedy, that's kind of the later discussion.
If it's a global issue, does it require a coordinated response?
If people came to the conclusion that given the equilibrium real rate [inflation targets should be increased], I do think there would be advantages: that the more countries that raised their target at the same time, I think the greater the benefit is. If you look at some of the research that's going on, I think one of the most interesting and important conclusions from that is that the negative spillovers from other parts of the world, if they go into recession and hit the zero lower bound, and monetary policy cannot be fully effective in bringing their economies back to full strength, the negative spillover is greater if the rest of the world is also getting pushed down to the zero lower bound. When everybody is at the zero lower bound and they're all being constrained, there's a negative feedback loop. Weakness abroad spills over to the United States and then we can't offset that as effectively. If we had a higher inflation target and didn't come to the zero lower bound, we'd be free to adjust our policy to offset any effects coming from abroad, and that has a positive influence on the global economy. And with a very low inflation target around the world, the likelihood of all of us hitting the zero lower bound is higher. And if everyone had a higher inflation target - a modestly higher target, a 3 or 4 percent target - then the likelihood of all us getting to the zero lower bound at the same time is much lower. My punch line is: Yes, countries can do it one by one. That would work. We've seen it happen. But I do think there are some benefits to a more, I wouldn't say coordinated, but perhaps a more correlated approach.
You mentioned the Bank of Canada's accounting every five years. There are proposals before Congress to increase the Fed's accountability. Do you think there are versions of that idea that would be desirable?
To my mind the most important feature of what the Federal Reserve operates under is the ability to act independently of short-term political influence. To me that's the bedrock of any discussion of reforms around the Federal Reserve. Research has shown that independent central banks can work more effectively at keeping inflation low and stable and keeping economies performing up to their potential, and that's a critical piece of any Fed reform. It's essential that we retain the ability to make what can be politically unpopular decisions in the interest of the economy. That's the way the Federal Reserve was constructed, and various reforms have maintained and strengthened that so we can focus on our dual mandate goals.
The specific proposals that would require a policy rule would be problematic in the real world. I'm a big advocate of having systematic predictable monetary policy. I agree with all of those principles, I just know from practice that given the uncertainties around potential output and employment - all of those aspects of actual decision-making means that trying to tie the hands of a central bank to some simple equations is misguided. I think rules are important inputs into policy making. I think we should make that clear. But it's not a substitute for careful analysis and judgment around decision-making.
The other point I'd make that doesn't get enough attention is that these efforts to tie the Fed's hands seems to be completely at odds with the structure of the Federal Reserve in having a committee of presidents from around the U.S. together with governors, having a group of people with different perspectives and backgrounds and different understandings of how monetary policy works. That whole structure is designed to get away from groupthink and it's designed to show that we don't all agree and highlight different views.
But are there steps you think the Fed should take?
Obviously I believe strongly in transparency at the Federal Reserve in terms of our strategy or our policies. We've moved dramatically toward more transparency in the 20 years I've been at the Fed. I think those are all positive things and I'm a supporter of any efforts we can do to be more transparent around our thinking around policy decisions within that rubric of being independent of short-term political pressure.
I do think that there's analysis that we go through in preparing for Federal Open Market Committee meetings that does not necessarily tell us what we're going to choose to do but definitely are inputs into our policy process that we could be more open about. The specific example is that we do look at policy rules and optimal control policies of the kind that [Janet]           Yellen has highlighted in her speeches over the last several years. It's not a substitute for decision-making. It's an input. And we could do a better job and be more willing to put that out there in different ways to help people understand better, in a very practical way, here's the kind of analysis that goes into the decisions. I always find that Chair Yellen is really good at this. She says, "Here are the issues; here are the caveats." I read her speeches and think could we make this more of a regular feature of our communications. Whether it's in the monetary policy report or in some other way. She's shown us the way of how to explain it and put it out there, nicely framed, not telling you what we're going to do but how I think about these issues. So I think there's a path forward around providing more information about the various scenarios and getting that information out there more publicly.
Our monetary policy report [sent to Congress twice a year] as currently constituted doesn't really provide this kind of information - the analysis around monetary policy - the stuff that you see around monetary policy reports at the Bank of England or the Riksbank. You look at those other reports and you're saying, these are quite amazing documents in terms of how much content they put into those. Our report, I don't think we're anywhere near best practice in terms of having that kind of report. That's a big undertaking and a lot of work, but that's again what I look at - is there a way even with our structure to come up with a monetary policy report that would give that depth to the analysis. We hide from the public how much work and thought goes into these, how much assessment of risks to the outlook in policy decisions, how much thinking goes into that.
Have you been surprised by the strength of job growth? Was there more room for the economy to improve than you expected?
Labor force participation has held up a little better than we had thought. And we've got a lot more research on this, in the context of "Hey, maybe we were missing something." One approach is to say, let's just treat everybody in the population as potentially in the labor force. Everyone over 16, let's look at that whole pool and construct a nonemployment index and for each group - a person in school, a person who's in retirement - you ask statistically, what's the percentage of those people who get a job in the next month? The punch line is when you look at this broader statistic, that number is basically consistent with an unemployment rate below 5 percent and it's very similar to the figure you get in 2005, when the economy was at full employment. What that tells me is whatever has been happening over the last year, where we are today is essentially consistent with being at full employment.
That does leave the huge question: If we really are at trend, why is participation so much lower than it was 10 years ago? And that's something economists have really turned their energy to understand: Why today the normal is so much different?
Trade with China, and immigration from Mexico, have been huge drivers of economic growth in your district. Are you concerned about the potential impact of Mr. Trump's plans to limit both?
We've been collecting a lot of perspectives from business leaders and community leaders in our district. And it was fascinating to me. It was one of the most interesting conversations I've had. First of all, everybody who came to these meetings, that's what they were thinking about. Obviously there are people very excited about perhaps a little more business-friendly regulation. A lot of people are excited about lower corporate taxes. But it was striking because in that same conversation where people said I'm bullish on this or cautiously optimistic on that, it was striking how much concern business leaders in my district expressed around immigration and trade. Obviously trade is a big deal here on the West Coast. Our industries are very export-oriented. That was an area where there is uncertainty around where that would go, not as a political statement, just "How would this affect us?" given how many industries and jobs are really tied to a global economy.
In terms of the agriculture industry, which is still a big part of the Western economy, clearly issues around labor availability came up quite a bit. That's tied to immigration, but it's also tied to concerns about our education system and making sure that if we're going to restrict the availability of labor into our market one way or the other, we're going to need to train and prepare our work force for the jobs that we need to fill.
Similarly you heard comments in tech about H1B visas. Nobody knows what's going to happen but this is a region of the economy that really has been built over a very long period of time around global trade, around openness, around bringing in the best talent from around the world into the technology world, superlative universities that attract people who come here and end up staying here. What I heard a lot of was more about the uncertainty of this, and people saying in the end this either means more mechanization if we don't have labor available, to have this done even more by machines.
And then in the tech world and quite honestly entertainment too we know that this is a very fungible industry. If it's hard to get the labor to come here, you'll have to have your offices, your research-and-development shops and other things where the labor can be. There's always a discussion around Canada being very open to having tech centers open up where they do research and do other things. It's not a political thing. It's more about the uncertainty.
The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on            Facebook and            Twitter. Sign up for our            newsletter.
Related Articles
    • A Fast Talk With New York's Fed Chief, and a View of a Steady Economy
    • Interview With a Fed Dissident: The Sole Vote to Raise Interest Rates
    • Q. and A. With the Fed's John Williams: Timing of Rate Rise Is Overrated
    • Why Jeffrey Lacker Is Worried About Inflation
    • Q. and A. With Fed's Eric Rosengren: Still Bullish on Economy
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ECONOMIC POLICY (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (89%); MONETARY POLICY (89%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (79%); FULL EMPLOYMENT (79%); INFLATION (79%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (79%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (79%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); TAX LAW (76%); IMMIGRATION (72%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (72%); Economic Conditions and Trends (%); United States Economy (%); Federal Reserve System (%); Bank of Canada (%); Banking and Financial Institutions (%); Interest Rates (%); Inflation (Economics) (%)

Company:  FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO (91%)

Organization: FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM (91%)

Ticker: Federal Reserve System; Federal Reserve System; Bank of Canada

Industry: NAICS521110 MONETARY AUTHORITIES - CENTRAL BANK (91%); SIC6011 FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS (91%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION & POLICY (90%); MONETARY POLICY (89%); CENTRAL BANKS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: December 21, 2016


End of Document
Businesses Brace for Limits on Foreign Worker Visas
The New York Times
June 20, 2020 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 1545 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


Citing the economic slump, the president is looking at a limit on H-1B, L-1 and other visas as well as a program allowing foreign students to work in the United States after they graduate.
Maya Nasr was admitted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology at 16 to study aerospace engineering. Currently a doctoral student there, she has been working on NASA's next Mars rover, slated for launch this summer. 
  ''By the time I finish my Ph.D., I will have spent 10 years in the U.S. researching what I am passionate about -- getting people to Mars and human space exploration,'' said Ms. Nasr, 23, who is Lebanese. ''I would really like to stay here and work in this field.''
  But recently she has been wracked with worry that the economic downturn that has left millions of Americans unemployed could threaten the visa program that would allow her to work as a foreigner in the United States once she graduates. ''If I had to, I would consider Canada, the U.K. or Europe, but the U.S. is the place,'' she said.
  President Trump is expected to issue an executive order within days to temporarily suspend various work visas that businesses rely on to hire foreigners, and also lay the groundwork for regulatory changes that would limit employment opportunities for foreign graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr.
  The details and scope of the plan remain unclear, and it is still a work in progress. But the coming order has elicited an extraordinary response from a diverse coalition that includes universities and sectors spanning manufacturing, technology and consulting, which have been inundating the White House with letters and phone calls.
  ''What is scaring so many different groups here is that the order is going to impact everyone,'' said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations at the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
  Mr. Trump on April 22 signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards for applicants outside the country, describing it as protection for unemployed Americans amid the coronavirus pandemic. But he stopped short of suspending visas and programs that allow U.S. employers to hire foreign workers.
  Additional limitations on foreign skilled and seasonal workers are now in the works, said several people who have been communicating with the administration in an attempt to narrow the scope of the proposed new limitations. ''What is being proposed is significant; we just don't know how far it will go,'' Ms. Dalal-Dheini said.
  A key target is expected to be the H-1B visa, often issued to computer programmers and other skilled workers who critics say often displace Americans from such jobs. The order is also expected to temporarily halt other visas, including L-1s, for executives transferred within companies; H-2Bs, for seasonal workers who often work in landscaping and hospitality; and J-1s, issued to au pairs, students on work-study summer programs and others.
  The administration is also likely to freeze or downsize a popular program, Optional Practical Training, that enables graduates of U.S. universities like Ms. Nasr to work in the country for up to three years if they are in science, technology or mathematics fields. Once in the program, the graduates are often sponsored for H-1Bs by their employers, who eventually may help them get green cards.
  In the 2019 fiscal year, almost 139,000 new H-1B petitions were approved; 77,000 L-1 visas were issued, as well as 66,000 H-2Bs, visas for unskilled workers that Mr. Trump has regularly used to staff his resorts. There were about 200,000 new J-1 workers hired in 2018, according to the latest data available. About 225,000 graduates of U.S. universities were authorized to remain in the country to work.
  The visa suspensions would likely extend into the next fiscal year, starting Oct. 1, according to people familiar with the planning.
  The proposed limits on foreign worker visas, if adopted, would be the latest restriction on immigration imposed by the Trump administration since the onset of the coronavirus pandemic.
  Immigration opponents argue that recipients of ''nonimmigrant'' visas compete with Americans for jobs, and that the present unemployment level justifies a clampdown.
  ''The president should insist that certain employers who have found it to be cheaper and more convenient to hire visa workers instead cast down their bucket here first, and get used to hiring U.S. workers again,'' said Jessica Vaughan, policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which lobbies to curb immigration. She said she was regularly consulted by White House aides on the matter.
  The planned new restrictions could hamper the ability of companies to relocate personnel, affecting both American multinationals that transfer employees from abroad to the United States and foreign firms that send employees to do stints in U.S. cities.
  The National Association of Manufacturers, which represents 14,000 small and large companies, sent a letter to the White House on June 1 warning that the planned immigration restrictions would stymie recovery efforts.
  ''We urge you to avoid immigration actions, either temporary or long term, that would cause uncertainty and impose great costs on our nation at this critical time,'' said the letter, signed by the association's president, Jay Timmons.
  Two groups affiliated with the industrialist Charles Koch last week sent a letter to Larry Kudlow, director of the National Economic Council, and Jared Kushner, senior adviser to Mr. Trump, urging the administration to ''refrain from imposing additional barriers'' on visas.
  The letter from Americans for Prosperity and the Libre Initiative said research had shown that immigrants were key to an economic rebound.
  Thomas J. Donohue, chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also sent a letter to Mr. Trump last week calling on him to reconsider a visa ban.
  Several Republican senators have voiced their opposition to elements of the proposed order. But influential members of Mr. Trump's entourage believe that a pause in visas, coupled with additional regulations, would induce employers to hire Americans and pay them higher wages.
  There could be risks in seriously reducing the number of foreign workers. Many businesses have learned during the pandemic that employees can work remotely from almost anywhere. If immigration is further restricted, companies might feel compelled to move jobs abroad, defenders of the visa programs caution, a trend that could undermine the U.S. economy in the long term.
  ''I have spoken to the administration and they are open-minded about this, but I emphasized that if we go too far on restricting immigration, from C.E.O.s I talked to, there is a risk companies will move jobs outside the country,'' said Rich Lesser, chief executive of the Boston Consulting Group, an American global management consultancy.
  The additional regulatory changes now under review would affect many other people already in the United States.
  Among the changes under consideration are eliminating the H-4 visa, which allows spouses of H-1B visa holders to work; ending the Optional Practical Training program, or shortening the time foreign graduates can work in the United States; and tightening H-1B requirements along with a $20,000 fee per applicant sponsored for the visa.
  While some Republican lawmakers have called for rescinding the O.P.T. program, 21 Republican members of Congress this month called for it to remain intact, saying in a letter to the Trump administration that it was a magnet for foreign students -- a key source of revenue for many universities, whose numbers have been falling.
  The Association of American Universities issued an action alert to presidents and chancellors, urging them to engage the administration on the executive order.
  ''The message you are sending to international students here, and those considering coming here, is that we don't value them,'' said Benjamin Lane, vice chair of the external affairs board at M.I.T.'s graduate student council. International students represent 45 percent of M.I.T. graduate students.
  Fan Chen, a data scientist from China, was hired by a U.S. multinational in Washington after earning a master's degree at the University of Michigan.
  For three consecutive years, the company, which initially had hired her under the O.P.T. program, sponsored her for an H-1B visa. However, she was not selected in the lottery that U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services holds when the number of applications exceeds the allotted annual number of visas.
  To keep employing Ms. Fan, the company transferred her last year to its branch in the United Kingdom, where she has continued to work with her U.S.-based team.
  Ms. Chen and her manager were ecstatic when she was chosen for a visa in this year's round. Then news began to circulate about the impending executive order, and it is no longer certain that she will be able to return to the United States in the fall.
  The company's lawyer and human resources personnel have been trying to reassure her. ''They are trying to make it sound like this order isn't likely to happen,'' Ms. Chen said. ''But they are also saying we might have to think of Plan B.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/19/us/foreign-worker-visas-trump-coronavirus.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Maya Nasr, an M.I.T. student, is working on the next Mars rover. ''I would really like to stay here and work in this field,'' she said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HANNAH REYES MORALES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); SPACE EXPLORATION (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); TECHNOLOGY (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SEASONAL WORKERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (78%); ENGINEERING (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); SPACE PROGRAMS (77%); SPACE TECHNOLOGY (77%); AEROSPACE RESEARCH (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (76%); PLANETS & ASTEROIDS (76%); SPACE & AERONAUTICS AGENCIES (76%); MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY (72%); AEROSPACE ENGINEERING (71%); IMMIGRATION LAW (71%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (69%); VIRUSES (69%); CORONAVIRUSES (60%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (60%); ECONOMIC NEWS (53%); EPIDEMICS (50%); PANDEMICS (50%)

Organization: MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (58%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); SPACE EXPLORATION (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SPACE INDUSTRY (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (77%); ENGINEERING (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); SPACE PROGRAMS (77%); SPACE TECHNOLOGY (77%); AEROSPACE RESEARCH (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (76%); SPACE & AERONAUTICS AGENCIES (76%); SPACE & SATELLITE LAUNCHES (76%); MANUFACTURING (73%); MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY (72%); AEROSPACE ENGINEERING (71%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (71%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (58%)

Geographic: MARS (72%); UNITED STATES (96%); EUROPE (79%); LEBANON (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

Load-Date: June 21, 2020


End of Document
Music Scholar Barred From U.S., But No One Will Tell Her Why
The New York Times
September 17, 2007 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1311 words
Byline: By NINA BERNSTEIN
Body


Nalini Ghuman, an up-and-coming musicologist and expert on the British composer Edward Elgar, was stopped at the San Francisco airport in August last year and, without explanation, told that she was no longer allowed to enter the United States.
  Her case has become a cause celebre among musicologists and the subject of a protest campaign by the American Musicological Society and by academic leaders like Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College at Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., where Ms. Ghuman was to have participated last month in the Bard Music Festival, showcasing Elgar's music.
  But the door has remained closed to Ms. Ghuman, an assistant professor at Mills College in Oakland, Calif., who is British and who had lived, studied and worked in this country for 10 years before her abrupt exclusion. 
  The mystery of her case shows how difficult, if not impossible, it is to defend against such a decision once the secretive government process has been set in motion.
  After a year of letters and inquiries, Ms. Ghuman and her Mills College lawyer have been unable to find out why her residency visa was suddenly revoked, or whether she was on some security watch list. Nor does she know whether her application for a new visa, pending since last October, is being stymied by the shadow of the same unspecified problem or mistake.
  In a tearful telephone interview from her parents' home in western Wales, Ms. Ghuman, 34, an Oxford graduate who earned her Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, said she felt like a character in Kafka.
  ''I don't know why it's happened, what I'm accused of,'' she said. ''There's no opportunity to defend myself. One is just completely powerless.''
  Kelly Klundt, a spokeswoman for Customs and Border Protection in the Department of Homeland Security, said officers at San Francisco International Airport had no choice but to bar Ms. Ghuman because the State Department, at its discretion, had revoked her visa. The State Department would not discuss the case, citing the confidentiality of individual visa records.
  Mr. Botstein, who wrote to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice in the hope of having the visa problem resolved before the music festival, said Ms. Ghuman's case is symptomatic. ''This is an example of the xenophobia, incompetence, stupidity and then bureaucratic intransigence that we are up against,'' he said, also citing the case of a teacher of Arabic at Bard who missed the first weeks of the spring semester this year because of visa problems. ''What is at stake is America's pre-eminence as a place of scholarship.''
  Ms. Ghuman is certainly not alone in her frustration. Academic and civil liberties groups point to other foreign scholars who have been denied entry without explanation at an airport, or refused a visa when they applied. A pending lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union contends that the Bush administration is using heightened security measures to keep foreign scholars out on ideological grounds in violation of the First Amendment rights of American scholars to hear them.
  But Ms. Ghuman's case does not seem to fit such a pattern. Few believe that her book in progress, ''India in the English Musical Imagination, 1890-1940,'' or her work on Elgar, best known by Americans for ''Pomp and Circumstance,'' could have raised red flags in Washington. And if it were a question of security profiling, nothing in her background fits. 
  She was born in Wales. Her mother is a British homemaker, and her father, an emeritus professor of educational psychology at the University of Wales, was born in India to a Sikh family and moved to Britain in the 1960s. Last semester, Ms. Ghuman tried to teach her students by video link. This academic year, she is on an unpaid leave of absence.
  ''The arbitrary and inexplicable exclusion of Dr. Ghuman has been a personal tragedy for her and a cause of distress to Mills and to American higher education,'' said Janet L. Holmgren, the president of Mills College, who called her ''one of our most distinguished faculty members.''
  ''She seems to be in this limbo,'' said Ms. Ghuman's fiance, Paul Flight, 47, who has visited her three times in Britain and is considering a move there. Mr. Flight, a countertenor, co-directed Darius Milhaud's opera about Orpheus and Eurydice with Ms. Ghuman at Mills three years ago. 
  Ms. Ghuman's descent into the bureaucratic netherworld began on Aug. 8, 2006, when she and Mr. Flight returned to San Francisco from a research trip to Britain. Armed immigration officers met them at the airplane door and escorted Ms. Ghuman away.
  In a written account of the next eight hours that she prepared for her lawyer, Ms. Ghuman said that officers tore up her H-1B visa, which was valid through May 2008, defaced her British passport, and seemed suspicious of everything from her music cassettes to the fact that she had listed Welsh as a language she speaks. A redacted government report about the episode obtained by her lawyer under the Freedom of Information Act erroneously described her as ''Hispanic.''
  Held incommunicado in a room in the airport, she was groped during a body search, she said, and was warned that if she moved, she would be considered to be attacking her armed female searcher. After questioning her for hours, the officers told her that she had been ruled inadmissible, she said, and threatened to transfer her to a detention center in Santa Clara, Calif., unless she left on a flight to London that night. 
  Outside, Mr. Flight made frantic calls for help. He said the British Consulate tried to get through to the immigration officials in charge, to no avail. And Ms. Ghuman said her demands to speak to the British consul were rebuffed. 
  ''They told me I was nobody, I was nowhere and I had no rights,'' she said. ''For the first time, I understood what the deprivation of liberty means.''
  As Ms. Ghuman tells it, the officers said they did not know why she was being excluded. They suggested that perhaps a jilted lover or envious colleague might have written a poison pen letter about her to immigration authorities, she said, or that Mills College might have terminated her employment without telling her. The notions are unfounded, she said. 
  One officer eventually told her that her exclusion was probably a mistake, and advised her to reapply for a visa in London after a 10-day wait. But it took more than eight weeks for her file to be transferred to the United States Embassy in London, in part because of routine anthrax screening at the State Department.
  As for the possibility that she has been deemed a security threat, Ms. Ghuman said: ''It's not only insulting and heartbreaking, but how? In what way? Musicians, dangerous people? Is it my piano playing?
  ''I have no indication at all,'' she added, ''and it has been 13 1/2 months.''
  Inquiries by Ms. Ghuman's representative in Parliament and several members of Congress, including Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, have been to no avail, said Byron Adams, a professor of music at the University of California, Riverside, who said he had known Ms. Ghuman for years and respected her work.
  ''All of these people have gotten the runaround from the State Department,'' Mr. Adams said. 
  In late spring, when hope faded that Ms. Ghuman's visa nightmare would be resolved quietly, Charles Atkinson, the president of the American Musicological Society, asked its 3,600 members to send letters to the State Department expressing ''our profound consternation and anxiety over the treatment of one of our members.'' 
  The society has invited her to lecture at its conference in November, which, ''in a fortunate circumstance,'' Mr. Atkinson said, is to be held in Quebec. 
  The $500 travel grant they have awarded her will not cover the cost. But at least, he said, she can expect Canada to let her in. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Nalini Ghuman, a professor at Mills College in Oakland, Calif., has been barred from entering the United States since August 2006, when the State Department revoked her residency visa.(pg. B5)                                                              
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: MUSIC (92%); MUSICOLOGY (91%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (89%); MUSIC COMPOSITION (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); TRENDS & EVENTS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (87%); CONCERTS & MUSIC FESTIVALS (78%); FESTIVALS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (76%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (76%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (76%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); NEGATIVE NEWS (71%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (66%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (66%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (60%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (56%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (50%)

Industry: AIRPORTS (89%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (87%); CONCERTS & MUSIC FESTIVALS (78%); FESTIVALS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (76%)

Person: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (57%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (58%); CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); WALES (79%)

Load-Date: September 17, 2007


End of Document
First Crop of Foreign Entrepreneurs Setting Up Shop at CUNY
The New York Times 
December 25, 2016 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 913 words
Byline: LIZ ROBBINS
Highlight: A new program, IN2NYC, helps founders of start-ups get temporary visas to establish their businesses, all while mentoring students and hopefully creating jobs.
Body


Correction Appended
Gabor Tankovics was checking off the boxes for his New York City tech start-up this past spring. Investors. Advisers. Users. But one box was still noticeably blank: Visa.
“I really felt like, ‘O.K., I am at the stage where things are starting to work out,’” said Mr. Tankovics, 33, a native of Hungary. “At the same time, I might have to leave.”
But then he heard about a new option, a program for international entrepreneurs created this year by New York City’s Economic Development Corporation with            the City University of New York. By working at one of CUNY’s campuses, founders of start-up companies can obtain an 18-month United States visa to establish their businesses — with the aim of creating jobs and training aspiring innovators.
In October, Mr. Tankovics became the first of two visa recipients out of 144 applicants for the program, the International Innovators Initiative, known as IN2NYC.
“This was absolutely designed for me,” Mr. Tankovics said in an empty and echoing co-working space at LaGuardia Community College’s NYDesigns start-up studio. By next year, it will house Mr. Tankovics’s three-employee company,            Dartboard, a web application to help manage            student loans.
The IN2NYC program selected Namisha Bahl, 26, of India, as its second participant. Ms. Bahl is a founder of Mogul, a website for women around the world that has 25 New York-based employees, she said, but is hoping to double in size by next year. Ms. Bahl, the company’s marketing director, will begin mentoring students at            City College of New York’s            Zahn Innovation Center, a start-up incubator promoting diversity in the tech world, next year.
By March, she and Mr. Tankovics will be joined by as many as 20 more participants in the program, working at five schools in the CUNY system, according to IN2NYC officials.
Ms. Bahl had been out of options. She had earned her master’s degree in integrated marketing from New York University in 2015 and twice applied for an H-1B visa. The visas, which go to skilled workers, are given out by lottery each year. The number of recipients is capped at 85,000, but more than three times as many people apply each year. And self-employed entrepreneurs are not eligible.
But in 2000, Congress allowed for exemptions to the cap, including people working at institutions of higher education or affiliated nonprofits.
“It is an amazing and crucial opportunity,” Ms. Bahl said in an email. “I would not have been able to expand Mogul further without work authorization.”
Or, as the program’s consulting lawyer, Peter F. Asaad, put it: “Without a program like this, she certainly would be out in the cold.”
Because of guidelines set by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, IN2NYC applicants must be sponsored for the visa by their company’s board of directors, all of whom are American citizens or permanent residents. The board members have the power to determine how much the applicant earns and other terms of employment.
The program does not just benefit the visa holder, its creators say.
“It’s not just about one person, but it’s about the larger ripple effect,” said Maria Torres-Springer, the president of New York City’s development corporation. “Both in terms of job creation for that company, and what it also means for the students and faculty, the local schools with which they partner.”
She added: “It’s an entire ecosystem.”
Dartboard and Mogul both are geared toward millennials. Mr. Tankovics explained that his web application, available only by invitation now but planned for public testing in January, helps people pay their student loans faster, saving money on interest payments.
Although he does not have any American student loans — he got a law degree and a master’s degree in business administration in Paris — when he came to New York for his master’s degree at Parsons School of Design, his friends in the United States all bemoaned their debt. A prototype of the app was the basis of his master’s thesis.
He has not thought about how he would find a way to stay once his visa expires.
“As a start-up founder, you do need to have a long-term vision, but at the same time you’re very into short-term fights. You’re struggling with every micro-decision,” Mr. Tankovics said.
Next semester, he is planning to teach a course at LaGuardia tentatively called “Designing for Financial Empowerment.” He hopes to teach students how to create opportunities for those New Yorkers who may not be served by traditional financial outlets, like banks.
His short-term goals are simple. “To have more users and a better service at the end of January and then hire new people,” Mr. Tankovics said. Then, looking around at the harshly lit space, he smiled. “And to move to an office with a window.”
Correction: December 28, 2016, Wednesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on Monday about a new program for international entrepreneurs misidentified the educational institution that partnered with New York City’s Economic Development Corporation. It is the City University of New York, not the City College of New York.
PHOTO: Gabor Tankovics received a temporary visa with help from IN2NYC, a program for international entrepreneurs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE TAYLOR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Large Companies Game H-1B Visa Program, Costing the U.S. Jobs
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
    • CUNY Schools to Lure Foreign Entrepreneurs With New Visa Program
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: BUSINESS COACHING & MENTORING (90%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (90%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); JOB CREATION (90%); MENTORS & ROLE MODELS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); STARTUPS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (78%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); NEW BUSINESSES (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SELF EMPLOYMENT (78%); WORKSPACE SHARING (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (73%); STUDENT EXPENSES & FINANCING (73%); STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (73%); STUDENT LOANS (73%); City University of New York (%); Economic Development Corp (%); Entrepreneurship (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Start-ups (%); LaGuardia Community College (%); City College of New York (%); New York City (%); Tankovics, Gabor (%); Bahl, Namisha (%); Colleges and Universities (%)

Ticker: City University of New York; City University of New York; Economic Development Corp; City University of New York; Economic Development Corp; LaGuardia Community College; City University of New York; Economic Development Corp; LaGuardia Community College; City College of New York

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); WEB DEVELOPMENT (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); INTERNET & WWW (71%); SPONSORSHIP (68%)

Person: Tankovics, Gabor; Bahl, Namisha

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (96%); NEW YORK, USA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: April 10, 2017


End of Document
Legal Immigrants Rally at Capitol to Protest Backlog
The New York Times
September 19, 2007 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2007 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 855 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18 
Body


About 1,000 highly skilled legal immigrants, carrying placards  and wearing T-shirts emblazoned with American flags, rallied Tuesday at the Capitol to protest long delays and vast bureaucratic backlogs in the immigration system. 
  The immigrants, including doctors, medical technicians and computer engineers from India and China, came from as far as California and Washington State to call on Congress to provide more permanent visas for highly educated immigrants and more resources for the overburdened immigration system. They said the plight of foreigners living in this country legally had been unfairly eclipsed by the polarized debate over illegal immigration that led to the defeat of an immigration overhaul in June. 
  While the rally's numbers were not large, immigration policy advocates said it was very unusual for legal immigrants, traditionally cautious since their visa applications and their futures are in the hands of the federal government, to stage public protests. The immigrants, who are living in the United States on temporary student or high-skilled employment visas, said they were nearing despair with waits lasting as long as a decade to obtain visas giving them permanent residence, which are known as a green cards. 
  ''When I heard about this rally I immediately made the decision to come,'' said Paul Wang, 37, a computer scientist from China who lives and works in Virginia. ''I like the freedom and the safety in this country. I want to send a request signal to Congress to bring more efficiency to the process for us to get a green card.'' 
  Paul Donnelly, a consultant to American Families United, a legal immigrant advocacy group, who said he had been working on immigration policy in Washington for more than 25 years, called the rally ''a genuinely new phenomenon.'' ''It is a significant thing to have foreign-born people, who are notoriously hard to organize, organizing themselves,'' Mr. Donnelly said.
  Since Congress reconvened this month, more and more calls have come for lawmakers to revisit the immigration issue by first fixing the foundering system for legal immigration. On Sept. 11 a bipartisan group of 13 governors, including those from the states with the largest immigrant populations, sent a letter to the leaders of Congress asking for increases in the number of temporary visas and green cards for highly educated immigrants. 
  Saying there was a ''critical shortage'' of professionals in math and the sciences, the governors wrote, ''We must recognize that foreign talent has a role to play in our ability to keep companies located in our state and country.'' The governors included Arnold Schwarzenegger of California and Rick Perry of Texas, both Republicans; and Janet Napolitano of Arizona and Eliot Spitzer of New York, who are Democrats.
  Despite soaring demand from immigrants and high-tech businesses, an annual limit of 140,000 on employment-based green cards has not been altered since 1990. A study published in August by the Kauffman Foundation of Kansas City, Mo., found that 1.1 million highly skilled immigrants and their family members were languishing in backlogs in 2006, waiting for green cards. Temporary visas for immigrants with special skills, known as H1B visas, are limited to 65,000 a year, plus 20,000 visas for immigrants who earn advanced academic degrees in the United States.
  The Kauffman study reported that some immigrant professionals were becoming discouraged by the prospect of bureaucratic delays. One in three new, skilled immigrants working here said they were uncertain whether they would remain, according to the study, conducted by researchers from Harvard, Duke and New York University. This raised the possibility of reverse brain drain, as immigrants who came to the United States for advanced studies might decide to return to their home countries. 
  The immigrants at the rally were clearly committed to staying in the United States, pausing from their speeches to listen to one of their leaders sing ''The Star-Spangled Banner.''
  Dr. Sridhar Narra, 34, a physician born in India, said his effort to gain a green card had lasted almost eight years, including a two-year forced separation from his wife, also from India. After coming to the United States in 1999, Dr. Narra has practiced medicine under a special visa for doctors who serve in areas where medical personnel are scarce. He has worked with low-income and uninsured patients at a clinic in Benton Harbor, Mich., fulfilling a five-year requirement, and applied for his green card two years ago. 
  ''I've been waiting, law abiding, tax paying,'' Dr. Narra said. ''How long is long enough?''
  Temporary immigrants who want green cards must obtain a Labor Department certification that no American workers are available for their jobs. It can take more than a year to get that certification. And in a June report, the ombudsman for Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency that handles green card applications, found that more than 100,000 F.B.I. background checks of immigrants, also part of the application, had been in process  for more than a year. 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Legal immigrants gathered yesterday in Washington to protest long delays for green cards. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)                          
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (96%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); GOVERNORS (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (75%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (72%); ENGINEERING (72%); SHORTAGES (71%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (72%); ENGINEERING (72%)

Person: JANET NAPOLITANO (79%); ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER (58%); ELIOT SPITZER (58%); RICK PERRY (52%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); CHINA (92%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: September 19, 2007


End of Document
Overseas Entrepreneurs Set Up Shop at CUNY in New Visa Program
The New York Times
December 26, 2016 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2016 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 799 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


Gabor Tankovics was checking off the boxes for his New York City tech start-up this past spring. Investors. Advisers. Users. But one box was still noticeably blank: Visa.
''I really felt like, 'O.K., I am at the stage where things are starting to work out,''' said Mr. Tankovics, 33, a native of Hungary. ''At the same time, I might have to leave.'' 
  But then he heard about a new option, a program for international entrepreneurs created this year by New York City's Economic Development Corporation with the City University of New York. By working at one of CUNY's campuses, founders of start-up companies can obtain an 18-month United States visa to establish their businesses -- with the aim of creating jobs and training aspiring innovators.
  In October, Mr. Tankovics became the first of two visa recipients out of 144 applicants for the program, the International Innovators Initiative, known as IN2NYC.
  ''This was absolutely designed for me,'' Mr. Tankovics said in an empty and echoing co-working space at LaGuardia Community College's NYDesigns start-up studio. By next year, it will house Mr. Tankovics's three-employee company, Dartboard, a web application to help manage student loans.
  The IN2NYC program selected Namisha Bahl, 26, of India, as its second participant. Ms. Bahl is a founder of Mogul, a website for women around the world that has 25 New York-based employees, she said, but is hoping to double in size by next year. Ms. Bahl, the company's marketing director, will begin mentoring students at City College of New York's Zahn Innovation Center, a start-up incubator promoting diversity in the tech world, next year.
  By March, she and Mr. Tankovics will be joined by as many as 20 more participants in the program, working at five schools in the CUNY system, according to IN2NYC officials.
  Ms. Bahl had been out of options. She had earned her master's degree in integrated marketing from New York University in 2015 and twice applied for an H-1B visa. The visas, which go to skilled workers, are given out by lottery each year. The number of recipients is capped at 85,000, but more than three times as many people apply each year. And self-employed entrepreneurs are not eligible.
  But in 2000, Congress allowed for exemptions to the cap, including people working at institutions of higher education or affiliated nonprofits.
  ''It is an amazing and crucial opportunity,'' Ms. Bahl said in an email. ''I would not have been able to expand Mogul further without work authorization.''
  Or, as the program's consulting lawyer, Peter F. Asaad, put it: ''Without a program like this, she certainly would be out in the cold.''
  Because of guidelines set by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, IN2NYC applicants must be sponsored for the visa by their company's board of directors, all of whom are American citizens or permanent residents. The board members have the power to determine how much the applicant earns and other terms of employment.
  The program does not just benefit the visa holder, its creators say.
  ''It's not just about one person, but it's about the larger ripple effect,'' said Maria Torres-Springer, the president of New York City's development corporation. ''Both in terms of job creation for that company, and what it also means for the students and faculty, the local schools with which they partner.''
  She added: ''It's an entire ecosystem.''
  Dartboard and Mogul both are geared toward millennials. Mr. Tankovics explained that his web application, available only by invitation now but planned for public testing in January, helps people pay their student loans faster, saving money on interest payments.
  Although he does not have any American student loans -- he got a law degree and a master's degree in business administration in Paris -- when he came to New York for his master's degree at Parsons School of Design, his friends in the United States all bemoaned their debt. A prototype of the app was the basis of his master's thesis.
  He has not thought about how he would find a way to stay once his visa expires.
  ''As a start-up founder, you do need to have a long-term vision, but at the same time you're very into short-term fights. You're struggling with every micro-decision,'' Mr. Tankovics said.
  Next semester, he is planning to teach a course at LaGuardia tentatively called ''Designing for Financial Empowerment.'' He hopes to teach students how to create opportunities for those New Yorkers who may not be served by traditional financial outlets, like banks.
  His short-term goals are simple. ''To have more users and a better service at the end of January and then hire new people,'' Mr. Tankovics said. Then, looking around at the harshly lit space, he smiled. ''And to move to an office with a window.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/25/nyregion/first-crop-of-foreign-entrepreneurs-setting-up-shop-at-cuny.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Gabor Tankovics received a temporary visa with help from IN2NYC, a program for international entrepreneurs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE TAYLOR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); STARTUPS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); BUSINESS COACHING & MENTORING (78%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); MENTORS & ROLE MODELS (78%); NEW BUSINESSES (78%); SELF EMPLOYMENT (78%); WORKSPACE SHARING (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); COMMUNITY COLLEGES (75%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (75%); JOB CREATION (75%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (75%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (70%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (70%); STUDENT EXPENSES & FINANCING (70%); STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (70%); STUDENT LOANS (70%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (66%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); COMMUNITY COLLEGES (75%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%); WEB DEVELOPMENT (75%); INTERNET & WWW (70%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: December 28, 2016


End of Document
Trump to Halt Worker Visas Through 2020
The New York Times
June 23, 2020 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1587 words
Byline: By Michael D. Shear and Miriam Jordan
Body


The move is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas.
WASHINGTON -- President Trump on Monday temporarily suspended new work visas and barred hundreds of thousands of foreigners from seeking employment in the United States, part of a broad effort to limit the entry of immigrants into the country. 
  In a sweeping order, which will be in place at least until the end of the year, Mr. Trump blocked visas for a wide variety of jobs, including those for computer programmers and other skilled workers who enter the country under the H-1B visa, as well as those for seasonal workers in the hospitality industry, students on work-study summer programs and au pairs who arrive under other auspices.
  The order also restricts the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for months or yearslong stints. And it blocks the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
  Officials said the ban on worker visas, combined with extending restrictions on the issuance of new green cards, would keep as many as 525,000 foreign workers out of the country for the rest of the year.
  Stephen Miller, the White House aide and the architect of Mr. Trump's immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate the worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. And in recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
  But the directive, which has been expected for several weeks, is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas for jobs that Americans are not willing to do or are not capable of performing.
  ''This is a full-frontal attack on American innovation and our nation's ability to benefit from attracting talent from around the world,'' said Todd Schulte, the president of FWD.us, a pro-immigration group supported by technology companies.
  ''Putting up a 'not welcome' sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won't help our country, it will hold us back,'' said Thomas J. Donohue, the chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. ''Restrictive changes to our nation's immigration system will push investment and economic activity abroad, slow growth and reduce job creation.''
  Administration officials said the president's order would not affect people outside the United States who already have valid visas or seasonal farm workers, whose annual numbers have ranged from a low of about 50,000 to a high of about 250,000 in the past 15 years. There will also be a narrow exception for certain medical workers dealing specifically with coronavirus research, officials said.
  The order will ban au pairs who come to the United States to care for children, though officials initially told reporters they would be exempt. Later, two senior administration officials said parents could seek waivers to the ban on a case-by-case basis, with no assurance that they would be approved.
  In the order, Mr. Trump described suspension of the visas as a way to ensure that Americans are first in line for scarce jobs -- an assertion that immigration advocates say does not reflect the reality of a dynamic and changing work force.
  ''Under the extraordinary circumstances of the economic contraction resulting from the Covid-19 outbreak, certain nonimmigrant visa programs authorizing such employment pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers,'' Mr. Trump wrote in the order.
  The effort to restrict entry from foreigners into the United States was at the heart of one of the president's key promises during the 2016 campaign and is certain to play a central role as Mr. Trump seeks to energize his core supporters during his re-election campaign this year.
  While the president's pledge to build a ''big, beautiful wall'' to prevent illegal border crossings has attracted more attention, his efforts to slow down the flow of legal immigration have been even more effective and potentially long-lasting.
  In April, the president signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards to most foreigners looking to live in the United States. But at the time, Mr. Miller and the president bowed to pressure from the business community to avoid imposing limits on the worker visas.
  Monday's order extends the green-card prohibition in addition to suspending the issuance of many of the worker visas.
  Immigration restrictionists who have had the ear of the Trump administration applauded the announcement. Combined with recent measures, ''the work visa suspensions will put the thumb on the labor market scale in favor of U.S. workers,'' said Jessica Vaughan, the policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates curbing immigration.
  ''It's really heartening to see the president stand up to the special interests that pull out the stops to lobby for these visa programs,'' said Ms. Vaughan, who said she had been regularly consulted by White House aides on the issue.
  In addition to the temporary suspensions, administration officials said Mr. Trump was directing the government to make permanent changes to a broad array of immigration regulations in order to discourage what they said was unfair competition for American jobs from foreigners looking to come to the United States.
  Among those changes will be new methods of ensuring that high-skill visas in the future are awarded to the highest-paid workers and of preventing companies from contracting large numbers of midlevel foreign workers to perform accounting, programming and other technology-assisted jobs that Americans might be able to do.
  Other changes would be aimed at discouraging immigrants from applying for asylum as a way of obtaining a work permit in the United States. It was unclear when those regulatory changes would go into effect.
  The administration could try to issue emergency rules to expedite such changes rather than go through the normal process, which can take months or even years because the public must be allowed to comment before a final rule is enacted.
  But fast-tracking the rule-making process on foreign workers could invite legal challenges from opponents who say the administration did not follow the rules. Last week, the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump violated the Administrative Procedure Act when he tried to terminate an Obama-era program aimed at protecting young immigrants from deportation.
  ''The government could try and fast-track that process by not allowing the public to weigh in on the changes before they go into effect, but it is difficult to see that process surviving court review,'' said Lynden Melmed, an immigration lawyer and the former chief counsel of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  Amid the pandemic, the Trump administration has seized on the threat to public health as a pretext to issue a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system, including asylum and green cards. While many changes have been announced as temporary, they could remain in place indefinitely.
  But critics say the administration has used the health crisis and the economic meltdown it has caused as pretext to put in place restrictions that further its immigration agenda.
  While Mr. Trump and his aides said the suspension of visas was in response to the pandemic, the administration has been pursuing the same broad reductions to legal immigration policies for years, including during times when unemployment was at its lowest in decades. In 2017, the president endorsed the RAISE Act, a Republican Senate bill that would have cut legal immigration, including business visas, by about 50 percent.
  In the weeks leading up to the announcement on Monday, a diverse coalition of businesses and research universities had lobbied fiercely, flooding the White House with letters and phone calls, in an attempt to limit the scope of the executive order.
  ''It's the largest crackdown on work visas that I have seen in my 35 years of practice,'' said Steve Yale-Loehr, a Cornell law professor. ''Thousands of businesses and universities will be hurt by these restrictions. Similarly, individuals will be stuck overseas unable to help the U.S. economy recover.''
  But the opponents failed to block the measures, which they had argued were counterproductive to economic recovery.
  ''The Trump administration has argued that it wants to create a merit-based immigration system that prioritizes educated immigrants with skills,'' said Alex Nowrasteh, the director of immigration studies at the conservative Cato Institute. ''With this suspension of the H-1B visa program, they have shown, once again, that they really mean they want fewer immigrants.''
  ''These immigration bans are more red meat and not jobs for the base,'' said Rebecca Shi from the American Business Immigration Coalition in Chicago. ''They don't even serve Trump's own business interests.''
  Mr. Trump has used H-2B visas to hire seasonal staff for his resorts to work as cooks and waiters.
  Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles.Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/22/us/politics/trump-h1b-work-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Amid the coronavirus pandemic, the Trump administration has issued a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); SEASONAL WORKERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); JOB CREATION (78%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); TECHNOLOGY (75%); ECONOMICS (74%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (73%); WORKER CATEGORIES (73%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (72%); FARM LABOR (70%); PUBLIC POLICY (70%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (63%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); FARM LABOR (70%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (70%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: June 24, 2020


End of Document
At Suffolk Building Sites, Sweeps For Illegal Workers Net Just One
The New York Times
February 19, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1272 words
Byline: By COREY KILGANNON
Body


To great fanfare in October 2006, Steve Levy, the Suffolk County executive, signed a new law requiring 6,000 contractors working for the county to affirm that their employees were not illegal immigrants, prompting fear of impromptu inspections and roundups of Hispanic men.
  Since then, county officials have found exactly one worker without proper immigration documents, after conducting two sweeps of a total of 33 contractors last summer and fall. A second worker at the same construction company, North Star Concrete, was initially suspected, but the $9,500 fine regarding his status was dismissed when the company produced proper documentation.
  ''All that fuss over the need for this law and they only cite one guy?'' complained Ricardo Montano, a Suffolk County legislator who opposed the initiative, officially called Local Law 52. ''Where are all the illegal workers Steve Levy was talking about?''
  Mr. Levy, a Democrat, has built a national reputation for taking a hard line against illegal immigration by proposing a bill to outlaw loitering by day laborers and bringing federal officials into the county jail to check inmates' immigration status. His spokesman, Mark Smith, said that the county never planned on widespread enforcement of the new law, and that the fact that only one undocumented worker had been found was testament to its power. 
  ''It's really meant to keep the contractor honest as a deterrent approach, as the I.R.S. does with its audit process,'' Mr. Smith said. ''Not everyone is going to get audited, and the vast majority is going to comply.'' He added, ''We never had a predetermined number, that we were going to catch X number of people.''
  The owners of North Star, Mario and Abilio Salgado,  declined to be interviewed for fear of further alienating county officials, and would not name the cited worker. Their lawyer, Robert J. LaReddola, said that he would continue to press the county's Labor Department to dismiss the remaining $9,500 fine, and that the company had paid all taxes and insurance for the employee, whom it hired through Laborers' Local 66, thinking he had a valid federal tax identification number and union card.
  ''This law is arbitrary and unfair and maybe unconstitutional,'' Mr. LaReddola said. ''They're putting the fear of God into these men.''
  The case is being closely watched by both immigrant advocates and the construction industry, especially because the county Legislature is now considering a bill to expand the requirement to confirm workers' legal status to cover all 15,000 licensed contractors in Suffolk, not just those doing work for the government.
  Introduced last month by Brian Beedenbender, a protege of Mr. Levy's, the bill would carry stiffer penalties, including the loss of county licenses and up to four years in jail. It is scheduled for public hearings beginning March 4 and could come up for a vote by March 18.
  Suffolk County is one of several municipalities nationwide to have experimented with such laws after seeing sharp increases in their Hispanic populations, which are often blamed for spikes in crime and overtaxed social services, schools, hospitals and jails. 
  Judges in Arizona, Missouri and Oklahoma have recently turned back contractors' challenges of similar laws in those states, though earlier, a federal judge had blocked Hazleton, Pa., from enforcing a law barring businesses from hiring illegal immigrants and landlords from renting them rooms (the city is appealing the ruling).
  Mayor Louis J. Barletta of Hazleton said that as soon as the laws were enacted there, ''People were loading vans and trucks and literally leaving town in the middle of the night, so it would be fair to assume they were illegal.''
  ''It's illegal to hire illegal aliens, so you have to go after the magnet: the businesses drawing them in,'' he said.
  Mr. LaReddola, the North Star lawyer, says the Suffolk legislation had upset contractors, who were baffled by ''a myriad of confusing immigration laws.'' In addition to making job estimates and calculating square footage, he says, contractors are now trying to brush up on the difference between a resident alien card and an alien registration card, and how an H-1B visa (for high-tech workers) differs from an H-2B visa (for temporary nonagricultural jobs) from an L-1 visa (usually for corporate employees).
  ''You're asking construction guys to do the work of attorney generals,'' he said, adding that a slip-up with one employee could ruin a company's reputation for years.
  But Mr. Smith, the county spokesman, said the local law should change nothing for law-abiding contractors, since there has long been a federal law to similar effect: Section 1324a of Title 8 of the United States Code declares it unlawful to hire undocumented immigrants. Mr. Levy's ''Affidavit of Compliance'' simply has contractors swear to follow those laws ''with respect to the alien and nationality status'' of workers.
  Mr. Levy created the law, Mr. Smith said, because the county could not get federal authorities to enforce their law; he feared that businesses hiring undocumented immigrants for low wages would undercut contractors who follow the law.
  Mr. Smith said inspections had been limited so far to heavy construction companies, on the theory that they were more likely to hire illegal workers. No extra money has been allocated or task forces formed. Typically, a pair of officials -- one from the county's Department of Labor and one from the Department of Public Works -- has been sent to a construction site to see who is working and get a list of employees from the foreman, then to check workers' documents at the contractors' main offices.
  North Star, which has 50 employees and is based in Farmingville, long a flashpoint of controversy over immigrant day laborers, was pouring concrete at the county Fire Academy in November when county officials showed up asking for papers.
  Steve Flanagan, the business manager for Laborers' Local 66 in Melville, N.Y., said he could not immediately identify the North Star worker who was caught by the county. 
  But Mr. Flanagan said North Star brought several Hispanic workers to the hiring hall last summer, produced the Social Security cards and photo identification required for new union members, and promised to employ the men for two years and file their names with the Internal Revenue Service.
  ''North Star came in with paperwork and it looked legit -- a Social Security number and a photo ID -- and now they're trying to pin it on us?'' Mr. Flanagan said.
  Mr. Smith said that county officials had not yet decided whether to report illegal immigrants found during the inspections to federal authorities. (A separate Levy initiative authorized local police officers to report suspected illegal immigrants to federal immigration authorities .)
  Mr. Beedenbender, the county legislator, said that if his law is approved, it would also be selectively enforced by current county officials, with more money and employees to be budgeted depending on the number of complaints about violators.
  The proposal the law has the support of the Democratic majority in the county Legislature, but has drawn sharp rebukes from Mr. Montano and Vivian Viloria-Fisher, two Hispanic Democrats who have fallen out with Mr. Levy because of what Mr. Montano calls his ''anti-Hispanic stance.''
  ''These laws are all a public relations ploy playing to an anti-immigrant mentality,'' he said. ''Steve Levy has used the community as political punching bag. He's alienated all the Hispanic leaders with his demagoguery. I'm Puerto Rican, so he can't deport me.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Steve Levy, the Suffolk County executive, created and signed the bill requiring contractors working for the county to affirm that their employees are legal residents of the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KIRK CONDYLES FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. B7)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (92%); IMMIGRATION (92%); COUNTIES (91%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); TAXES & TAXATION (89%); FINES & PENALTIES (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); INSPECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TAX LAW (78%); DAY LABORERS (77%); MEN (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); LAWYERS (74%); CORRECTIONS (72%); EMPLOYEE INSURANCE (72%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (72%); LABOR UNIONS (72%); PRISONERS (72%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (72%); JAIL SENTENCING (67%); AUDITS (64%); LICENSES & PERMITS (60%)

Industry: CONSTRUCTION (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); LAWYERS (74%); EMPLOYEE INSURANCE (72%)

Load-Date: February 19, 2008


End of Document
Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes
The New York Times 
January 27, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 958 words
Byline: NICK WINGFIELD and MIKE ISAAC
Highlight: Silicon Valley relies on the H-1B visa system, which gives skilled workers permission to work in the United States, but it could be altered under Trump.
Body


SEATTLE - American technology companies for years have relied on a steady stream of skilled engineers from overseas to help them create their products.
Now many of those companies and their workers are girding for expected changes to immigration policy under President Trump that the companies say could hurt their ability to tap the technical talent they need to stay competitive.
Mr. Trump, who has signed a series of executive orders related to immigration, is expected to soon take similar action on visa programs for foreign workers.
A draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked this week. While it is not clear how the final order will look and the draft contains some changes many in the technology industry support, some language alarmed people in Silicon Valley.
The technology industry relies heavily on the H-1B visa program, through which highly skilled workers like software engineers are permitted to work in the United States for companies like Microsoft, Google and Intel.
The draft proposed a regulation to "restore the integrity of employment-based nonimmigrant worker programs" and to consider options for modifying the H-1B program to "ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest."
That language rattled some executives and lawyers representing technology companies because of its implication of sweeping changes.
"You'd be shocked at the number of people who are feeling fear, calling our firm alarmed based on what's coming out," said Priya Alagiri, an immigration lawyer based in the Bay Area who has tech clients. "It's not just the undocumented. Even people who are here on green cards, legally. Citizens. They're scared."
Some technology companies have started warning their investors of potential threats to their business from the changes. In a filing on Thursday with securities regulators related to its quarterly financial results, Microsoft included new language related to immigration.
"Changes to U.S. immigration policies that restrain the flow of technical and professional talent may inhibit our ability to adequately staff our research and development efforts," the company said in the filing.
Brad Smith, Microsoft's president, said in a statement that the company believes "in a strong and balanced high-skilled immigration system and in broader immigration opportunities for talented and law-abiding young people like the Dreamers," a reference to young people who entered the country illegally as children but were allowed to remain by President Barack Obama.
On Friday, Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of            Facebook, waded into the broader immigration debate with a            post in which he said he was concerned about Mr. Trump's actions. Mr. Zuckerberg said his great-grandparents came from Germany, Austria and Poland, while his wife's arrived from China and Vietnam.
"We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here," Mr. Zuckerberg wrote. "I hope we find the courage and compassion to bring people together and make this world a better place for everyone."
The technology industry is open to changes that have been proposed by members of Congress to better enforce the skilled worker program and adjust limits on the number of visas. But the companies see skilled worker visas as a signature policy issue that they have fought to protect and expand.
They fear Jeff Sessions, the nominee for attorney general, and others in the administration will take a more severe approach to immigration and sweep up H-1B visas into prohibitions on refugees and stronger border protection.
"The effect would end up being exactly the opposite of what Trump wants. Companies would go offshore like Microsoft did with Vancouver, Canada" to seek talent, said Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a research group sponsored by several tech firms.
Mr. Zuckerberg has been an outspoken proponent of immigration issues and how they may affect those inside and outside of Silicon Valley. In 2013, with other tech leaders, Mr. Zuckerberg backed Fwd.us, a nonprofit group dedicated to comprehensive immigration change.
But Mr. Trump has made it increasingly clear that immigration policy may change drastically.
Any changes to the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, program, initiated under the Obama administration, could have significant effects on current tech employees who fear for their status.
"Right now, we are focused on making sure for protections for 750,000 Dreamers who have DACA stay in place," said Todd Schulte, president of Fwd.us, in an interview. "If the goal is to increase public safety and prevent future illegal immigration, the way to do that is to modernize the legal immigration process. That's radically different than a large-scale ramp-up of rapid deportation."
The White House did not respond to a request for comment.
On Friday, Mr. Trump signed a separate executive order that imposes a temporary ban on visas to people from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
The Computing Research Association, a nonprofit organization that represents computing professionals in academia, government laboratories and other areas, said in a statement that the order "creates uncertainty and potential hardship among current students and researchers already here making important contributions and endangers our leadership role in a key field."
Cecilia Kang contributed reporting from Washington.
PHOTO: Mark Zuckerberg expressed concern over immigration policies. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Google, in Post-Obama Era, Aggressively Woos Republicans
    • Peter Thiel, Trump Adviser, Has a Backup Country: New Zealand
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (79%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); EXECUTIVES (73%); SECURITIES LAW (72%); LAWYERS (67%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (62%); FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE & REPORTS (61%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (61%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Facebook Inc (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Zuckerberg, Mark E (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (90%);  GOOGLE INC (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (56%);  FACEBOOK INC (51%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (90%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%); FB (NASDAQ) (51%); Facebook Inc

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (90%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%); SECURITIES LAW (72%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (68%); LAWYERS (67%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (62%)

Person: MARK ZUCKERBERG (90%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); BARACK OBAMA (57%); Trump, Donald J; Zuckerberg, Mark E

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (93%); AUSTRIA (79%); CHINA (79%); GERMANY (79%)

Load-Date: January 29, 2017


End of Document
Stocks Rise After Trump Reaffirms China Trade Deal: Live Updates
The New York Times 
June 23, 2020 Tuesday 17:49 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 2479 words
Highlight: The latest on stock market and business news during the coronavirus outbreak.
Body


Pandemic shutdowns put the Trump Organization under financial strain.
Shortly after the coronavirus pandemic largely shut down the country’s hotels and golf courses, the Trump Organization asked its longtime lender, Deutsche Bank, for a break on its monthly loan payments. President Trump’s company owed the German bank a total of more than $300 million, most of which was on loans related to the Trump National Doral golf resort in Florida and the Trump International Hotel in Washington.
Deutsche Bank executives recently made an offer to the Trump Organization: The company could skip a number of payments on some of its loans, but the loans would eventually need to be repaid in full, according to people familiar with the matter. The offer was similar to what Deutsche Bank was proposing to other struggling clients.
The Trump Organization rejected the proposal, which officials concluded was not worth taking, the people said.
Deutsche Bank officials — which were wary of doing a financial favor for a president whose administration oversees the bank — were surprised that the Trump Organization did not accept the offered relief, however modest it might have been.
This is not the first time that the Trump Organization has sought to rework its debts to Deutsche Bank. In 2008, during the global financial crisis, the Trump company was due to repay a loan that had financed the construction of the Trump International Hotel &amp; Tower in Chicago. After Deutsche Bank refused to extend the loan’s due date, the Trump Organization sued the bank, blaming Deutsche Bank for causing the financial crisis and arguing that it constituted a contract-voiding act of God.
That lawsuit was eventually settled, but Deutsche Bank stopped working with Mr. Trump for a few years. The relationship was restarted in 2012 when the bank agreed to make a number of loans to the Trump company, including $125 million to finance the Doral golf resort.
A ‘not welcome’ sign won’t help: Companies react with anger to visa restrictions.
President Trump on Monday suspended new work visas through at least the end of the year. The sweeping order denies employment permits for hundreds of thousands of skilled foreign workers, like programmers. Seasonal hospitality workers and work-study students are also affected.
The president cited the pandemic, saying that the visa programs “pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers.”
The business world reacted with anger. “Putting up a ‘not welcome’ sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won’t help our country, it will hold us back,” said Thomas Donohue of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Technology firms, which account for the bulk of H-1B visas, were particularly aghast. 
Google’s chief executive, Sundar Pichai, was “disappointed” by the decision:
In a statement, Amazon said that “preventing high skilled professionals from entering the country and contributing to America’s economic recovery puts American’s global competitiveness at risk.”
Facebook said “highly-skilled visa holders play a critical role in driving innovation — at Facebook and at organizations across the country — and that’s something we should encourage, not restrict.”
The chairman of Twitter, Patrick Pichette (who is Canadian), suggested an alternative: “A message to all you H-1B seekers; just look to the North, where we welcome you (and your family) with open arms.”
‘The future looks bleak’: The pandemic ravages medical tourism.
Over the past several years, hospitals began to play innkeeper to open the door to more elective surgery, which is the lifeblood of their revenue.
They developed hotels near their operating rooms where patients, who often came from overseas for specialized treatments, could recover comfortably. Expanding into the hospitality business also allowed health care providers to avoid the high costs of being hosts themselves.
But as with so much else, the coronavirus pandemic has devastated medical tourism. To allow doctors to focus on emergencies, hospitals have canceled hip replacements and tummy tucks, while flight bans have grounded many foreign visitors.
“Unfortunately, the future looks bleak,” said Trey Hulsey, a co-founder of Hayakoum, a three-year-old service that handles travel arrangements for patients from the Middle East bound for hospitals in Boston, Houston and Philadelphia. “It’s just been one blow after another.”
Yet hospitals, whose costs have mounted as the pandemic dragged on, may have little choice but to revive the sector, according to some developers, who are forging ahead despite the uncertainty.
“We want to be focused on the entire patient experience,” said Ana Lopez-Blázquez, an executive vice president at Baptist Health South Florida, which owns the Miami hospital.
Disney will close its language schools in China, citing changing habits caused by the pandemic.
The Walt Disney Company has decided to close Disney English, a 12-year-old chain of 25 language schools in China, ending a once-promising business that, at times, prompted questions about education as brand building.
The learning centers, in six cities and using Disney characters like Mickey Mouse and the Little Mermaid in their curriculum, have been closed since late January, when the Chinese government began to take aggressive efforts to contain the coronavirus. Traditional schools have been allowed to slowly reopen, but some supplemental education centers, including Disney English, have remained closed.
Mahesh Samat, Disney’s executive vice president of consumer products commercialization in the Asia-Pacific region, told parents in a letter on Monday that Disney English had made the “difficult decision” not to reopen. The chain was founded in 2008, when China’s fast-growing middle class had created increased demand for English-language learning. Disney developed the curriculum in partnership with Columbia University.
He added that Disney was “taking care of each and every” teacher affected by the decision but did not specify how. Advance-paid tuition will be refunded. The learning centers, aimed at children ages 2 to 12, charged roughly $2,000 annually for about 100 hours of instruction.
How companies are able to give their chief executives millions just before bankruptcy.
The coronavirus recession is pushing many companies into bankruptcy, a painful process that has led to layoffs, wiped out some investors and hurt the economy.
But the chief executives of some of these businesses are doing just fine.
Companies that are struggling to pay creditors and suppliers are managing to find millions of dollars to pay bonuses to their bosses. The payments, which are made just before a bankruptcy filing, appear to be legal and have been made by several companies.
J.C. Penney, which is closing 154 stores, paid its chief executive, Jill Soltau, $4.5 million. The chief executive of Whiting Petroleum, which sought bankruptcy protection in April, received $6.4 million and Chesapeake Energy is paying bonuses ahead of an expected bankruptcy filing. Executives at Hertz also got payments before the rental-car giant sought bankruptcy protection.
Companies have said the payments are meant to help them retain qualified executives through the recession and bankruptcy. But critics counter that the money would be better spent on rank-and-file employees.
Walmart will remove the Mississippi state flag from its stores.
Walmart said on Tuesday that it was removing all Mississippi state flags from its stores, saying the decision was consistent with the company’s positions not to sell “merchandise with the confederate flag.”
With the move, the nation’s largest retailer joins universities, businesses and athletic organizations that are putting pressure on officials in Mississippi to change the state flag’s design.
“We believe it’s the right thing to do, and is consistent with Walmart’s position to not sell merchandise with the confederate flag from stores and online sites, as part of our commitment to provide a welcoming and inclusive experience for all of our customers in the communities we serve,’’ the company said in a statement.
It is part of a broader effort to root out symbols of the confederacy including statues of confederate generals and other monuments from public parks and government property.
The battle flag of the Confederacy is on vivid display at the heart of Mississippi’s flag, but previous efforts to alter the design have faltered. All eight of Mississippi’s public universities have stopped flying the flag, along with cities across the state.
Walmart stopped selling merchandise that displayed the confederate flag in 2015, following the murder of nine black parishioners in a South Carolina church.
Sanofi accelerates the timeline for its coronavirus vaccine development.
After lagging behind its competitors in starting clinical trials, the French drugmaker Sanofi plans to speed a vaccine development timeline that could yield approval from regulatory authorities sometime next year, perhaps in the first half of 2021, the company said on Tuesday.
The company and its partner in the endeavor, GlaxoSmithKline, originally projected that a vaccine would be available in the later half of next year at the earliest.
Like other contenders in the race for a coronavirus vaccine, Sanofi is eager to push forward. Still, “such fast-tracking and intense scale of vaccine production is totally unprecedented,” and the future unknown, said Padmini Pillai, an immunologist at M.I.T.
TheSanofi-GSK vaccine contains a laboratory-synthesized version of the coronavirus’s “spike” protein, which decorates the surface of the virus and is crucial to its ability to enter host cells. This so-called recombinant vaccine is also formulated with one of GSK’s proprietary adjuvants, compounds that can enhance the body’s immune response to a foreign onslaught, in theory strengthening the staying power of a given vaccine.
A combined Phase I/II clinical trial for the vaccine, originally scheduled forDecember 2020, will now begin in September. The goal is to have the recombinant vaccine fully licensed by June 2021.
In news briefings on Tuesday, both companies expressed confidence in their collaboration and its potential to deliver a successful vaccine. Sanofi’s history with vaccine development runs deep: Its production lines are responsible for hundreds of millions of doses of the flu vaccine each year.
“As all eyes are on prevention of infectious disease through vaccines, this is a pointed moment in time where we are called upon to seek innovative ways to protect public health,” Thomas Triomphe, executive vice president of Sanofi Pasteur, the company’s vaccines global business unit, saidin a statement.
Nasdaq hits record as stocks climb again.
Stocks on Wall Street rose along with global markets, as investors zeroed in on signs of economic recovery and the prospect for another round of stimulus spending by the government.
The S&amp;P 500 rose less than half a percent. As they have done for several days recently, technology stocks fared even better than the broader market, with the Nasdaq composite returning to a record.
The gains came after a turbulent night for financial markets around the world, after one of President Trump’s advisers seemed to suggest that a trade deal between the United States and China had been scrapped. But after Mr. Trump took to Twitter, and his surrogates appeared on television to clarify the statement, stocks quickly recovered.
Lifting sentiment were initial surveys of corporate purchasing managers that echoed other signals of a rebound underway in the United States, Britain and Europe. The IHS Markit composite purchasing managers index for the United States rose to 46.8 in June, up from 37 in May. A reading under 50 still signals economic contraction.
“The second quarter started with an alarming rate of collapse but output and jobs are now falling at far more modest rates in both the manufacturing and service sectors,” Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit, said in a statement accompanying the data. “The improvement will fuel hopes that the economy can return to growth in the third quarter.”
Investors were also emboldened by expectations for another round of stimulus spending by Washington. A White House economic adviser, Larry Kudlow, said that it could include “tax rebates and direct mail checks,” even as he cautioned that nothing had been settled. The trading day began on a more volatile note.
On Monday evening, Peter Navarro, Mr. Trump’s trade adviser, said “it’s over” when asked in an interview on Fox News about the trade war pact that was reached between the United States and China in January. The pact had eased trade tensions between the two countries but has since become a source of investor concern. China pledged to increase purchases of American agricultural products and other goods under the pact, but its struggles with the coronavirus pandemic put those promises into doubt.
Later on Monday, Mr. Trump confirmed that the pact was still in force. “The China Trade Deal is fully intact,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. “Hopefully they will continue to live up to the terms of the Agreement!”
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
    • New York Times Company executives announced 68 layoffs Tuesday, saying the cuts were coming largely in the advertising department and not among the journalists in the newsroom. “The eliminations are taking place in parts of the company that have seen a significant immediate impact from the virus,” Mark Thompson, the chief executive, and Meredith Kopit Levien, executive vice president and chief operating officer, said in an internal email, “but they also reflect long-term trends in our business and are fully consistent with the company’s strategy.” During last month’s quarterly earnings call, Mr. Thompson forecast a steep drop in advertising revenue because of the pandemic.
    • Spirit Aerosystems, a key Boeing supplier, said in a securities filing that Boeing had slashed an order for fuselage parts because of the effect the pandemic has had on global aviation. Boeing now wants only 72 shipsets, down from 125. (The aerospace giant had already cut its order from 216 earlier this year.)
    • Airlines continue to amass emergency funds to get them through the pandemic. United Airlines on Tuesday said it would raise $3 billion in a bond offering backed by its loyalty program, while American Airlines on Sunday said it would raise $3.5 billion in varied financing.
Reporting was contributed by Brooks Barnes, Katherine J. Wu, Michael Corkery, C.J. Hughes, Peter Eavis, Alan Rappeport, David Gelles, Nathaniel Popper, Michael Corkery, Mohammed Hadi, Edmund Lee, Natasha Singer, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, Julie Creswell, Niraj Chokshi, Katie Robertson, Mary Williams Walsh and Brooks Barnes.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Kim Kyung Hoon/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EPIDEMICS (94%); PANDEMICS (91%); VIRUSES (91%); BUSINESS NEWS (90%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); STOCK EXCHANGES (90%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); GOLF (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (85%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (79%); BUSINESS FINANCIAL TROUBLE (79%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (79%); CREDIT CRISIS (78%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (74%); STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (72%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (71%); SERVICE WORKERS (65%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (65%); LITIGATION (64%); SEASONAL WORKERS (63%); TECHNOLOGY (60%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Stocks and Bonds (%); Standard &amp; Poor&#39;s 500-Stock Index (%); Economic Conditions and Trends (%); United States Economy (%)

Company:  DEUTSCHE BANK AG (92%)

Ticker: DEUT (JSE) (92%); DBK (FRA) (92%); DBK (BIT) (92%); DBETN (JSE) (92%); DB (NYSE) (92%)

Industry: NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (92%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (92%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (92%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (92%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (92%); SIC6081 BRANCHES & AGENCIES OF FOREIGN BANKS (92%); HOTELS & MOTELS (90%); STOCK EXCHANGES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (79%); RESORTS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); SUNDAR PICHAI (79%)

Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); GERMANY (73%)

Load-Date: January 20, 2021


End of Document
Laid Off in U.S., Immigrants Race to Find New Jobs
The New York Times
May 13, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 1367 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


The Trump administration is unlikely to allow laid-off holders of H-1B and other work visas to extend their stay in the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Like millions of American workers, an Indian software engineer, a British market researcher and an Iranian architect lost their jobs amid the coronavirus pandemic. Unlike Americans, they are not entitled to unemployment benefits, despite paying taxes, because they are on foreign work visas. And, if they fail to find similar jobs soon, they must leave the country. 
  Rejish Ravindran analyzed data for a national footwear retailer, helping make sales projections and investment decisions. After hiring him on an H-1B skilled-worker visa nearly two years ago, the company recently sponsored his application for legal permanent residency, a process that takes several years to complete.
  ''It was going good. I thought I would be in Michigan forever. We were going to buy a house and settle down here,'' said Mr. Ravindran, 35, who lives in Grand Rapids, Mich. His wife, Amrutha, a nurse, was finishing a course and hoped to put her training to use soon.
  But battered by the coronavirus outbreak, the retailer furloughed Mr. Ravindran last month, which is not allowed under the terms of his visa. So two days later, the company terminated him.
  ''Everything came crashing down,'' said Mr. Ravindran, who arrived in the United States in 2012.
  Now, he is scrambling to find another job before the 60-day grace period for transferring his visa to another employer expires early next month. He is not optimistic.
  The lives of tens of thousands of foreign workers on skilled-worker visas, such as H-1Bs, have been upended by the economic fallout from the Covid-19 crisis. Many have been waiting in a backlog for several years to obtain permanent legal residency through their employer, and now face the prospect of deportation.
  The Trump administration is also expected within the next few weeks to halt the issuance of new work visas such as the H-1B, for high skilled foreigners, and the H-2B, for seasonal employment. The new measures under review, according to two current and two former government immigration officials, would also eliminate a program that enables foreign graduates of American universities to remain in the country and work.
  The tightening work rules come as unemployment in the U.S. soared last month to 14.7 percent, the highest level on record, and as calls escalated in Congress for Americans to be given priority for jobs.
  ''Given the extreme lack of available jobs for American job-seekers as portions of our economy begin to reopen, it defies common sense to admit additional foreign guest workers to compete for such limited employment,'' a group of Republican senators said in a letter last week calling for a suspension of new visas to guest workers who have not yet entered the country.
  For those already rooted in the U.S., the consequences of canceling the existing visas are ''life-altering,'' said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations for the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
  ''They have been thrown into limbo. It's not like they can go and just find any job, like at a pizza place,'' Ms. Dalal-Dheini said. A new job must meet specific criteria for the visa, such as by paying a certain salary and requiring at least a bachelor's degree.
  Ms. Dalal-Dheini's association of 15,000 lawyers has asked United States Citizenship and Immigration Services to extend the grace period, giving H-1B holders at least 90 days after the public health emergency has ended to find employment.
  An agency spokesman did not address whether an extension was under consideration. He said the agency would continue to monitor the coronavirus and ''assess various options related to temporary worker programs.''
  Since taking office, President Trump has thrust immigration and job displacement onto center stage, introducing a series of policies to curtail both legal and illegal immigration. More recently, his administration has cited the pandemic to justify even stricter restrictions.
  On April 22, Mr. Trump suspended the entry of new immigrants for 60 days. Less noticed in his proclamation was the order to the secretaries of labor and homeland security for a speedy review of nonimmigrant work visa programs.
  There are about 500,000 people on H-1B visas in the United States, according to estimates by Daniel Costa, a researcher at the Economic Policy Institute. More than 70 percent of them are Indians, and many of them technology workers. About 220,000 people were enrolled in the 2018-19 academic year in the Optional Practical Training program, which allows foreign students to work after completing their studies.
  The strong economy had fueled brisk demand for foreign workers in recent years, with H-1B applications by private companies far outstripping the annual supply of 85,000, a situation that prompted the government to resort to a lottery to award them.
  But proponents of limiting immigration say that if there was ever a time to prioritize American workers, it is now.
  ''If an H-1B visa holder is terminated from their job and is unable to find another employer willing to sponsor them, they should go back home,'' said Kevin Lynn, executive director of Progressives for Immigration Reform, which advocates for American technology workers.
  American citizens with foreign partners on visas are also affected.
  Andrew Jenkins and Krista York of Minnesota began more than a year ago to plan their wedding. The couple had settled on getting married Aug. 22 at the majestic Cathedral of St. Paul, where Ms. York's grandparents were married decades ago and she was confirmed in the church as a teenager. Then the coronavirus struck.
  Ms. York was furloughed. Mr. Jenkins, who is British, lost his job as a market research analyst. Because he is on an H-1B visa, Mr. Jenkins is not eligible for unemployment. ''It's far from ideal to not have any income when you're planning your wedding,'' said Mr. Jenkins, 27.
  What's worse, the couple said, is that Mr. Jenkins is in a race against time to find him another job before his visa expires in July.
  Unless he succeeds, they may have to hurriedly get married at a courthouse so that Mr. Jenkins can salvage his immigrant status -- by filing an application for a green card through a spouse. If that happens, the couple will not be allowed to hold a religious ceremony at the cathedral.
  ''Everything is ready to go for the cathedral. But if we have to get married on paper, we'll have to find another church,'' said Ms. York, 27.
  Bahar Shirkhanloo of Iran completed a master's degree in architecture two years ago and used the Optional Practical Training program to get a job at a firm in Chicago, where she is part of a team that designs high-rise residential buildings.
  Early this year, the firm decided to sponsor her for a green card. But she was abruptly terminated in early April when projects came to a standstill, leaving her with 60 days, under the terms of the program, to find a new job.
  ''I'm applying every day, everywhere in the U.S. you can think of,'' said Ms. Shirkhanloo, 28. Most often, she hears the same thing: ''They are interested, but, for now, there's a hiring freeze.''
  In Michigan, Mr. Ravindran is contemplating selling his 2013 Honda Accord to make the rent and pay outstanding bills, including $6,000 for a hospital visit by his wife last year.
  The son of a tea stall owner and the first to attend college in his family, the software engineer said that if he ends up having to return to India, ''I want to clear all my debts. I need to make a smooth exit from the U.S.''
  But there is a wrinkle: Commercial flights to India have been suspended since that country went into lockdown in March. While the government recently started repatriating some Indians stranded abroad, it has stipulated that pregnant women, older people and those with medical conditions will have priority.
  That could put someone like Mr. Ravindran at risk of overstaying his visa, which could jeopardize his ability to live in the United States in the future.
  ''If I don't find a new job, I can't stay here,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/12/us/foreign-workers-visas-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Andrew Jenkins, who is British, and Krista York had planned to marry at the Cathedral of St. Paul in Minnesota. Now both are out of work. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); EPIDEMICS (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); VIRUSES (91%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); LAYOFFS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (90%); PANDEMICS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); DISMISSALS (78%); EMPLOYEE LEAVE (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TEMPORARY LAYOFFS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (77%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (77%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (77%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (77%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (77%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (76%); SALES PROJECTIONS (75%); SEASONAL WORKERS (73%); DEPORTATION (72%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (90%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (77%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (77%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (77%); RETAILERS (75%); SALES PROJECTIONS (75%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (72%); FOOTWEAR (72%); FOOTWEAR INDUSTRY (72%); SHOE STORES (70%)

Geographic: GRAND RAPIDS, MI, USA (56%); MICHIGAN, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: May 13, 2020


End of Document
Tech Industry Frets Over Visa Program
The New York Times
January 28, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 936 words
Byline: By NICK WINGFIELD and MIKE ISAAC; Cecilia Kang contributed reporting from Washington.
Body


SEATTLE -- American technology companies for years have relied on a steady stream of skilled engineers from overseas to help them create their products.
Now many of those companies and their workers are girding for expected changes to immigration policy under President Trump that the companies say could hurt their ability to tap the technical talent they need to stay competitive. 
  Mr. Trump, who has signed a series of executive orders related to immigration, is expected to soon take similar action on visa programs for foreign workers.
  A draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked this week. While it is not clear how the final order will look and the draft contains some changes many in the technology industry support, some language alarmed people in Silicon Valley.
  The technology industry relies heavily on the H-1B visa program, through which highly skilled workers like software engineers are permitted to work in the United States for companies like Microsoft, Google and Intel.
  The draft proposed a regulation to ''restore the integrity of employment-based nonimmigrant worker programs'' and to consider options for modifying the H-1B program to ''ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.''
  That language rattled some executives and lawyers representing technology companies because of its implication of sweeping changes.
  ''You'd be shocked at the number of people who are feeling fear, calling our firm alarmed based on what's coming out,'' said Priya Alagiri, an immigration lawyer based in the Bay Area who has tech clients. ''It's not just the undocumented. Even people who are here on green cards, legally. Citizens. They're scared.''
  Some technology companies have started warning their investors of potential threats to their business from the changes. In a filing on Thursday with securities regulators related to its quarterly financial results, Microsoft included new language related to immigration.
  ''Changes to U.S. immigration policies that restrain the flow of technical and professional talent may inhibit our ability to adequately staff our research and development efforts,'' the company said in the filing.
  Brad Smith, Microsoft's president, said in a statement that the company believes ''in a strong and balanced high-skilled immigration system and in broader immigration opportunities for talented and law-abiding young people like the Dreamers,'' a reference to young people who entered the country illegally as children but were allowed to remain by President Barack Obama.
  On Friday, Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, waded into the broader immigration debate with a post in which he said he was concerned about Mr. Trump's actions. Mr. Zuckerberg said his great-grandparents came from Germany, Austria and Poland, while his wife's arrived from China and Vietnam.
  ''We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here,'' Mr. Zuckerberg wrote. ''I hope we find the courage and compassion to bring people together and make this world a better place for everyone.''
  The technology industry is open to changes that have been proposed by members of Congress to better enforce the skilled worker program and adjust limits on the number of visas. But the companies see skilled worker visas as a signature policy issue that they have fought to protect and expand.
  They fear Jeff Sessions, the nominee for attorney general, and others in the administration will take a more severe approach to immigration and sweep up H-1B visas into prohibitions on refugees and stronger border protection.
  ''The effect would end up being exactly the opposite of what Trump wants. Companies would go offshore like Microsoft did with Vancouver, Canada'' to seek talent, said Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a research group sponsored by several tech firms.
  Mr. Zuckerberg has been an outspoken proponent of immigration issues and how they may affect those inside and outside of Silicon Valley. In 2013, with other tech leaders, Mr. Zuckerberg backed Fwd.us, a nonprofit group dedicated to comprehensive immigration change.
  But Mr. Trump has made it increasingly clear that immigration policy may change drastically.
  Any changes to the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, program, initiated under the Obama administration, could have significant effects on current tech employees who fear for their status.
  ''Right now, we are focused on making sure for protections for 750,000 Dreamers who have DACA stay in place,'' said Todd Schulte, president of Fwd.us, in an interview. ''If the goal is to increase public safety and prevent future illegal immigration, the way to do that is to modernize the legal immigration process. That's radically different than a large-scale ramp-up of rapid deportation.''
  The White House did not respond to a request for comment.
  On Friday, Mr. Trump signed a separate executive order that imposes a temporary ban on visas to people from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
  The Computing Research Association, a nonprofit organization that represents computing professionals in academia, government laboratories and other areas, said in a statement that the order ''creates uncertainty and potential hardship among current students and researchers already here making important contributions and endangers our leadership role in a key field.''
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/business/technology-h-1b-visa-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mark Zuckerberg expressed concern over immigration policies. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (72%); EXECUTIVES (72%); SECURITIES LAW (72%); LAWYERS (67%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (62%); FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE & REPORTS (61%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (61%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (58%);  GOOGLE INC (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (56%);  FACEBOOK INC (50%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%); FB (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (58%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (72%); SECURITIES LAW (72%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (68%); LAWYERS (67%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (62%)

Person: MARK ZUCKERBERG (89%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); BARACK OBAMA (57%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); AUSTRIA (79%); CHINA (79%); GERMANY (79%)

Load-Date: January 28, 2017


End of Document
Who Will Face Mitch McConnell in November?; On Politics
The New York Times 
June 23, 2020 Tuesday 15:31 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1125 words
Byline: Giovanni Russonello
Highlight: Several states are holding primaries, and virus cases are surging. This is your morning tip sheet.
Body


Good morning and welcome to On Politics, a daily political analysis of the 2020 elections based on reporting by New York Times journalists.
Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday.
Another Primary Day, and an unyielding virus. It’s Tuesday, and this is your tip sheet.
Where things stand
    • State and local officials — not to mention health experts — are expressing alarm at the coronavirus’s continued spread in the United States. New cases are surging in nearly two dozen states, and Oklahoma and Missouri on Sunday reported their largest single-day case increases yet.
    • The United States accounts for one in every five new cases worldwide, despite making up only 4 percent of the world’s population. The virus is spreading more rapidly than ever before across the globe.
    • Pushing back against a narrative embraced by President Trump, Dr. Michael Ryan, the executive director of the World Health Organization’s health emergencies program, said on Monday that increased testing was not driving the jump in cases. “We do not believe that this is a testing phenomenon,” he said. “Clearly, hospital admissions are also rising in a number of countries, deaths are also rising, and they are not due to increased testing, per se.”
    • As Florida surpassed 100,000 total cases over the weekend, its surgeon general released a new health advisory: “All individuals in Florida should wear face coverings in any setting where social distancing is not possible.”
    • Trump on Monday suspended work visas through the end of the year, effectively preventing over half a million foreigners from coming to work in the United States, according to White House estimates. The move is intended to boost employment prospects for American workers amid the economic downturn caused by the pandemic.
    • But business leaders have long lobbied against it — as they did in April, when Trump initially floated the idea of suspending visas. At that time, he bowed to pressure and suspended only the issuance of green cards for 60 days.
    • With Monday’s order, Trump also extended the green-card prohibition through the end of the year. The order targets the H-1B visa program for high-skilled workers and visas for some students and seasonal employees; health care professionals, farm workers and some workers in other industries are exempt.
    • Two Trump campaign staff members who attended the president’s rally in Tulsa, Okla., on Saturday tested positive for the coronavirus shortly afterward, the campaign announced on Monday. It’s not yet clear how many people those staff members interacted with at the event.
    • Just days before the rally, six other members of Trump’s advance team tested positive for the virus, adding to concerns over the wisdom of holding the event.
    • But Trump is still in a reopening frame of mind. Within hours of the announcement about the new infections, the White House began rolling back restrictions that have been in place at the complex since March.
    • Fewer temperature checks will be administered to White House visitors, and many staff members who have been teleworking will be allowed to return to their offices. But people who come in close contact with Trump or Vice President Mike Pence will still receive temperature checks and coronavirus tests, and they will have to answer questions about their history of symptoms.
    • The Times reported last week that the Trump campaign was pushing to add a fourth presidential debate to the fall schedule and seeking to exert control over who will moderate the forums. But Team Biden is having none of it.
    • In a letter to the Commission on Presidential Debates, Jen O’Malley Dillon, Joe Biden’s campaign manager, wrote, “Our position is straightforward and clear: Joe Biden will accept the commission’s debates, on the commission’s dates, under the commission’s established format and the commission’s independent choice of moderators.”
    • Three presidential debates are typically held during the general election. But with Trump’s poll numbers slipping, his campaign is eager for a chance to reframe the discussion. Brad Parscale, Trump’s campaign manager, wrote in a statement: “We want fair debates. We want them sooner and we want a bigger schedule. We also don’t want them up against football games competing for viewers.”
    • In other debate news, the University of Michigan plans to withdraw as the host of the second forum because of concerns about the coronavirus.
Photo of the day
Kayleigh McEnany, the White House press secretary, at a briefing on Monday, where she defended Trump’s use of a racist term to describe the coronavirus.
What political ads tell us about today’s Democratic primary in Kentucky
Several states are holding primary elections today, and perhaps no race is being watched more closely than the Democratic Senate primary in Kentucky.
For much of the past year, it appeared the general election battle for the Senate seat was set, with Amy McGrath, a Democrat, expected to take on Mitch McConnell, the incumbent senator and Republican majority leader. They have long been trading television attack ads during the nightly news.
But over the past few weeks, Charles Booker, a state representative who is competing against McGrath, has seen a boom in support for his progressive campaign, and it has been turning into real money. Now, both Booker and McGrath are inundating Kentucky airwaves in a final push before voting on Tuesday.
McGrath, who has spent $3.1 million in the past week, began running a closing argument ad last Tuesday that features her answer to “Why I’m a Democrat.” She describes her lifelong desire to be a fighter pilot in the military, one that she realized only after elected Democrats passed new laws allowing women to join the ranks. Unlike a lot of her ads from this year, this one makes no mention of McConnell.
For Booker, who has spent about $740,000 over the past week, his most frequently aired ad features a debate answer from McGrath, in which she says that she did not join one of the protests in the state against police brutality and systemic racism. The screen then cuts to Booker speaking at a protest through a bullhorn with his mask around his chin, “as your brother, as your cousin, as your neighbor, as your fellow good troublemaker.”
The dueling messages show how the nationwide push for racial justice has upended the Kentucky primary, with McGrath grappling with how to respond and Booker elevating the movement as it, in turn, has brought new attention to his campaign.
On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox.
Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY  FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: POLITICS (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (86%); CORONAVIRUSES (78%); EPIDEMICS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS & BODIES (78%); LOBBYING (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PANDEMICS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SOCIAL DISTANCING (78%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (76%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); HEALTH CARE INFORMATION (73%); VIRUSES (73%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (69%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (69%); FACTORY WORKERS (67%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (65%); SEASONAL WORKERS (64%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (50%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); FARM LABOR (50%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Elections, Senate (%); Primaries and Caucuses (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Kentucky (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (86%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (76%); HEALTH CARE INFORMATION (73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (69%); FACTORY WORKERS (67%); HEALTH CARE (66%); FARM LABOR (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); MITCH MCCONNELL (59%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: TULSA, OK, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); OKLAHOMA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Gates Tells Congress What Is Needed for Better Work Force
The New York Times
March 13, 2008 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 242 words
Byline: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body


More investment in math and science education and a more liberal policy toward skilled foreign workers are crucial if America is to avoid losing its competitive edge, a founder of Microsoft, Bill Gates, told Congress on Wednesday.
  The shortage of scientists and engineers is so acute, Mr. Gates said, that ''we must do both: reform our education system and our immigration policies.''
  ''If we don't, American companies simply will not have the talent to innovate and compete,'' he said in testimony to the House Committee on Science and Technology.
  Mr. Gates outlined four goals he said the country must pursue: improving educational opportunities in science and technology, revamping the visa system for highly skilled workers, increasing federal financing for basic scientific research and providing incentives for private-sector research and development.
  The toughest sell was the position of Mr. Gates, and others in high-tech industries, that Congress raise the current cap of 65,000 H-1B visas, nonimmigrant visas that allow employers to hire foreigners with specific skills. The program  allows  20,000 visas for foreigners receiving master's or doctoral degrees from American universities.
  Current limits, he said, have led to a ''serious disruption'' in the flow of  science, technology, and engineering graduates to American companies. Mr. Gates said companies had been forced to put employees  in countries more open to foreign workers. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FOREIGN LABOR (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (90%); LABOR FORCE (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (90%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (78%); EDUCATION REFORM (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (78%); SCIENCE FUNDING (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (76%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (71%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (66%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (58%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (58%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (71%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (66%)

Person: BILL GATES (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: March 13, 2008


End of Document
They Lost Their Jobs. Now They May Have to Leave the U.S.
The New York Times 
May 15, 2020 Friday 16:26 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1384 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The Trump administration is unlikely to allow laid-off holders of H-1B and other work visas to extend their stay in the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Body


The Trump administration is unlikely to allow laid-off holders of H-1B and other work visas to extend their stay in the country amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Like millions of American workers, an Indian software engineer, a British market researcher and an Iranian architect lost their jobs amid the coronavirus pandemic. Unlike Americans, they are not entitled to unemployment benefits, despite paying taxes, because they are on foreign work visas. And, if they fail to find similar jobs soon, they must leave the country.
Rejish Ravindran analyzed data for a national footwear retailer, helping make sales projections and investment decisions. After hiring him on an H-1B skilled-worker visa nearly two years ago, the company recently sponsored his application for legal permanent residency, a process that takes several years to complete.
“It was going good. I thought I would be in Michigan forever. We were going to buy a house and settle down here,” said Mr. Ravindran, 35, who lives in Grand Rapids, Mich. His wife, Amrutha, a nurse, was finishing a course and hoped to put her training to use soon.
But battered by the coronavirus outbreak, the retailer furloughed Mr. Ravindran last month, which is not allowed under the terms of his visa. So two days later, the company terminated him.
“Everything came crashing down,” said Mr. Ravindran, who arrived in the United States in 2012.
Now, he is scrambling to find another job before the 60-day grace period for transferring his visa to another employer expires early next month. He is not optimistic.
The lives of tens of thousands of foreign workers on skilled-worker visas, such as H-1Bs, have been upended by the economic fallout from the Covid-19 crisis. Many have been waiting in a backlog for several years to obtain permanent legal residency through their employer, and now face the prospect of deportation.
The Trump administration is also expected within the next few weeks to halt the issuance of new work visas such as the H-1B, for high skilled foreigners, and the H-2B, for seasonal employment. The new measures under review, according to two current and two former government immigration officials, would also eliminate a program that enables foreign graduates of American universities to remain in the country and work.
The tightening work rules come as unemployment in the U.S. soared last month to 14.7 percent, the highest level on record, and as calls escalated in Congress for Americans to be given priority for jobs.
“Given the extreme lack of available jobs for American job-seekers as portions of our economy begin to reopen, it defies common sense to admit additional foreign guest workers to compete for such limited employment,” a group of Republican senators said in a letter last week calling for a suspension of new visas to guest workers who have not yet entered the country.
For those already rooted in the U.S., the consequences of canceling the existing visas are “life-altering,” said Shev Dalal-Dheini, director of government relations for the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
“They have been thrown into limbo. It’s not like they can go and just find any job, like at a pizza place,” Ms. Dalal-Dheini said. A new job must meet specific criteria for the visa, such as by paying a certain salary and requiring at least a bachelor’s degree.
Ms. Dalal-Dheini’s association of 15,000 lawyers has asked United States Citizenship and Immigration Services to extend the grace period, giving H-1B holders at least 90 days after the public health emergency has ended to find employment.
An agency spokesman did not address whether an extension was under consideration. He said the agency would continue to monitor the coronavirus and “assess various options related to temporary worker programs.”
Since taking office, President Trump has thrust immigration and job displacement onto center stage, introducing a series of policies to curtail both legal and illegal immigration. More recently, his administration has cited the pandemic to justify even stricter restrictions.
On April 22, Mr. Trump suspended the entry of new immigrants for 60 days. Less noticed in his proclamation was the order to the secretaries of labor and homeland security for a speedy review of nonimmigrant work visa programs.
There are about 500,000 people on H-1B visas in the United States, according to estimates by Daniel Costa, a researcher at the Economic Policy Institute. More than 70 percent of them are Indians, and many of them technology workers. About 220,000 people were enrolled in the 2018-19 academic year in the Optional Practical Training program, which allows foreign students to work after completing their studies.
The strong economy had fueled brisk demand for foreign workers in recent years, with H-1B applications by private companies far outstripping the annual supply of 85,000, a situation that prompted the government to resort to a lottery to award them.
But proponents of limiting immigration say that if there was ever a time to prioritize American workers, it is now.
“If an H-1B visa holder is terminated from their job and is unable to find another employer willing to sponsor them, they should go back home,” said Kevin Lynn, executive director of Progressives for Immigration Reform, which advocates for American technology workers.
American citizens with foreign partners on visas are also affected.
Andrew Jenkins and Krista York of Minnesota began more than a year ago to plan their wedding. The couple had settled on getting married Aug. 22 at the majestic Cathedral of St. Paul, where Ms. York’s grandparents were married decades ago and she was confirmed in the church as a teenager. Then the coronavirus struck.
Ms. York was furloughed. Mr. Jenkins, who is British, lost his job as a market research analyst. Because he is on an H-1B visa, Mr. Jenkins is not eligible for unemployment. “It’s far from ideal to not have any income when you’re planning your wedding,” said Mr. Jenkins, 27.
What’s worse, the couple said, is that Mr. Jenkins is in a race against time to find him another job before his visa expires in July.
Unless he succeeds, they may have to hurriedly get married at a courthouse so that Mr. Jenkins can salvage his immigrant status — by filing an application for a green card through a spouse. If that happens, the couple will not be allowed to hold a religious ceremony at the cathedral.
“Everything is ready to go for the cathedral. But if we have to get married on paper, we’ll have to find another church,” said Ms. York, 27.
Bahar Shirkhanloo of Iran completed a master’s degree in architecture two years ago and used the Optional Practical Training program to get a job at a firm in Chicago, where she is part of a team that designs high-rise residential buildings.
Early this year, the firm decided to sponsor her for a green card. But she was abruptly terminated in early April when projects came to a standstill, leaving her with 60 days, under the terms of the program, to find a new job.
“I’m applying every day, everywhere in the U.S. you can think of,” said Ms. Shirkhanloo, 28. Most often, she hears the same thing: “They are interested, but, for now, there’s a hiring freeze.”
In Michigan, Mr. Ravindran is contemplating selling his 2013 Honda Accord to make the rent and pay outstanding bills, including $6,000 for a hospital visit by his wife last year.
The son of a tea stall owner and the first to attend college in his family, the software engineer said that if he ends up having to return to India, “I want to clear all my debts. I need to make a smooth exit from the U.S.”
But there is a wrinkle: Commercial flights to India have been suspended since that country went into lockdown in March. While the government recently started repatriating some Indians stranded abroad, it has stipulated that pregnant women, older people and those with medical conditions will have priority.
That could put someone like Mr. Ravindran at risk of overstaying his visa, which could jeopardize his ability to live in the United States in the future.
“If I don’t find a new job, I can’t stay here,” he said.
PHOTO: Andrew Jenkins, who is British, and Krista York had planned to marry at the Cathedral of St. Paul in Minnesota. Now both are out of work. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EPIDEMICS (96%); LAYOFFS (96%); VIRUSES (94%); CORONAVIRUSES (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); PANDEMICS (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (90%); DISMISSALS (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (79%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (78%); EMPLOYEE LEAVE (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); TEMPORARY LAYOFFS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (78%); SALES PROJECTIONS (75%); DEPORTATION (74%); SEASONAL WORKERS (73%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Unemployment (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); American Immigration Lawyers Assn (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (77%); RETAILERS (75%); SALES PROJECTIONS (75%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (72%); FOOTWEAR (72%); FOOTWEAR INDUSTRY (72%); SHOE STORES (70%)

Geographic: GRAND RAPIDS, MI, USA (56%); MICHIGAN, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (98%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Amid Immigration Furor, Apple’s Chief Focuses on Apps and Music
The New York Times 
January 31, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 675 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL
Highlight: Timothy D. Cook said the iPhone maker hoped to double its services business in the next four years, but it will be harder to predict how to deal with the Trump administration.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — Apple’s next big business won’t be a self-driving car or an improved smartwatch. It will be digital services like the App Store and Apple Music.
The company said on Tuesday that such services brought in $7.2 billion in the quarter that ended in December, and $25.5 billion over the last 12 months.
“Our goal is to double the size of our services business in the next four years,” Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said in a conference call with investors to discuss the company’s            financial results.
More difficult to predict is what the impact of President Trump’s policies will be on Apple’s business over the next four years.
Mr. Cook said he was optimistic about corporate tax cuts proposed by Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress, and he noted that there was bipartisan support for reducing the tax on overseas profits that American companies must currently pay if they bring the money back to the United States.
He said such changes would be good for Apple and for the country. As of Dec. 31, Apple had $246 billion in cash and marketable securities, most of it in foreign accounts.
Mr. Cook said nothing on the call about Mr. Trump’s push to limit immigration, which has riled the technology industry.
But in an interview with the Wall Street Journal published late Tuesday, he said that he has contacted senior people in the White House and that Apple is studying its legal options.
On Friday, the president signed an executive order restricting immigration from seven predominantly Muslim countries, prompting an outcry from Mr. Cook and other tech leaders. The administration is expected to issue another order soon that would change the rules for immigrant worker programs, including the H-1B visa program, which Apple and other tech companies rely on when filling many key jobs.
Mr. Trump has also publicly called on Apple to build its iPhones in the United States instead of China.
Luca Maestri, Apple’s chief financial officer, said in an interview on Tuesday, “We are working to understand what the new administration’s standpoint is.”
The strong growth in services will partly offset a slowdown in sales of Apple’s flagship product, the iPhone. Apple said the number of iPhones sold rose just 5 percent in the first fiscal quarter, which ended in December, despite the introduction of the iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus in September. In the past, product upgrades have yielded bigger jumps in sales.
“For a while now, we’ve seen Apple take a step back from the iPhone and try to derive value from services,” said Brian Blau, a technology analyst with the research firm Gartner.
Over all, the company’s financial results for the quarter were an improvement from the year before, when it struggled with declining revenue. Apple posted revenue of $78.4 billion for the quarter, up 3 percent compared with the previous year. Profits actually fell slightly, to $17.9 billion, but the company used some of its $27 billion in cash flow in the quarter to buy back millions of shares, so earnings per share rose slightly.
Apple said it was seeing strong growth globally. In mainland China, sales were flat, after a long run of declines. Apple said its global revenue for the quarter was reduced by 1 percent because of the high value of the dollar. In some countries, Mr. Maestri said, Apple raised prices of its products by as much as 40 percent in local currency terms as the dollar rose.
Mr. Cook said that Apple was continuing to explore new services. “We have put our toe in the water with doing some original content for Apple Music,” he said. “We are learning from that.”
PHOTO: Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, introducing the iPhone 7 in September. In the last quarter, iPhone sales rose 5 percent. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCIO JOSE SANCHEZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Related Articles
    • How China Built ‘iPhone City’ With Billions in Perks for Apple’s Partner
    • An iPhone’s Journey, From the Factory Floor to the Retail Store
    • Apple Adds to Qualcomm’s Troubles, Filing Lawsuit Over Rebates
    • Apple Removes New York Times Apps From Its Store in China
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE & REPORTS (89%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); COMPANY PROFITS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); PRODUCT ENHANCEMENTS (78%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (77%); BIPARTISANSHIP (75%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (75%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); INTERNATIONAL TAXATION (74%); TAX LAW (74%); TAX RELIEF (74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (50%); Apple Inc (%); Company Reports (%); Cook, Timothy D (%)

Ticker: Apple Inc

Industry: MOBILE APPLICATIONS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (89%); SMARTPHONES (89%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS MFG (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT MFG (78%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (78%); AUTONOMOUS MOTOR VEHICLES (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); CONFERENCE CALLS (70%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (70%)

Person: TIM COOK (91%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); Cook, Timothy D

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: May 3, 2017


End of Document
Visas for Foreign Workers; Letter
The New York Times 
May 1, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 163 words
Highlight: “If companies are allowed to lower the price of tech jobs, the American work force will continue its decline as a leader in math and science.”
Body


To the Editor:
Re “How ‘Hire American’ Could Affect a World of Tech Workers” (news article, April 19):
The problem with the H-1B visa program is that it depresses the price of tech jobs, which in turn lowers the desirability for tech jobs and the incentive for American students to seek math and science education.
This would be true to some extent even if the system weren’t abused, but The New York Times and other outlets have shown that employment companies are gaming the lottery system and being used not just to fill a critical opening but also to replace entire departments of citizens who are already working.
The invisible hand is supposed to respond to a shortage by raising the price. Bringing in substitute labor from foreign countries lowers the price. I don’t know what President Trump has in mind, but if companies are allowed to lower the price of tech jobs, the American work force will continue its decline as a leader in math and science.
JOHN MCGLOIN, STATEN ISLAND
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); LABOR FORCE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (73%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (73%); PRICE CUTTING (73%); PRICE INCREASES (73%); PRICE CHANGES (69%); Foreign Workers (%); Science and Technology (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Visas (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (73%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (73%); PRICE CUTTING (73%); PRICE INCREASES (73%); PRICE CHANGES (69%)

Load-Date: May 2, 2017


End of Document
Companies Criticize Visa Suspensions, but Impact May Be Muted for Now
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 10:57 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; economy
Length: 800 words
Byline: Gillian Friedman
Highlight: President Trump’s executive order came at a time when hiring has slowed, and many U.S. consulates are not conducting interviews for temporary green cards.
Body


President Trump’s executive order came at a time when hiring has slowed, and many U.S. consulates are not conducting interviews for temporary green cards.
While the American business community reacted swiftly — and negatively — to President Trump’s executive order suspending new visas for foreign workers, immigration experts said that because of the coronavirus pandemic it would take some time before workers felt the impact.
The order, announced on Monday, suspends at least through the end of the year H-1B visas for skilled workers, H-2B visas for low-skill jobs, H-4 visas for dependents of certain visa holders, J visas for those participating in work and student exchanges and L visas for transfers within a company.
However, United States consulates are not currently conducting interviews for most green cards or temporary workers because of Covid-19, said Julia Gelatt, senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute.
“The immediate impact of the suspension is mostly symbolic until those consular officers reopen,” she said. “Then it will have a real impact on who is able to immigrate into the United States.”
In signing the order on Monday, Mr. Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during an economic downturn.
But businesses leaders rejected that rationale, with companies like Google, Twitter, Facebook and Amazon all releasing critical statements saying that the order would hurt them and the American economy as a whole.
“We’ve heard from manufacturers, technology companies, accounting firms, pharmaceutical companies, cosmetics companies, among many others, about how these visa restrictions will harm their businesses, and the negative impacts will be felt by not only these companies, but also the American workers employed by them,” said Jon Baselice, the executive director of immigration policy for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
The H-1B visa program is available only to foreign workers who have a bachelor’s degree or higher, and is often used to fill positions in the tech sector, though the visas are also used to hire teachers, architects, engineers, doctors, lawyers and other skilled workers.
The Trump administration’s suspension of H-1B visas is intended to push companies to look harder for Americans to fill those roles.
“They may have to raise wages, they may have to recruit in ways and in places that they don’t currently,” said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a think tank in Washington that supports immigration limits.
But Jennifer Minear, the president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association, said that companies often used H-1B visas because they could not find qualified American workers for specific roles.
“We already have a shortage of STEM workers in the United States, they’re not just going to suddenly become qualified to do these jobs, just because they lost their job doing something else,” Ms. Minear said.
American companies have become more comfortable with remote work over the past few months, and they may choose to respond to the visa suspension by hiring the same worker but having them work remotely in another country, said Joseph Vavra, associate professor of economics at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
“From the perspective of the domestic worker who is displaced, that looks exactly the same, except now you’re not bringing in tax revenue and you’re not bringing in local demand or any of the other positive benefits you get from having that worker physically in the United States,” Mr. Vavra said.
The suspension of L-1 visas, which allow for transfers within companies and also allow companies to send an employee to the United States to establish a company office, could also have significant implications for the U.S. economy.
“This may discourage companies from opening U.S. offices if they aren’t able to get the visas to bring their employees from abroad to the United States,” Ms. Gelatt said.
Low-wage jobs in fields like landscaping, forestry, seasonal construction and seasonal hospitality have been filled by workers on H-2B visas. The economic crisis caused by the virus could change that, Ms. Gelatt said, and there may be more Americans facing the prospect of long-term unemployment who are willing to take those jobs.
Au pairs will also be subject to the ban, as well as interns, trainees, teachers, camp counselors and anyone participating in summer work travel, who would have normally been able to apply for J visas. Though with summer activities paused throughout the country, there may be less demand for workers to fill those roles.
PHOTO: President Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during a downturn when suspending new visas for foreign workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pete Marovich for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (96%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (79%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (79%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (77%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (76%); EPIDEMICS (76%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (76%); NEGATIVE NEWS (76%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (75%); LAWYERS (75%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (74%); STEM EDUCATION (74%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); TEACHER RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); CORONAVIRUSES (71%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (71%); PANDEMICS (71%); TELECOMMUTING (71%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (69%); TECHNOLOGY (69%); ECONOMIC NEWS (66%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (66%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (63%); VIRUSES (57%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); American Immigration Lawyers Assn (%); Center for Immigration Studies (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (78%); LAWYERS (75%); MANUFACTURING (74%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (74%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (69%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (66%); COSMETICS (64%); TOILETRIES MFG (64%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Businesses Say New York's Clout Is Emigrating, With Visa Policies to Blame
The New York Times
March 24, 2008 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1364 words
Byline: By PATRICK McGEEHAN and NINA BERNSTEIN
Body


New York officials have long taken pride in the city's status as a global gateway. But lately, senior executives of some of the country's biggest corporations, like Alcoa, have been complaining that American immigration policies are thwarting New York's ability to compete with other world capitals.
  Every big employer in the city, it seems, can cite an example of high-paying jobs that had to be relocated to foreign cities because the people chosen to fill them could not gain entry to the United States. 
  In Alcoa's case, one of its chief financial executives, Vanessa Lau, who is from Hong Kong, is working from the company's offices in Geneva when she should be at headquarters on Park Avenue, according to Alain J. P. Belda, the chairman and chief executive.
  Officials of large investment banks on Wall Street said the difficulty in obtaining visas for foreign workers, many of them graduates of American universities, had caused them to shift dozens of jobs to other financial capitals this year. In some cases, foreign-born professionals have grown weary of the struggle to get and renew a work visa in the United States and moved on to cities like London, where they say they feel more welcome.
  ''In a company like ours, we have people moving all over the place all the time,'' Mr. Belda said. ''This visa situation is causing difficulty.''
  Mr. Belda is particularly frustrated, given that he is a Moroccan-born citizen of Brazil whom Alcoa brought to the United States in the early 1990s when immigration rules were looser. Now, with visas for immigrants with special skills tightly controlled and awarded in an annual lottery in early April, managing a global enterprise from New York can be a competitive disadvantage, he said.
  ''After 9/11, it just became more and more complicated,'' Mr. Belda said. ''You're fighting to get everybody in, ''he said, then fighting for renewal of their visas so that they can stay more than three years. ''How do you move somebody with a family if they don't know they're going to be renewed?'' he said.
  Until now, visa restrictions have been seen as a problem that primarily affected technology companies in Silicon Valley and elsewhere in the West. Bill Gates, the chairman of Microsoft, has been railing against them for years.
  But according to the Partnership for New York City, a business advocacy group, there is more demand for visas for specialized jobs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut than in California, and most of the demand comes from small and midsize companies, not the largest corporations. The partnership, whose members include many of the city's biggest employers, has lobbied legislative leaders, including Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senator Charles E. Schumer, for a relaxation of visa policies. 
  ''New York's ability to compete with London, which has much more open immigration, or with the emerging financial capitals in Asia and the Middle East, depends on mobility of talent, both in terms of new and current employees,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, president of the partnership. ''What people miss is, New York's standing as an international capital of business and finance depends on the professionals within these companies being able to come to New York to be trained and groomed for leadership positions around the world.''
  Indeed, companies are capitalizing on more open visa policies elsewhere to recruit some of the leaders educated and trained in New York. Gaurav Gaur, for example, an Indian who earned his M.B.A. from Cornell in 2004, said he seized the chance to leave New York last year for London to work for Barclays, though it meant turning his back on opportunities at Bloomberg L.P. and other American companies.
  ''The whole visa situation was one of the biggest reasons that I took the job,'' Mr. Gaur said in a telephone interview from London, where he is a senior project manager for the British bank. ''I didn't want to keep going through this uncertainty -- it's just a nightmare.'' 
  In New York, Mr. Gaur, 33, had managed to secure one of the three-year visas for professionals known as H-1B visas, and he probably could have renewed it for another three years, he said. But after that he knew he would be faced with the prospect of year-to-year renewals while he waited in a long and unpredictable line for permanent residency -- and remained tethered to whatever company was sponsoring him for a green card. 
  Moreover, he said, his wife, Bhavna, who has a master's degree in social work from Washington University in St. Louis, had work visa woes of her own in a field where few employers were familiar with the H-1B program.
  In Britain, he said, ''it's drastically different.'' There is no cap on work visas, and since he had a work permit, his wife was automatically allowed to work; she quickly found a good social work job. 
  ''If I stay here for five years,'' he added, ''I automatically become eligible for a green card, for permanent residency.''
  In the United States, companies apply for the three-year H-1B visas annually, starting on April 1. The demand typically far outstrips the total supply of visas, limited to 65,000 a year, with an additional 20,000 available for those with advanced degrees from American universities. Last year 120,000 applications came in on April 1 alone, including hundreds of duplicates, and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services conducted a lottery for the first time. 
  This year, officials warned, multiple petitions by the same company for one candidate will be disqualified, to prevent businesses from trying to game the system.
  In 2006, more than 10,000 companies sought H-1B visas for jobs in New York City, according to the partnership's analysis in a soon-to-be-published report. Only about one-tenth of those applications came from the country's 1,000 biggest companies, it said. 
  Data about who holds these visas and where they work is closely guarded. But judging by the applications filed, the partnership concluded that the greatest demand is from the New York area.
  More than one-fifth -- 21 percent -- of the applications were for jobs in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, according to the report, titled ''Winning the Global Race for Talent.'' In contrast, about 18.2 percent of the H-1B visa applications were for jobs in California. Texas ranked fourth behind New York and New Jersey with about 7.7 percent of the applications, according to the report. A survey by the partnership found that employers had complaints about other immigration policies, including long delays in obtaining visas for employees transferring from offices in other countries and visas for their employees to make short-term visits to the United States. They also said they were constrained by big backlogs on applications for employment-based green cards, which offer permanent residency to sponsored workers.
  The partnership recommended adjusting the cap on H-1B visas to meet demand and more than doubling the annual limit on employment-based green cards to 290,000 from 140,000. It also suggested exempting workers with advanced degrees in science and math from any cap on H-1B visas and extending the term of visas for workers receiving practical training to 29 months from 12 months.
  Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies in Washington, which advocates less immigration, dismissed the partnership's argument as merely ''trying to bend the law to benefit them financially.''
  The H-1B visa program creates a form of indentured worker whose pay, on average, is lower than that of American counterparts, Mr. Krikorian contended. The only morally defensible way to bring workers into the country, he said, is with green cards that allow them to quit working for the sponsoring employer and stay in the United States. Still, he added that he opposed increasing the number of such green cards without the immigration service's raising its standards ''so that it's really Einstein immigration.''
  Ms. Wylde disagrees.
  ''It's a 20th-century, pre-globalization mentality that thinks somehow American companies and jobs can grow if we cut ourselves off from foreign talent,'' she said.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CITY LIFE (90%); EMIGRATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); RELOCATIONS (76%); LOBBYING (60%)

Company:  ALCOA CORP (90%);  MICROSOFT CORP (51%)

Ticker: AAI (ASX) (90%); AA (NYSE) (90%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (51%)

Industry: NAICS331313 ALUMINA REFINING & PRIMARY ALUMINUM PRODUCTION (90%); SIC3334 PRIMARY PRODUCTION OF ALUMINUM (90%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (51%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (51%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (70%)

Person: ALAIN J P BELDA (79%); BILL GATES (78%); CHARLES SCHUMER (59%); NANCY PELOSI (57%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (76%); NEW YORK, USA (95%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

Load-Date: March 25, 2008


End of Document
Trump Administration Moves to Solidify Restrictive Immigration Policies
The New York Times 
June 12, 2020 Friday 15:27 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1376 words
Byline: Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Maggie Haberman
Highlight: The administration proposed a rule this week that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and is expected to propose additional visa restrictions.
Body


The administration proposed a rule this week that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and is expected to propose additional visa restrictions.
WASHINGTON — Under the cloak of a pandemic and the convulsions of anti-racist protests, the Trump administration continues to advance its policies to restrict legal immigration, halting the flow of foreign workers and raising the bar for asylum seekers hoping for sanctuary.
This week, administration officials proposed a fallback for when they need to lift “emergency” border closure rules for the coronavirus, proposing regulations that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and allow immigration judges to deny applications for protection without giving migrants an opportunity to testify in court.
If adopted, the rules would lay a framework of restrictionist immigration policies that can be enforced well after the pandemic subsides. The administration last month extended a coronavirus border rule that has effectively blocked nearly 43,000 migrants from seeking asylum at the southwest border, according to Customs and Border Protection data released on Friday. In April, President Trump issued an executive order temporarily suspending the issuance of green cards to many outside the United States and is expected to limit certain visas issued to immigrants seeking temporary work in the country.
Education Secretary Betsy DeVos issued an emergency rule on Thursday night barring colleges from granting virus relief funds to foreign and undocumented students, including tens of thousands protected under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival program, or DACA.
And the administration is examining restrictions on new skilled-worker H-1B visas in the coming weeks.
“You’re going to see some more news on that probably sometime soon,” Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said Wednesday at an event organized by the Heritage Foundation when asked about nonimmigrant visas.
In the past month, top administration officials, including Stephen Miller, a senior White House adviser and an architect of Mr. Trump’s hard-line immigration agenda, have discussed ways to follow up on the executive order in April. That order, which was riddled with exemptions, was immediately criticized by conservative groups that had hoped the administration would restrict nonimmigrant visa programs that are used to bring thousands of workers to the United States.
Top administration officials have continued to debate whether a new executive order should encompass a host of worker visas, including H-1B visas for skilled workers, according to two government officials. In a meeting held in recent weeks, Mr. Miller has pressed Mr. Trump and the labor secretary, Eugene Scalia, to significantly reduce the number of foreign workers entering the country. But officials emphasized that the order, which is expected to be released in the coming week, is not finished. Visa holders in the United States are not likely to be affected.
“Whether it’s restrictions to legal immigration or further gutting the asylum system, the goal to reduce immigration to its lowest level possible continues to be at the forefront of this administration’s decision-making,” said Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, the policy counsel the American Immigration Council.
In defending the initial executive order and border restrictions, White House officials said those moves were needed to conserve American jobs and prevent potential outbreaks during a pandemic that has left tens of millions out of work and ravaged the economy, despite multiple studies that show immigrants bolster the economy. And long before the coronavirus, Mr. Miller sought to use health authorities to turn away migrants at the border.
The Department of Homeland Security has pointed to the pandemic in “expelling” nearly 43,000 migrants to Mexico and their home countries without providing due process, including more than 20,500 in May, Customs and Border Protection officials said on Friday, an increase of 33 percent from April.
Other programs that have largely halted asylum at the border partly rely on the cooperation of foreign governments, including a bilateral deal that deports asylum seekers to Guatemala to seek protections and an agreement that forces migrants to wait in Mexico for the duration of their asylum case in the United States.
The proposal pushed forward by the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security on Wednesday night came one day after the first legal challenge was filed to the administration’s coronavirus-related border restrictions. The regulation would allow the administration to unilaterally seal off asylum seekers, even while Mr. Trump’s physical barrier is far from complete.
Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center, called the new proposal the culmination of “all the scattershot regulations” already in effect and “an insurance policy against countries saying: ‘Never mind. We’re not going to do your dirty work anymore.’”
The proposed regulation, which is open for a comment period for 30 days, would not entitle a migrant to a full court proceeding to hear their claims.
It would also give officers broad authority to declare asylum applications “frivolous,” barring migrants from seeking other forms of immigration relief in the United States.
The rule would also raise the bar that migrants must meet to be considered persecuted in their home countries. Those claiming to be targeted by gangs or “rogue” government officials are likely to be turned away, and those seeking protection on the basis of their gender would have limited ability to seek asylum.
“Persecution is an extreme concept involving a severe level of harm that includes actions so severe that they constitute an exigent threat,” Chad R. Mizelle, the acting general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security, wrote in issuing the rule. Mr. Mizelle said it would not encompass harm from criminal or military strife, intermittent harassment or detentions or foreign governments failing to enforce laws.
Under the proposed policy, the Trump administration would be able to deny migrants asylum if they spent 14 days in another country and did not apply for protections there on their way to the United States, building off a similar measure announced last July. It remains unclear to what extent the rule would be applied to pending applications.
The administration has repeatedly said the asylum system should be streamlined given a backlog of more than a million cases.
As the White House has increased the barriers to seeking sanctuary in the country, thousands of migrants have been left to wait in squalid tent camps.
“Here we are fleeing from political violence from a place where they’ve threatened us, and we have to end up in a place like this,” said Perla Vargas, 45, who has spent 10 months in a camp in Matamoros, Mexico, with her 27-year-old daughter and two grandchildren. “It’s difficult to seek refuge with conditions like this.”
Ms. Vargas has tried to keep busy after fleeing Nicaragua, where armed civilian groups began following her after she participated in an anti-government demonstration.
Before the pandemic, Ms. Vargas, a former health care worker, tried to help form a makeshift school for the many migrant children in the camp. But in recent days, she has sought to encourage other migrants to protect themselves from the coronavirus.
Ms. Vargas has also tried to distract her grandchildren from their current situation. The family was robbed twice on their way to the border, and their remaining belongings were drenched after recent downpours broke through their tent.
“The kids say all the time, ‘We want to leave already.’ It’s frustrating to hear them say it. This has become harder and harder,” Ms. Vargas said. “I’m not sure I can keep living in this painful situation.”
Erica L. Green and Michael D. Shear contributed reporting from Washington, and Maya Averbuch from Mexico City.
PHOTO: Stephen Miller, a senior White House adviser, has urged the president to curb the number of foreign workers entering the country. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TOM BRENNER/REUTERS)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (92%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (91%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); VIRUSES (89%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); UNDOCUMENTED STUDENTS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (73%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); CONSERVATISM (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (70%); JUDGES (69%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Asylum, Right of (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Miller, Stephen (1985- ) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Cuccinelli, Kenneth T II (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); BETSY DEVOS (78%); Miller, Stephen (1985- ); Trump, Donald J; Cuccinelli, Kenneth T II

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: August 26, 2020


End of Document
Apple Hopes to Increase Earnings From Services
The New York Times
February 1, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 605 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Apple's next big business won't be a self-driving car or an improved smartwatch. It will be digital services like the App Store and Apple Music.
The company said on Tuesday that such services brought in $7.2 billion in the quarter that ended in December, and $25.5 billion over the last 12 months. 
  ''Our goal is to double the size of our services business in the next four years,'' Timothy D. Cook, Apple's chief executive, said in a conference call with investors to discuss the company's financial results.
  More difficult to predict is what the impact of President Trump's policies will be on Apple's business over the next four years.
  Mr. Cook said he was optimistic about corporate tax cuts proposed by Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress, and he noted that there was bipartisan support for reducing the tax on overseas profits that American companies must currently pay if they bring the money back to the United States.
  He said such changes would be good for Apple and for the country. As of Dec. 31, Apple had $246 billion in cash and marketable securities, most of it in foreign accounts.
  Mr. Cook said nothing on the call about Mr. Trump's push to limit immigration, which has riled the technology industry.
  But in an interview with the Wall Street Journal published late Tuesday, he said that he has contacted senior people in the White House and that Apple is studying its legal options.
  On Friday, the president signed an executive order restricting immigration from seven predominantly Muslim countries, prompting an outcry from Mr. Cook and other tech leaders. The administration is expected to issue another order soon that would change the rules for immigrant worker programs, including the H-1B visa program, which Apple and other tech companies rely on when filling many key jobs.
  Mr. Trump has also publicly called on Apple to build its iPhones in the United States instead of China.
  Luca Maestri, Apple's chief financial officer, said in an interview on Tuesday, ''We are working to understand what the new administration's standpoint is.''
  The strong growth in services will partly offset a slowdown in sales of Apple's flagship product, the iPhone. Apple said the number of iPhones sold rose just 5 percent in the first fiscal quarter, which ended in December, despite the introduction of the iPhone 7 and iPhone 7 Plus in September. In the past, product upgrades have yielded bigger jumps in sales.
  ''For a while now, we've seen Apple take a step back from the iPhone and try to derive value from services,'' said Brian Blau, a technology analyst with the research firm Gartner.
  Over all, the company's financial results for the quarter were an improvement from the year before, when it struggled with declining revenue. Apple posted revenue of $78.4 billion for the quarter, up 3 percent compared with the previous year. Profits actually fell slightly, to $17.9 billion, but the company used some of its $27 billion in cash flow in the quarter to buy back millions of shares, so earnings per share rose slightly.
  Apple said it was seeing strong growth globally. In mainland China, sales were flat, after a long run of declines. Apple said its global revenue for the quarter was reduced by 1 percent because of the high value of the dollar. In some countries, Mr. Maestri said, Apple raised prices of its products by as much as 40 percent in local currency terms as the dollar rose.
  Mr. Cook said that Apple was continuing to explore new services. ''We have put our toe in the water with doing some original content for Apple Music,'' he said. ''We are learning from that.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/31/technology/apple-tim-cook.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Timothy D. Cook, Apple's chief executive, introducing the iPhone 7 in September. In the last quarter, iPhone sales rose 5 percent. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCIO JOSE SANCHEZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: COMPANY EARNINGS (90%); CORPORATE FINANCE (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE & REPORTS (89%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); PRODUCT ENHANCEMENTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (74%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (74%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (74%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (74%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); IMMIGRATION LAW (73%); INTERNATIONAL TAXATION (73%); TAX LAW (73%); TAX RELIEF (73%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (72%); FOREIGN LABOR (70%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (70%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (50%)

Company:  APPLE INC (85%);  WALL STREET JOURNAL (54%)

Ticker: AAPL (NASDAQ) (85%)

Industry: NAICS423430 COMPUTER & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE MERCHANT WHOLESALERS (85%); NAICS334112 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICE MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (85%); SIC5045 COMPUTERS & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE (85%); SIC3572 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICES (85%); SIC3571 ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (85%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (89%); SMARTPHONES (89%); MOBILE APPLICATIONS (77%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (74%); AUTONOMOUS MOTOR VEHICLES (73%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (72%); CONFERENCE CALLS (70%); SECURITIES & OTHER INVESTMENTS (70%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (67%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); TIM COOK (79%); STEVEN JOBS (58%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: February 1, 2017


End of Document
Infosys, an Indian Outsourcing Company, Says It Will Create 10,000 U.S. Jobs
The New York Times 
May 2, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1399 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL and PAUL MOZUR
Highlight: The pledge, light on details, follows big promises by other Asian employers to create American jobs in the era of President Trump.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — Facing new corporate demands and political pressure from a Trump administration that wants to curb immigrant work visas, Infosys, one of India’s leading tech outsourcing companies, said Tuesday that it will hire up to 10,000 Americans to serve its clients in the United States.
The move makes Infosys the latest Asian technology company to portray itself as a jobs creator as President Trump threatens to take action against companies he sees as hurting American workers.
Last month, Mr. Trump signed an executive order directing government agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote “Hire American” policies. That included offering suggestions for how to reform the H-1B visa program, which operates as a lottery to bring skilled foreign laborers to the United States each year — usually tech workers.
But Infosys is also making its move to hire American driven by other forces. Its home base of India has become a less appealing place to do the grunt work of programming as wages rise there and skilled labor has become more difficult to find. A study of 36,000 engineering students at 500 Indian colleges released last month found that only 5 percent could write software code correctly.
“Building talent pools that define the future of America is what we want to do,” said Ravi Kumar S., Infosys’s president, in a phone interview from Indiana.
Indiana, the home state of Vice President Mike Pence, will be the first beneficiary of Infosys’s hire-American efforts. The company intends to open a new technology and innovation office in or near Indianapolis in August, recruiting 100 new workers this year and several hundred more next year, with a goal of adding a total of 2,000 employees by 2021.
Infosys said it would seek out three other sites for American expansion, looking for places that are close to clients and universities and where state and local governments are willing to offer significant economic incentives. The company already has an innovation hub in Silicon Valley.
The majority of Infosys’s business is in the United States, and it typically receives several thousand H-1B visas every year to bring in mostly entry-level Indian programmers who move from project to project at companies in industries like banking, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing and energy.
Infosys has hired more American college graduates in the last couple of years, said Mr. Kumar. And now clients in the United States want the company to have even more people on site locally. So it must expand its American work force significantly, he said.
“We polled our customers and a lot of our newest locations require a lot of presence,” Mr. Kumar said. “This year, we are taking it to scale.”
Mr. Kumar declined to say whether Mr. Trump’s attacks on immigrant workers had influenced its decisions.
Whether Infosys follows through on its ambitious goal of hiring 10,000 Americans in the next two years remains to be seen. The company, which employs more than 200,000 people globally, has slowed its overall hiring to a trickle as revenue growth has stalled. Mr. Kumar said the American expansion plans depend on expected client demand, as well as whether it can find and train enough college graduates with skills in artificial intelligence and other technical fields that it needs.
Indiana’s governor, Eric Holcomb, aggressively pursued Infosys, the company said at a news conference with Mr. Holcomb. Infosys already had a small work force of about 140 people in the state.
In February, Indiana state officials were approached about a potential investment by Infosys executives via the Indiana India Business Council, a local business group, according to Jim Schellinger, the state’s secretary of commerce.
Mr. Schellinger and his team traveled to India in mid-March, meeting with Infosys’s senior leadership and visiting its campuses in Bangalore and Mysore to make their pitch for the state. At the end of the month, Infosys representatives sat down with Mr. Holcomb and agreed to go ahead with plans to invest in the state.
“They’re going to hire a wide variety of people including people with four year degrees as well as two-year ones,” said Mr. Schellinger. “These are high wage jobs, including software developers and architects.”
Mr. Holcomb was ebullient at Tuesday’s announcement in Indianapolis, thanking Infosys for showing confidence in the state’s tech work force.
“You can’t even spell Indiana without starting with India,” he said. “Today is just the beginning of a great partnership.”
The state is offering Infosys incentives worth up to $31 million for the project. Indiana intends to give the company $500,000 in training funds and $15,250 in conditional tax credits per new job created.
Infosys argues that it saves money for major American companies and allows them to operate more efficiently.
Critics say that companies like Infosys have taken advantage of the H-1B program, which is designed to complement the American skilled labor force, by bringing in workers who ultimately undercut it by taking lower wages. While the program is relatively small, accounting for about 85,000 visas per year, it has become a lightning rod in the debate about large companies outsourcing American jobs.
The proposed changes to the H-1B visa program have alarmed Indian companies and government officials, since Indians receive about two-thirds of those visas. The country’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, discussed the visa issue with Mr. Trump in February, and Indian tech executives raised it with members of Congress during a visit to Washington about two months ago.
“Our objective was to make sure that a well-thought-out process was put in place,” said R. Chandrashekhar, president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, India’s leading tech trade group, in a phone interview after Mr. Trump’s executive order.
Like American tech companies, the Indian outsourcers have trouble finding enough qualified Americans to fill jobs, he said. “If the Indian companies are not able to get the skills that are needed in the U.S. and not bring in skilled workers from somewhere else, then the only option is to move the job out of the United States or leave the job undone,” he said.
As one of the largest beneficiaries of the H-1B program, Infosys could be hit hard by changes to the system. Major American technology companies like Facebook and Qualcomm also use the program to hire foreign talent, arguing that they cannot find enough skilled workers in the United States. Still, outsourcing companies like Infosys have caused the most controversy.
One suggestion — that H-1B visas be given to companies paying the highest wages — could particularly affect outsourcing companies like Infosys, which usually do not offer wages as high as the likes of Facebook. To that end, new operations in America could help offset those difficulties.
Mr. Trump’s nationalistic approach to business puts international companies in a difficult position. But for many Asian companies, it is a position they are familiar with, with the rhetoric reminiscent of the politics of business in their home countries. In recent years, India has introduced a so-called Make in India industrial policy to push companies like Apple to build out manufacturing plants in the country. Both Japan and China often exhibit the kind of economic nationalism that the Trump administration has championed.
In response to Mr. Trump’s approach, Alibaba Group of China and SoftBank of Japan have similarly made vows to            hire           large           numbers of Americans. In Alibaba’s case, it has said its businesses will help create one million jobs. The promises are so large that            many experts doubt all the jobs will materialize.
Still, their pledges won an endorsement from Mr. Trump. It is not clear whether such moves will ultimately help win political advantages from a president who has been skeptical about the benefits of trade agreements.
Nelson D. Schwartz contributed reporting from New York. Vindu Goel reported from San Francisco and Paul Mozur from Hong Kong.
PHOTO: Vishal Sikka, chief executive of Infosys, at the company’s headquarters in India in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) (B6)
Related Articles
    • Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Asian Tech Titans Take a Page From Trump’s Book
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); JOB CREATION (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (79%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (71%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (71%); Infosys Technologies Ltd (%); Hiring and Promotion (%); Outsourcing (%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%)

Ticker: Infosys Technologies Ltd

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (79%); MANUFACTURING (79%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (74%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (71%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (67%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); MIKE PENCE (79%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: INDIANAPOLIS, IN, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); INDIANA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: May 4, 2017


End of Document
Broader Effects Of Visa Limits May Be Muted, For the Moment
The New York Times
June 24, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 774 words
Byline: By Gillian Friedman
Body


President Trump's executive order came at a time when hiring has slowed, and many U.S. consulates are not conducting interviews for temporary green cards.
While the American business community reacted swiftly -- and negatively -- to President Trump's executive order suspending new visas for foreign workers, immigration experts said that because of the coronavirus pandemic it would take some time before workers felt the impact. 
  The order, announced on Monday, suspends at least through the end of the year H-1B visas for skilled workers, H-2B visas for low-skill jobs, H-4 visas for dependents of certain visa holders, J visas for those participating in work and student exchanges and L visas for transfers within a company.
  However, United States consulates are not currently conducting interviews for most green cards or temporary workers because of Covid-19, said Julia Gelatt, senior policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute.
  ''The immediate impact of the suspension is mostly symbolic until those consular officers reopen,'' she said. ''Then it will have a real impact on who is able to immigrate into the United States.''
  In signing the order on Monday, Mr. Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during an economic downturn.
  But businesses leaders rejected that rationale, with companies like Google, Twitter, Facebook and Amazon all releasing critical statements saying that the order would hurt them and the American economy as a whole.
  ''We've heard from manufacturers, technology companies, accounting firms, pharmaceutical companies, cosmetics companies, among many others, about how these visa restrictions will harm their businesses, and the negative impacts will be felt by not only these companies, but also the American workers employed by them,'' said Jon Baselice, the executive director of immigration policy for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
  The H-1B visa program is available only to foreign workers who have a bachelor's degree or higher, and is often used to fill positions in the tech sector, though the visas are also used to hire teachers, architects, engineers, doctors, lawyers and other skilled workers.
  The Trump administration's suspension of H-1B visas is intended to push companies to look harder for Americans to fill those roles.
  ''They may have to raise wages, they may have to recruit in ways and in places that they don't currently,'' said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a think tank in Washington that supports immigration limits.
  But Jennifer Minear, the president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association, said that companies often used H-1B visas because they could not find qualified American workers for specific roles.
  ''We already have a shortage of STEM workers in the United States, they're not just going to suddenly become qualified to do these jobs, just because they lost their job doing something else,'' Ms. Minear said.
  American companies have become more comfortable with remote work over the past few months, and they may choose to respond to the visa suspension by hiring the same worker but having them work remotely in another country, said Joseph Vavra, associate professor of economics at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
  ''From the perspective of the domestic worker who is displaced, that looks exactly the same, except now you're not bringing in tax revenue and you're not bringing in local demand or any of the other positive benefits you get from having that worker physically in the United States,'' Mr. Vavra said.
  The suspension of L-1 visas, which allow for transfers within companies and also allow companies to send an employee to the United States to establish a company office, could also have significant implications for the U.S. economy.
  ''This may discourage companies from opening U.S. offices if they aren't able to get the visas to bring their employees from abroad to the United States,'' Ms. Gelatt said.
  Low-wage jobs in fields like landscaping, forestry, seasonal construction and seasonal hospitality have been filled by workers on H-2B visas. The economic crisis caused by the virus could change that, Ms. Gelatt said, and there may be more Americans facing the prospect of long-term unemployment who are willing to take those jobs.
  Au pairs will also be subject to the ban, as well as interns, trainees, teachers, camp counselors and anyone participating in summer work travel, who would have normally been able to apply for J visas. Though with summer activities paused throughout the country, there may be less demand for workers to fill those roles.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/23/business/economy/visa-suspensions-companies-react.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: President Trump cited the need to preserve American jobs during a downturn when suspending new visas for foreign workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pete Marovich for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); EXECUTIVES (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (77%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (76%); EPIDEMICS (76%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (76%); NEGATIVE NEWS (76%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (75%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (75%); STEM EDUCATION (74%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (73%); TEACHER RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (72%); LABOR SHORTAGES (72%); CORONAVIRUSES (71%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (71%); PANDEMICS (71%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (69%); TECHNOLOGY (69%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (68%); ECONOMIC NEWS (65%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (65%); LAWYERS (65%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (62%); VIRUSES (56%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (54%);  GOOGLE INC (54%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (54%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (54%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); MANUFACTURING (73%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (68%); LAWYERS (65%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (65%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (64%); TOILETRIES MFG (64%); COSMETICS (63%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: June 24, 2020


End of Document
Visa Application Period Opens for Highly Skilled Workers
The New York Times
April 1, 2008 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 844 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The annual sweepstakes for visas for highly skilled temporary foreign workers begins on Tuesday, the opening day for applications to the vastly oversubscribed immigration program that is the center of a growing controversy in Congress.
  The federal authorities will accept petitions from employers for 65,000 temporary work visas, known as H-1Bs, that are available for the year that starts Oct. 1. Last year, the agency received enough petitions to cover the annual quota on the first day applications were accepted. About half of the total petitions filed were rejected because the supply of visas had run out. 
  Technology companies have urged Congress to raise the annual limit, saying they face damaging shortages of the computer engineers and software technicians that these visas attract. 
  But a number of lawmakers, led by Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, say  foreign companies have used the program to import workers who compete against Americans and lower wage rates. The senators oppose increasing the number of H-1B visas without closing loopholes in the program.
  Citizenship and Immigration Services has said that it will accept H-1B visa petitions over five business days, ending April 7. Last year the agency closed the application period after one day because the quota had already been surpassed. In mid-April, the agency will run a computerized lottery to choose about 65,000 petitions. 
  ''We want to make sure everyone has the opportunity to get their petition in to make the process as fair as possible,'' said Christopher S. Bentley, a spokesman for the immigration agency.
  For the first time, the agency this year has explicitly prohibited companies from filing more than one petition for the same worker. 
  Technology companies have become increasingly frustrated and vocal about the H-1B visa limits and the lottery selection method. In March, Bill Gates of Microsoft told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the current system ''makes attracting and retaining high-skilled immigrants exceptionally challenging for U.S. firms.'' 
  Mr. Gates said Microsoft and other American companies had been forced to export jobs that could have been done in the United States to countries more welcoming to skilled foreign workers.
  A study in March by the National Foundation for American Policy, an immigration research group in Washington, concluded that H-1B workers helped United States technology companies generate jobs for American workers. The companies increased their employment by five workers for every H-1B visa they sought, the study found. 
  The H-1B visas bring foreign workers, preferably with master's degrees or doctorates, for an initial period of three years, renewable for another three years. The visas are intended to help American companies fill shortages of employees with sophisticated skills. 
  But official figures released by Mr. Grassley show that the three biggest users of the H-1B program in 2007 were three companies based in India that perform computer and software contract work here using foreign workers, mainly Indian. 
  The three companies -- Infosys Technologies and Wipro Limited of Bangalore, and Satyam Computer Services of Hyderabad -- accounted for more than 8,500 of the H-1B visas that received preliminary approval in 2007, figures show.
  Mr. Durbin, the Senate's second-ranking Democrat, said in an interview on Monday that these companies had distorted the program's purpose. 
  ''They are H-1B brokers,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''For a fee, they are moving these engineers to the United States for three or six years, training them and then moving them back to India to work for companies that compete with America.''
  Ron Hira, a professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology, said that gaps in the rules had allowed technology companies, including American ones, to misuse the program. 
  ''Basically, H-1B has been thoroughly corrupted,'' Mr. Hira said. ''Under H-1B you could be forced to train your own replacement,'' he said, speaking of American workers.
  Mr. Hira pointed out that current rules do not require employers to prove a labor shortage by advertising jobs or recruiting in the United States. He said wages established for H-1B technology workers were below market levels in this country, allowing companies that use the visas to gain a competitive advantage and lowering wages over all. 
  Mr. Durbin and Mr. Grassley have proposed requiring companies to advertise jobs with the Labor Department before applying for visas, and giving the department new monitoring authority. 
  Infosys, in a statement, said that about 30 percent of its work for American employers was performed ''at the client's location'' in this country. It said it used H-1B visas to bring in ''our trained resources'' for several years or less. 
  Wipro said that 20 percent of its workers in the United States were ''local employees.'' It said it used H-1B visas to bring in workers ''for a short duration.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
CHART: Importing the Work Force: Among the top 10 companies that filed petitions last year for H-1B visas for high-skilled temporary workers, six were technology firms based in India. All India-based companies are highlighted below.(Source: U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services) Chart details various statistics for petitions approved and headquarters.                                  
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PETITIONS (90%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); EXPORT TRADE (78%); IMPORT TRADE (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); JOB CREATION (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (71%); ENGINEERING (70%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (69%); RESEARCH REPORTS (61%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (53%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (82%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (53%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (53%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (53%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); ENGINEERING (70%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (69%)

Person: BILL GATES (78%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (57%); RICHARD DURBIN (57%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: April 1, 2008


End of Document
White House, Pointing to Pandemic, Moves to Bolster Immigration Barriers
The New York Times
June 13, 2020 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1361 words
Byline: By Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Maggie Haberman
Body


The administration proposed a rule this week that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and is expected to propose additional visa restrictions.
WASHINGTON -- Under the cloak of a pandemic and the convulsions of anti-racist protests, the Trump administration continues to advance its policies to restrict legal immigration, halting the flow of foreign workers and raising the bar for asylum seekers hoping for sanctuary. 
  This week, administration officials proposed a fallback for when they need to lift ''emergency'' border closure rules for the coronavirus, proposing regulations that would raise the standard of proof for migrants hoping to obtain asylum and allow immigration judges to deny applications for protection without giving migrants an opportunity to testify in court.
  If adopted, the rules would lay a framework of restrictionist immigration policies that can be enforced well after the pandemic subsides. The administration last month extended a coronavirus border rule that has effectively blocked nearly 43,000 migrants from seeking asylum at the southwest border, according to Customs and Border Protection data released on Friday. In April, President Trump issued an executive order temporarily suspending the issuance of green cards to many outside the United States and is expected to limit certain visas issued to immigrants seeking temporary work in the country.
  Education Secretary Betsy DeVos issued an emergency rule on Thursday night barring colleges from granting virus relief funds to foreign and undocumented students, including tens of thousands protected under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival program, or DACA.
  And the administration is examining restrictions on new skilled-worker H-1B visas in the coming weeks.
  ''You're going to see some more news on that probably sometime soon,'' Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said Wednesday at an event organized by the Heritage Foundation when asked about nonimmigrant visas.
  In the past month, top administration officials, including Stephen Miller, a senior White House adviser and an architect of Mr. Trump's hard-line immigration agenda, have discussed ways to follow up on the executive order in April. That order, which was riddled with exemptions, was immediately criticized by conservative groups that had hoped the administration would restrict nonimmigrant visa programs that are used to bring thousands of workers to the United States.
  Top administration officials have continued to debate whether a new executive order should encompass a host of worker visas, including H-1B visas for skilled workers, according to two government officials. In a meeting held in recent weeks, Mr. Miller has pressed Mr. Trump and the labor secretary, Eugene Scalia, to significantly reduce the number of foreign workers entering the country. But officials emphasized that the order, which is expected to be released in the coming week, is not finished. Visa holders in the United States are not likely to be affected.
  ''Whether it's restrictions to legal immigration or further gutting the asylum system, the goal to reduce immigration to its lowest level possible continues to be at the forefront of this administration's decision-making,'' said Aaron Reichlin-Melnick, the policy counsel the American Immigration Council.
  In defending the initial executive order and border restrictions, White House officials said those moves were needed to conserve American jobs and prevent potential outbreaks during a pandemic that has left tens of millions out of work and ravaged the economy, despite multiple studies that show immigrants bolster the economy. And long before the coronavirus, Mr. Miller sought to use health authorities to turn away migrants at the border.
  The Department of Homeland Security has pointed to the pandemic in ''expelling'' nearly 43,000 migrants to Mexico and their home countries without providing due process, including more than 20,500 in May, Customs and Border Protection officials said on Friday, an increase of 33 percent from April.
  Other programs that have largely halted asylum at the border partly rely on the cooperation of foreign governments, including a bilateral deal that deports asylum seekers to Guatemala to seek protections and an agreement that forces migrants to wait in Mexico for the duration of their asylum case in the United States.
  The proposal pushed forward by the Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security on Wednesday night came one day after the first legal challenge was filed to the administration's coronavirus-related border restrictions. The regulation would allow the administration to unilaterally seal off asylum seekers, even while Mr. Trump's physical barrier is far from complete.
  Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center, called the new proposal the culmination of ''all the scattershot regulations'' already in effect and ''an insurance policy against countries saying: 'Never mind. We're not going to do your dirty work anymore.'''
  The proposed regulation, which is open for a comment period for 30 days, would not entitle a migrant to a full court proceeding to hear their claims.
  It would also give officers broad authority to declare asylum applications ''frivolous,'' barring migrants from seeking other forms of immigration relief in the United States.
  The rule would also raise the bar that migrants must meet to be considered persecuted in their home countries. Those claiming to be targeted by gangs or ''rogue'' government officials are likely to be turned away, and those seeking protection on the basis of their gender would have limited ability to seek asylum.
  ''Persecution is an extreme concept involving a severe level of harm that includes actions so severe that they constitute an exigent threat,'' Chad R. Mizelle, the acting general counsel of the Department of Homeland Security, wrote in issuing the rule. Mr. Mizelle said it would not encompass harm from criminal or military strife, intermittent harassment or detentions or foreign governments failing to enforce laws.
  Under the proposed policy, the Trump administration would be able to deny migrants asylum if they spent 14 days in another country and did not apply for protections there on their way to the United States, building off a similar measure announced last July. It remains unclear to what extent the rule would be applied to pending applications.
  The administration has repeatedly said the asylum system should be streamlined given a backlog of more than a million cases.
  As the White House has increased the barriers to seeking sanctuary in the country, thousands of migrants have been left to wait in squalid tent camps.
  ''Here we are fleeing from political violence from a place where they've threatened us, and we have to end up in a place like this,'' said Perla Vargas, 45, who has spent 10 months in a camp in Matamoros, Mexico, with her 27-year-old daughter and two grandchildren. ''It's difficult to seek refuge with conditions like this.''
  Ms. Vargas has tried to keep busy after fleeing Nicaragua, where armed civilian groups began following her after she participated in an anti-government demonstration.
  Before the pandemic, Ms. Vargas, a former health care worker, tried to help form a makeshift school for the many migrant children in the camp. But in recent days, she has sought to encourage other migrants to protect themselves from the coronavirus.
  Ms. Vargas has also tried to distract her grandchildren from their current situation. The family was robbed twice on their way to the border, and their remaining belongings were drenched after recent downpours broke through their tent.
  ''The kids say all the time, 'We want to leave already.' It's frustrating to hear them say it. This has become harder and harder,'' Ms. Vargas said. ''I'm not sure I can keep living in this painful situation.''
  Erica L. Green and Michael D. Shear contributed reporting from Washington, and Maya Averbuch from Mexico City.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/12/us/politics/coronavirus-trump-immigration-policies.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Stephen Miller, a senior White House adviser, has urged the president to curb the number of foreign workers entering the country. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TOM BRENNER/REUTERS)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (91%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); VIRUSES (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); UNDOCUMENTED STUDENTS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (77%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (71%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (71%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (70%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (70%); JUDGES (69%); CONSERVATISM (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); BETSY DEVOS (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: June 14, 2020


End of Document
Broad Challenge to Trump Order May Center on Cleveland Doctor
The New York Times 
February 3, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 975 words
Byline: ALAN FEUER
Highlight: Lawyers argued that the immigration ban ensnared dozens like a Sudanese physician who said she was deported even after a judge ruled that no one with a visa should be removed.
Body


Just minutes after a federal judge blocked part of President Trump’s immigration order on Saturday night, ruling that no one with a valid visa should be deported, someone was, according to court papers filed on Thursday.
Her name is Suha Amin Abdullah Abushamma, a Sudanese doctor with a valid H-1B foreign-worker visa who was working at the Cleveland Clinic, in Ohio, in a residency program.
“She left for vacation thinking she’d be gone for a short time, and then she couldn’t come back to her home,” Dr. Abushamma’s lawyer, Jennifer Kroman, said on Thursday evening. “It raises not only constitutional questions, but questions about the importance of court orders.”
Mr. Trump said his immigration order, restricting entry to the United States by people from seven predominantly Muslim countries, including Sudan, was intended to make the country safe from Islamic terrorists. But according to lawyers for immigrants who were barred, the order caught in its web dozens of people like Dr. Abushamma, who graduated at the top of her class from medical school.
Dr. Abushamma’s case was highlighted at a hearing in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on Thursday, where Judge Carol B. Amon extended until Feb. 21 the initial ruling — formally known as a stay of removal — issued last week by her colleague, Judge Ann M. Donnelly.
Judge Amon will be presiding over the case and deciding on the legal issues underlying the executive order, while at the same time overseeing nine cases in which plaintiffs say they were improperly deported.
The Thursday hearing before Judge Amon was largely procedural and was held to set out the schedule for arguments and motions in coming weeks. But in a separate action the day before, Judge Amon ordered the government to explain in writing by mid-February why she should not allow Dr. Abushamma to return to the United States, where the doctor is engaged to be married to a fellow physician.
Lawyers for the plaintiffs described Dr. Abushamma’s detention and deportation during Thursday’s hearing.
Four days before Mr. Trump signed the executive order, Dr. Abushamma had flown to Jeddah in Saudi Arabia to spend time with her family. Her apartment, her car and all of her belongings — save the few that she had packed for her vacation — were still in Cleveland. But when she landed at Kennedy Airport on Jan. 28, she was detained by customs agents and not allowed to continue on to Cleveland, according to the papers filed on Thursday.
Dr. Abushamma, the papers said, was held for more than six hours at the airport, as arguments were being held in Judge Donnelly’s courtroom. And although her immigration lawyer tried to explain to customs agents that the judge was about to rule, the lawyer was ignored, the papers said. She was escorted onto a plane headed back to Saudi Arabia by two customs officials.
“One stood in front of her and the other stood behind her,” according to the papers. “Dr. Abushamma felt like they were trying to make sure that she did not escape, as though she was a criminal in custody.”
In court, lawyers for the immigrants said it remained unclear if people were removed from the country in violation of Judge Donnelly’s ruling, as Dr. Abushamma contends she was, and how many of them there might be. Though lawyers say they have repeatedly asked the government for a detailed list of those who were both detained and deported since the ruling went into effect, federal officials have not yet provided one. The government has said that no immigrants are currently in custody, but lawyers say that could be because some of them have already been improperly sent back to their homelands.
“It is unlikely we have found the entire universe of people who have been removed,” said Lee Gelernt, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, who argued for the immigrants at the hearing. Mr. Gelernt said that he would give the government another chance to furnish him with a list of detainees and those who were deported, but he added that if federal officials did not provide the list within “a short time” — perhaps as early as Friday — he would consider filing a contempt of court complaint against the administration.
The case may emerge as the first of its kind to decide whether the Trump administration disobeyed Judge Donnelly’s ruling to keep legal visa holders in the country.
Samuel Go, a lawyer for the Justice Department, said at the hearing that the government planned to file a motion to dismiss the entire case challenging Mr. Trump’s executive order, which, so far, has not been subject to a ruling on broad constitutional grounds.
While Mr. Gelernt and his colleagues have opposed the order, saying that it violates due process rights and discriminates against Muslims in contravention of the 14th Amendment’s equal protection clause, they have not yet had the opportunity to make those arguments in court.
Given that most of the travelers detained by the government have already been released, possibly rendering their legal efforts moot, Dr. Abushamma’s claims may provide the plaintiffs with an opportunity to attack the basic legal foundations of the executive order.
“When she left to visit her family, she had no idea that she would become ensnared in the chaos following President Trump’s issuance of an unconstitutional and unlawful Executive Order,” her papers say. “Nor did Dr. Abushamma ever imagine then that, as a valid visa-holder living and working legally in the United States, she would be barred from reentry to the United States and unlawfully removed to Saudi Arabia.”
PHOTO: Protesters of an immigrant ban outside of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn last week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YANA PASKOVA/GETTY IMAGES)
Related Articles
    • Refugee Ban Endangers ‘Part of American Legacy’
    • Disorder at Airports as Travelers Are Detained Without Lawyers
    • Highlights: Reaction to Trump’s Travel Ban
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); JUDGES (93%); DEPORTATION (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); RESIDENCY PROGRAMS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (74%); MEDICAL EDUCATION (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); RELIGION (68%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (63%); TERRORISM (53%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Suits and Litigation (Civil) (%); Refugees and Displaced Persons (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%); TRAVEL BANS (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); LAWYERS (89%); AIRPORTS (83%); ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (94%); OHIO, USA (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: February 5, 2017


End of Document
Trump and Turnbull in New York: A Chance to Make U.S.-Australia Ties Shipshape
The New York Times 
May 3, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 873 words
Byline: NOAH REMNICK
Highlight: President Trump and Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull, who clashed over refugees, will be at a commemoration on the Intrepid of their nations’ 1942 battle against Japan.
Body


Among the many people President Trump has antagonized during his brief yet turbulent time in office, few were quite as surprised to receive his ire as the Australians. Though the United States and            Australia have long been allied in war and trade, Mr. Trump            abruptly ended a phone call with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in late January after the Australian leader urged him to honor an agreement to accept 1,250 refugees from an Australian detention center.
Things only soured further when Mr. Trump took to Twitter to excoriate the agreement. “I will study this dumb deal!” he declared in a post a few days later.
On Thursday, the president will have a chance for reconciliation when he boards the hangar deck of the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum for a dinner commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea, in which United States and Australian naval and air forces fought Japan during World War II. The conflict is often remembered as “the battle that saved Australia.”
“There’s a deep and broad connection between the two countries that most people don’t know enough about,” said John Berry, a former United States ambassador to Australia and the president of the American Australian Association, which is hosting the event. “I’m glad we’re taking a moment to really celebrate that.”
The American Australian Association, a little-known yet industrious nonprofit organization with offices in the Financial District of Manhattan, has been working for decades to strengthen relations between the countries. Founded in 1948 by the journalist Keith Murdoch, the association was intended to spark American governmental and business interests in Australia after World War II. Since then, the scope of its ambitions has expanded to include cultural, educational and philanthropic activity. Its Education Fund, for example, has financed the participation of more than 200 fellows in postgraduate study between Australia and the United States since 2002.
The dinner on Thursday will raise money to start a new fund for veterans. It will also be the first time an American president has met with the association, Mr. Berry said, and the first in-person encounter between Mr. Trump and Mr. Turnbull.
Perhaps nowhere is that burgeoning cultural kinship more apparent than New York, which has experienced a surge of Australian immigration in recent years. The Australian Consulate now estimates that there are approximately 20,000 Australians in New York; a decade ago, a census survey estimatedthat there were fewer than 6,000.
With those immigrants has come a swell of Australian culture in a city already rich with international life. New Yorkers have taken notice. In 2014, the website Gothamist posted an article asking, “What’s the Deal With All These Australians in NYC?” The upswing, as it noted, can be attributed in part to the            E-3 program, a class of visa introduced under President George W. Bush in 2005 exclusively for Australians that is easier and less expensive to obtain than the conventional H-1B work visa. Every year, more than 10,000 E-3 visas are reserved for Australian nationals.
“Australians focus not only on work but on vacation and quality of life, so when they come it’s for six weeks or six months, not just six days like most tourists,” Mr. Berry said. “And if you look around the city, you’re starting to see their impact.”
A healthy collection of Australian bars, restaurants, and clothing stores have taken root in a stretch of NoLIta, around Mulberry Street, that some people call Little Australia. Now, alongside the typical Manhattan fare, Australians can find comfort in the familiar taste of flat whites and chants of “Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi!” As time has passed, more and more longtime New Yorkers have also begun to better understand their antipodal counterparts.
“Back when we first got here, everyone used to think we were all Crocodile Dundee with kangaroos in our backyards,” said Tim Sykes, 32, a co-owner of Ruby’s Cafe, an Australian restaurant on Mulberry Street. “But now that we’re all over the place, Aussie life is kind of taking hold.”
The transformation has been evident in at least one crucial way for Mr. Sykes. “Now you can actually find Vegemite in some restaurants,” he said.
Still, that sense of comfort was upended by Mr. Trump’s clash with Mr. Turnbull. In late April, Vice President Mike Pence helped smooth over relations when during a visit to Australia, he confirmed the countries’ “strong and historic alliance.”
Since Mr. Trump’s comments, Mr. Sykes said, he and many of his Australian friends have been calling their immigration lawyers, worried that their status might shift. For now, Mr. Sykes is counting on the meeting Thursday to help return a sense of normalcy.
“That’d be ripper, mate,” he said.
PHOTO: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia in April. He will meet President Trump in person on Thursday in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICK TSIKAS/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)
Related Articles
    • Trump Is Returning to New York City, Just Not to Sleep
    • What to Watch For: Turnbull’s First Meeting With President Trump
    • Trump’s Volatility in Asia Distresses a Longtime U.S. Ally: Australia
    • Mike Pence, on Charm Offensive in Australia, Confirms ‘Historic Alliance’
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); ANNIVERSARIES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TRENDS & EVENTS (78%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (75%); FUNDRAISING (74%); AIR FORCES (72%); CHARITIES (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%); EDUCATION FUNDING (67%); PHILANTHROPY (62%); Australia (%); New York City (%); Turnbull, Malcolm (1954- ) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States International Relations (%)

Industry: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (75%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (73%); AIR FORCES (72%); ARMED FORCES (68%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); MALCOLM TURNBULL (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (59%); Turnbull, Malcolm (1954- ); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (94%); PACIFIC OCEAN (73%); UNITED STATES (97%); AUSTRALIA (96%)

Load-Date: May 5, 2017


End of Document
The Visas and the Fury; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 06:02 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1683 words
Highlight: As President Trump moves to restrict work-based immigration, the business world — particularly Silicon Valley — is speaking out.
Body


Want this in your inbox every day? Sign up here.
Corporate America’s visa anger
President Trump moved again yesterday to restrict immigration, this time targeting work-based visas. The business world — particularly Silicon Valley — is angry.
Mr. Trump suspended H-1Bs and other work visas through at least the end of the year, denying employment permits for hundreds of thousands of skilled foreign workers like programmers. Seasonal hospitality workers and work-study students are also affected.
 The restrictions also block multinationals from transferring foreign workers to the U.S. for extended stints, and also apply to the spouses of foreigners working for U.S. companies.
 Trump administration officials say the move, combined with extended restrictions on new green cards, could bar a half-million foreign workers from the U.S. in the rest of this year.
The president cited the pandemic, saying that “certain nonimmigrant visa programs authorizing such employment pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers.” (A recent Pew Research Center poll showed 64 percent of Americans think that legal immigrants fill jobs Americans don’t want.)
Business leaders were aghast, particularly in tech, which accounts for about three-quarters of all H-1B visas:
 “This is a full-frontal attack on American innovation and our nation’s ability to benefit from attracting talent from around the world,” said Todd Schulte of FWD.us, a pro-immigration advocacy group for big tech companies.
 “America’s continued success depends on companies having access to the best talent from around the world,” Google said. The tech giant’s C.E.O., Sundar Pichai — who was born in India — tweeted: “Disappointed by today’s proclamation.”
 “Preventing high skilled professionals from entering the country and contributing to America’s economic recovery puts American’s global competitiveness at risk,” Amazon said.
 “Highly-skilled visa holders play a critical role in driving innovation,” Facebook said, “and that’s something we should encourage, not restrict.”
 “Putting up a ‘not welcome’ sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won’t help our country, it will hold us back,” said Thomas Donohue of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Twitter’s Canadian chairman, Patrick Pichette, offered an alternative. “A message to all you H-1B seekers; just look to the North, where we welcome you (and your family) with open arms,” he tweeted, adding, “Did I mention free healthcare?”
It ain’t over till it’s over
For a few hours last night, investors thought that the U.S.-China trade deal was dead. Why? The White House trade adviser, Peter Navarro, said in a Fox News interview: “It’s over.”
The “turning point” was China’s response to the coronavirus, according to Mr. Navarro. Beijing failed to warn Washington about the spread of the disease, he said, which was gaining pace when the two sides signed a “Phase 1” pact in January. Markets promptly dropped, with S&amp;P 500 futures falling around 2 percent in after-hours trading.
… Then it wasn’t over. Larry Kudlow, the White House’s chief economic adviser, said the U.S. “remains engaged” in the deal. Shortly afterward, Mr. Navarro said his comments were taken “wildly out of context,” and he was speaking broadly about trust between the two countries. Then President Trump said that the deal was “fully intact.” Markets promptly rallied, regaining all the lost ground. (At the time of writing, futures suggest that stocks will open higher this morning.)
A preview of things to come? Many analysts believe that tensions with China could ramp up as the U.S. presidential election approaches and Mr. Trump adopts a campaign stance. “The trade deal is most at risk in September and October,” Paul Donovan of UBS wrote in a note to clients.
Apple flexes its chip power
The tech giant will design the processors for its computers, breaking with Intel after 15 years. It’s a sign of Apple’s strength, and a blow to America’s best-known chip maker.
Apple already designs the chips that run iPhones and iPads, drawing on engineers it has acquired by buying start-ups like PA Semi and Intrinsity. And it will rely on Asian manufacturing partners like T.S.M.C. to make the chips.
 Moving to custom chips will make Macs faster and more power-efficient, Apple says. And iPhone and iPad apps will work directly on Macs after the transition, which will take two years.
It’s a disappointment for Intel, which has long been the standard-bearer for the semiconductor industry. Macs make up just 5 percent of Intel’s annual sales, but the company’s reputation for building the most powerful processors around — and the profits that come with that — may be at risk.
Here’s what’s happening
Florida is worried about a rise in coronavirus cases. State officials are fretting about the spread of the virus, but divided on how to respond. The numbers are creating unease about the restart of the N.B.A. season in Orlando next month and the Republican National Convention in Jacksonville in August.
Wirecard’s ex-C.E.O. was arrested in Germany today, after the tech payment platform admitted that 1.9 billion euros ($2.1 billion) reported in its accounts probably “do not exist.” Markus Braun had resigned on Friday. The company has had a long fight with The Financial Times over its accounting practices.
Delta Air Lines will restart passenger flights to China this week, the first U.S. airline to do so. Major carriers suspended routes in late January as the Trump administration imposed travel restrictions.
Small businesses accused Square of withholding money without warning. Users of the payments service say it’s withholding up to 30 percent of their sales. The company has described this as a “rolling reserve” to cover disputes, refunds and fees.
A Japanese supercomputer was crowned as the world’s fastest. Fugaku, a system installed in Kobe, carried out 2.8 times more calculations a second than IBM’s runner-up. Chinese and American supercomputers have dominated the top 500.
Win some, lose some
SoftBank, the embattled tech conglomerate, announced its latest big deal yesterday — just as another of its investments looks to be crumbling.
The company finally announced plans to sell $21 billion worth of T-Mobile shares, which it acquired when it sold Sprint to the telecom. Selling that stake, about two-thirds of its holdings in T-Mobile, will give SoftBank much-needed cash after reporting a nearly $13 billion operating loss for its latest fiscal year.
 Because things are rarely straightforward with SoftBank, the group is also lending money to its C.O.O., Marcelo Claure, to let him spend $500 million on T-Mobile shares. (He previously ran Sprint for the conglomerate.)
But SoftBank executives have been hit by the collapse of Wirecard. Last year, SoftBank invested $1 billion in the German company, funded by several senior employees, and, thanks to complicated financial engineering, showed an instant profit. The huge drop in Wirecard’s stock has largely wiped that out.
Business as seen through a block of cheese
Cheese is fetching record wholesale prices, for reasons that reflect the strange state of the economy, The Times’s Matt Phillips writes.
“If there was a cheese VIX index, it would have been spiking,” a dairy commodity consultant told Matt. The price of a 40-pound block of Cheddar, the benchmark for cheese traded at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, collapsed in early April, when restaurants and other trade buyers shuttered. Retail demand soared, but it wasn’t enough to make up the difference.
Washington helped push the price back up  when it stepped in to buy $3 billion in agricultural goods as part of stimulus efforts. More recently, the reopening of restaurants and other institutions has led to a sudden spike in demand — milk suppliers are struggling to catch up. And retail sales are still higher than they used to be, as people cook at home more often; some of that shift may be permanent.
What does it mean? The cheese industry, like so many others, has been whipsawed by economic uncertainty, navigating a compressed boom-and-bust cycle that makes planning next to impossible. Matt dug into his Cheddar-stained notebook and told us:
Although things look much better now, “we’re all scared to death” of another outbreak, Jeff Schwager of Sartori Cheese in Wisconsin told me. The hard cheeses the company produces typically require somewhere between six months and two years of aging, meaning production decisions today have to be made about how the pandemic will be affecting the economy in the future — including whether there will be more lockdowns. “It’s anybody’s guess where we are going to be a year from now,” he said. “So how much cheese do we make?”
The speed read
Deals
 Six investment firms agreed to pump $10 billion into a new subsidiary of Abu Dhabi’s state-owned oil company. (CNBC)
 A publicly traded “blank check” investment fund run by Bill Ackman is seeking to raise as much as $6.5 billion to buy another company. (Business Insider)
Politics and policy
 A federal agency quietly halted funding for treatments of coronavirus-related lung ailments, after pledging billions for vaccine development. (NYT)
 Republicans are increasingly worried about blowback from their drive to end Obamacare during the pandemic. (NYT)
 The U.S. trade fight with Europe has cost American whiskey distillers $300 million. (Fortune)
Tech
 Google’s ad revenue in the U.S. is poised to drop for the first time, according to eMarketer. (CNBC)
 Microsoft has abandoned its gaming streaming service and will partner with Facebook. (Business Insider)
Best of the rest
 There are billions to be made in virus-proofing offices. In the meantime, here’s how to use the elevator. (NYT, WaPo)
 Why ardent fans of Korean pop are becoming political activists. (NYT)
 “Sergey Brin Has a Secret Disaster Relief Squad.” (Daily Beast)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Google is one of the biggest U.S. employers of foreign skilled workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Henry for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (85%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (79%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SERVICE WORKERS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); EPIDEMICS (76%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (74%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (73%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (73%); SEASONAL WORKERS (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (71%); TECHNOLOGY (71%); CORONAVIRUSES (68%); EMERGING MARKETS (68%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (68%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (67%); VIRUSES (67%); Foreign Workers (%); Mergers, Acquisitions and Divestitures (%); Visas (%); Navarro, Peter (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (79%); HEALTH CARE (78%); BIG TECH (71%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); SUNDAR PICHAI (79%); Navarro, Peter

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (91%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (51%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Quota Limit For High-Skill Visas Is Reached
The New York Times
April 9, 2008 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19; NATIONAL BRIEFING WASHINGTON
Length: 140 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal immigration officials said they had received enough applications for three-year visas for high-skilled immigrants, known as H-1B, to meet the quota of 65,000 for the year beginning Oct. 1. Officials at Citizenship and Immigration Services said they closed the application period, which started April 1, after the pre-set minimum of five days. The agency also received enough applications to surpass an annual quota of 20,000 work visas for immigrants with a master's degree or higher from an American college or university. The agency has not finished counting the applications, but they are expected to greatly exceed the quotas. In coming days, officials said, the agency will run an electronic lottery to select immigrants who will receive visas, in a process that prompted calls from technology businesses to raise the visa limits.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Brief

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); CITIZENSHIP (88%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (79%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (69%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LOTTERIES (53%)

Load-Date: April 9, 2008


End of Document
Trump Suspends Visas Allowing Hundreds of Thousands of Foreigners to Work in the U.S.
The New York Times 
June 22, 2020 Monday 21:07 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1608 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear and Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The move is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas.
Body


The move is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas.
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday temporarily suspended new work visas and barred hundreds of thousands of foreigners from seeking employment in the United States, part of a broad effort to limit the entry of immigrants into the country.
In a sweeping order, which will be in place at least until the end of the year, Mr. Trump blocked visas for a wide variety of jobs, including those for computer programmers and other skilled workers who enter the country under the H-1B visa, as well as those for seasonal workers in the hospitality industry, students on work-study summer programs and au pairs who arrive under other auspices.
The order also restricts the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for months or yearslong stints. And it blocks the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
Officials said the ban on worker visas, combined with extending restrictions on the issuance of new green cards, would keep as many as 525,000 foreign workers out of the country for the rest of the year.
Stephen Miller, the White House aide and the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate the worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. And in recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
But the directive, which has been expected for several weeks, is fiercely opposed by business leaders, who say it will block their ability to recruit critically needed workers from countries overseas for jobs that Americans are not willing to do or are not capable of performing.
“This is a full-frontal attack on American innovation and our nation’s ability to benefit from attracting talent from around the world,” said Todd Schulte, the president of FWD.us, a pro-immigration group supported by technology companies.
“Putting up a ‘not welcome’ sign for engineers, executives, IT experts, doctors, nurses and other workers won’t help our country, it will hold us back,” said Thomas J. Donohue, the chief executive of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. “Restrictive changes to our nation’s immigration system will push investment and economic activity abroad, slow growth and reduce job creation.”
Administration officials said the president’s order would not affect people outside the United States who already have valid visas or seasonal farm workers, whose annual numbers have ranged from a low of about 50,000 to a high of about 250,000 in the past 15 years. There will also be a narrow exception for certain medical workers dealing specifically with coronavirus research, officials said.
The order will ban au pairs who come to the United States to care for children, though officials initially told reporters they would be exempt. Later, two senior administration officials said parents could seek waivers to the ban on a case-by-case basis, with no assurance that they would be approved.
In the order, Mr. Trump described suspension of the visas as a way to ensure that Americans are first in line for scarce jobs — an assertion that immigration advocates say does not reflect the reality of a dynamic and changing work force.
“Under the extraordinary circumstances of the economic contraction resulting from the Covid-19 outbreak, certain nonimmigrant visa programs authorizing such employment pose an unusual threat to the employment of American workers,” Mr. Trump wrote in the order.
The effort to restrict entry from foreigners into the United States was at the heart of one of the president’s key promises during the 2016 campaign and is certain to play a central role as Mr. Trump seeks to energize his core supporters during his re-election campaign this year.
While the president’s pledge to build a “big, beautiful wall” to prevent illegal border crossings has attracted more attention, his efforts to slow down the flow of legal immigration have been even more effective and potentially long-lasting.
In April, the president signed an executive order that suspended for 60 days the issuance of green cards to most foreigners looking to live in the United States. But at the time, Mr. Miller and the president bowed to pressure from the business community to avoid imposing limits on the worker visas.
Monday’s order extends the green-card prohibition in addition to suspending the issuance of many of the worker visas.
Immigration restrictionists who have had the ear of the Trump administration applauded the announcement. Combined with recent measures, “the work visa suspensions will put the thumb on the labor market scale in favor of U.S. workers,” said Jessica Vaughan, the policy director at the Center for Immigration Studies, which advocates curbing immigration.
“It’s really heartening to see the president stand up to the special interests that pull out the stops to lobby for these visa programs,” said Ms. Vaughan, who said she had been regularly consulted by White House aides on the issue.
In addition to the temporary suspensions, administration officials said Mr. Trump was directing the government to make permanent changes to a broad array of immigration regulations in order to discourage what they said was unfair competition for American jobs from foreigners looking to come to the United States.
Among those changes will be new methods of ensuring that high-skill visas in the future are awarded to the highest-paid workers and of preventing companies from contracting large numbers of midlevel foreign workers to perform accounting, programming and other technology-assisted jobs that Americans might be able to do.
Other changes would be aimed at discouraging immigrants from applying for asylum as a way of obtaining a work permit in the United States. It was unclear when those regulatory changes would go into effect.
The administration could try to issue emergency rules to expedite such changes rather than go through the normal process, which can take months or even years because the public must be allowed to comment before a final rule is enacted.
But fast-tracking the rule-making process on foreign workers could invite legal challenges from opponents who say the administration did not follow the rules. Last week, the Supreme Court ruled that Mr. Trump violated the Administrative Procedure Act when he tried to terminate an Obama-era program aimed at protecting young immigrants from deportation.
“The government could try and fast-track that process by not allowing the public to weigh in on the changes before they go into effect, but it is difficult to see that process surviving court review,” said Lynden Melmed, an immigration lawyer and the former chief counsel of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services.
Amid the pandemic, the Trump administration has seized on the threat to public health as a pretext to issue a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system, including asylum and green cards. While many changes have been announced as temporary, they could remain in place indefinitely.
But critics say the administration has used the health crisis and the economic meltdown it has caused as pretext to put in place restrictions that further its immigration agenda.
While Mr. Trump and his aides said the suspension of visas was in response to the pandemic, the administration has been pursuing the same broad reductions to legal immigration policies for years, including during times when unemployment was at its lowest in decades. In 2017, the president endorsed the RAISE Act, a Republican Senate bill that would have cut legal immigration, including business visas, by about 50 percent.
In the weeks leading up to the announcement on Monday, a diverse coalition of businesses and research universities had lobbied fiercely, flooding the White House with letters and phone calls, in an attempt to limit the scope of the executive order.
“It’s the largest crackdown on work visas that I have seen in my 35 years of practice,” said Steve Yale-Loehr, a Cornell law professor. “Thousands of businesses and universities will be hurt by these restrictions. Similarly, individuals will be stuck overseas unable to help the U.S. economy recover.”
But the opponents failed to block the measures, which they had argued were counterproductive to economic recovery.
“The Trump administration has argued that it wants to create a merit-based immigration system that prioritizes educated immigrants with skills,” said Alex Nowrasteh, the director of immigration studies at the libertarian Cato Institute. “With this suspension of the H-1B visa program, they have shown, once again, that they really mean they want fewer immigrants.”
“These immigration bans are more red meat and not jobs for the base,” said Rebecca Shi from the American Business Immigration Coalition in Chicago. “They don’t even serve Trump’s own business interests.”
Mr. Trump has used H-2B visas to hire seasonal staff for his resorts to work as cooks and waiters.
Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles.
Michael D. Shear reported from Washington, and Miriam Jordan from Los Angeles. 
PHOTO: Amid the coronavirus pandemic, the Trump administration has issued a series of policy changes affecting almost every aspect of the immigration system. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); SEASONAL WORKERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (78%); CORONAVIRUSES (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ECONOMICS (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (78%); JOB CREATION (78%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); VIRUSES (78%); TECHNOLOGY (75%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (73%); WORKER CATEGORIES (73%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (72%); FARM LABOR (70%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (60%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Visas (%); United States Economy (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); United States Chamber of Commerce (%); Miller, Stephen (1985- ) (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Organization: UNITED STATES CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); FARM LABOR (70%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (70%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (60%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); Miller, Stephen (1985- ); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: July 23, 2020


End of Document
Challenge to Trump Action May Center on Ohio Doctor
The New York Times
February 4, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 933 words
Byline: By ALAN FEUER
Body


Just minutes after a federal judge blocked part of President Trump's immigration order on Saturday night, ruling that no one with a valid visa should be deported, someone was, according to court papers filed on Thursday.
Her name is Suha Amin Abdullah Abushamma, a Sudanese doctor with a valid H-1B foreign-worker visa who was working at the Cleveland Clinic, in Ohio, in a residency program. 
  ''She left for vacation thinking she'd be gone for a short time, and then she couldn't come back to her home,'' Dr. Abushamma's lawyer, Jennifer Kroman, said on Thursday evening. ''It raises not only constitutional questions, but questions about the importance of court orders.''
  Mr. Trump said his immigration order, restricting entry to the United States by people from seven predominantly Muslim countries, including Sudan, was intended to make the country safe from Islamic terrorists. But according to lawyers for immigrants who were barred, the order caught in its web dozens of people like Dr. Abushamma, who graduated at the top of her class from medical school.
  Dr. Abushamma's case was highlighted at a hearing in Federal District Court in Brooklyn on Thursday, where Judge Carol B. Amon extended until Feb. 21 the initial ruling -- formally known as a stay of removal -- issued last week by her colleague, Judge Ann M. Donnelly.
  Judge Amon will be presiding over the case and deciding on the legal issues underlying the executive order, while at the same time overseeing nine cases in which plaintiffs say they were improperly deported.
  The Thursday hearing before Judge Amon was largely procedural and was held to set out the schedule for arguments and motions in coming weeks. But in a separate action the day before, Judge Amon ordered the government to explain in writing by mid-February why she should not allow Dr. Abushamma to return to the United States, where the doctor is engaged to be married to a fellow physician.
  Lawyers for the plaintiffs described Dr. Abushamma's detention and deportation during Thursday's hearing.
  Four days before Mr. Trump signed the executive order, Dr. Abushamma had flown to Jeddah in Saudi Arabia to spend time with her family. Her apartment, her car and all of her belongings -- save the few that she had packed for her vacation -- were still in Cleveland. But when she landed at Kennedy Airport on Jan. 28, she was detained by customs agents and not allowed to continue on to Cleveland, according to the papers filed on Thursday.
  Dr. Abushamma, the papers said, was held for more than six hours at the airport, as arguments were being held in Judge Donnelly's courtroom. And although her immigration lawyer tried to explain to customs agents that the judge was about to rule, the lawyer was ignored, the papers said. She was escorted onto a plane headed back to Saudi Arabia by two customs officials.
  ''One stood in front of her and the other stood behind her,'' according to the papers. ''Dr. Abushamma felt like they were trying to make sure that she did not escape, as though she was a criminal in custody.''
  In court, lawyers for the immigrants said it remained unclear if people were removed from the country in violation of Judge Donnelly's ruling, as Dr. Abushamma contends she was, and how many of them there might be. Though lawyers say they have repeatedly asked the government for a detailed list of those who were both detained and deported since the ruling went into effect, federal officials have not yet provided one. The government has said that no immigrants are currently in custody, but lawyers say that could be because some of them have already been improperly sent back to their homelands.
  ''It is unlikely we have found the entire universe of people who have been removed,'' said Lee Gelernt, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, who argued for the immigrants at the hearing. Mr. Gelernt said that he would give the government another chance to furnish him with a list of detainees and those who were deported, but he added that if federal officials did not provide the list within ''a short time'' -- perhaps as early as Friday -- he would consider filing a contempt of court complaint against the administration.
  The case may emerge as the first of its kind to decide whether the Trump administration disobeyed Judge Donnelly's ruling to keep legal visa holders in the country.
  Samuel Go, a lawyer for the Justice Department, said at the hearing that the government planned to file a motion to dismiss the entire case challenging Mr. Trump's executive order, which, so far, has not been subject to a ruling on broad constitutional grounds.
  While Mr. Gelernt and his colleagues have opposed the order, saying that it violates due process rights and discriminates against Muslims in contravention of the 14th Amendment's equal protection clause, they have not yet had the opportunity to make those arguments in court.
  Given that most of the travelers detained by the government have already been released, possibly rendering their legal efforts moot, Dr. Abushamma's claims may provide the plaintiffs with an opportunity to attack the basic legal foundations of the executive order.
  ''When she left to visit her family, she had no idea that she would become ensnared in the chaos following President Trump's issuance of an unconstitutional and unlawful Executive Order,'' her papers say. ''Nor did Dr. Abushamma ever imagine then that, as a valid visa-holder living and working legally in the United States, she would be barred from reentry to the United States and unlawfully removed to Saudi Arabia.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/03/nyregion/trump-ban-suha-amin-abdullah-abushamma.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Protesters of an immigrant ban outside of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn last week. (PHOTOGRAPH BY YANA PASKOVA/GETTY IMAGES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); JUDGES (91%); DEPORTATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); RESIDENCY PROGRAMS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (73%); MEDICAL EDUCATION (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); RELIGION (68%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (60%); TERRORISM (53%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); LAWYERS (89%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (89%); ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); AIRPORTS (63%)

Geographic: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (93%); OHIO, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

Load-Date: February 4, 2017


End of Document
In Turnabout, Indian Outsourcing Company Promises U.S. Jobs
The New York Times
May 3, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1332 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL and PAUL MOZUR; Nelson D. Schwartz contributed reporting from New York. Vindu Goel reported from San Francisco and Paul Mozur from Hong Kong.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Facing new corporate demands and political pressure from a Trump administration that wants to curb immigrant work visas, Infosys, one of India's leading tech outsourcing companies, said Tuesday that it will hire up to 10,000 Americans to serve its clients in the United States.
The move makes Infosys the latest Asian technology company to portray itself as a jobs creator as President Trump threatens to take action against companies he sees as hurting American workers. 
  Last month, Mr. Trump signed an executive order directing government agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote ''Hire American'' policies. That included offering suggestions for how to reform the H-1B visa program, which operates as a lottery to bring skilled foreign laborers to the United States each year -- usually tech workers.
  But Infosys is also making its move to hire American driven by other forces. Its home base of India has become a less appealing place to do the grunt work of programming as wages rise there and skilled labor has become more difficult to find. A study of 36,000 engineering students at 500 Indian colleges released last month found that only 5 percent could write software code correctly.
  ''Building talent pools that define the future of America is what we want to do,'' said Ravi Kumar S., Infosys's president, in a phone interview from Indiana.
  Indiana, the home state of Vice President Mike Pence, will be the first beneficiary of Infosys's hire-American efforts. The company intends to open a new technology and innovation office in or near Indianapolis in August, recruiting 100 new workers this year and several hundred more next year, with a goal of adding a total of 2,000 employees by 2021.
  Infosys said it would seek out three other sites for American expansion, looking for places that are close to clients and universities and where state and local governments are willing to offer significant economic incentives. The company already has an innovation hub in Silicon Valley.
  The majority of Infosys's business is in the United States, and it typically receives several thousand H-1B visas every year to bring in mostly entry-level Indian programmers who move from project to project at companies in industries like banking, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing and energy.
  Infosys has hired more American college graduates in the last couple of years, said Mr. Kumar. And now clients in the United States want the company to have even more people on site locally. So it must expand its American work force significantly, he said.
  ''We polled our customers and a lot of our newest locations require a lot of presence,'' Mr. Kumar said. ''This year, we are taking it to scale.''
  Mr. Kumar declined to say whether Mr. Trump's attacks on immigrant workers had influenced its decisions.
  Whether Infosys follows through on its ambitious goal of hiring 10,000 Americans in the next two years remains to be seen. The company, which employs more than 200,000 people globally, has slowed its overall hiring to a trickle as revenue growth has stalled. Mr. Kumar said the American expansion plans depend on expected client demand, as well as whether it can find and train enough college graduates with skills in artificial intelligence and other technical fields that it needs.
  Indiana's governor, Eric Holcomb, aggressively pursued Infosys, the company said at a news conference with Mr. Holcomb. Infosys already had a small work force of about 140 people in the state.
  In February, Indiana state officials were approached about a potential investment by Infosys executives via the Indiana India Business Council, a local business group, according to Jim Schellinger, the state's secretary of commerce.
  Mr. Schellinger and his team traveled to India in mid-March, meeting with Infosys's senior leadership and visiting its campuses in Bangalore and Mysore to make their pitch for the state. At the end of the month, Infosys representatives sat down with Mr. Holcomb and agreed to go ahead with plans to invest in the state.
  ''They're going to hire a wide variety of people including people with four year degrees as well as two-year ones,'' said Mr. Schellinger. ''These are high wage jobs, including software developers and architects.''
  Mr. Holcomb was ebullient at Tuesday's announcement in Indianapolis, thanking Infosys for showing confidence in the state's tech work force.
  ''You can't even spell Indiana without starting with India,'' he said. ''Today is just the beginning of a great partnership.''
  The state is offering Infosys incentives worth up to $31 million for the project. Indiana intends to give the company $500,000 in training funds and $15,250 in conditional tax credits per new job created.
  Infosys argues that it saves money for major American companies and allows them to operate more efficiently.
  Critics say that companies like Infosys have taken advantage of the H-1B program, which is designed to complement the American skilled labor force, by bringing in workers who ultimately undercut it by taking lower wages. While the program is relatively small, accounting for about 85,000 visas per year, it has become a lightning rod in the debate about large companies outsourcing American jobs.
  The proposed changes to the H-1B visa program have alarmed Indian companies and government officials, since Indians receive about two-thirds of those visas. The country's prime minister, Narendra Modi, discussed the visa issue with Mr. Trump in February, and Indian tech executives raised it with members of Congress during a visit to Washington about two months ago.
  ''Our objective was to make sure that a well-thought-out process was put in place,'' said R. Chandrashekhar, president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, India's leading tech trade group, in a phone interview after Mr. Trump's executive order.
  Like American tech companies, the Indian outsourcers have trouble finding enough qualified Americans to fill jobs, he said. ''If the Indian companies are not able to get the skills that are needed in the U.S. and not bring in skilled workers from somewhere else, then the only option is to move the job out of the United States or leave the job undone,'' he said.
  As one of the largest beneficiaries of the H-1B program, Infosys could be hit hard by changes to the system. Major American technology companies like Facebook and Qualcomm also use the program to hire foreign talent, arguing that they cannot find enough skilled workers in the United States. Still, outsourcing companies like Infosys have caused the most controversy.
  One suggestion -- that H-1B visas be given to companies paying the highest wages -- could particularly affect outsourcing companies like Infosys, which usually do not offer wages as high as the likes of Facebook. To that end, new operations in America could help offset those difficulties.
  Mr. Trump's nationalistic approach to business puts international companies in a difficult position. But for many Asian companies, it is a position they are familiar with, with the rhetoric reminiscent of the politics of business in their home countries. In recent years, India has introduced a so-called Make in India industrial policy to push companies like Apple to build out manufacturing plants in the country. Both Japan and China often exhibit the kind of economic nationalism that the Trump administration has championed.
  In response to Mr. Trump's approach, Alibaba Group of China and SoftBank of Japan have similarly made vows to hire large numbers of Americans. In Alibaba's case, it has said its businesses will help create one million jobs. The promises are so large that many experts doubt all the jobs will materialize.
  Still, their pledges won an endorsement from Mr. Trump. It is not clear whether such moves will ultimately help win political advantages from a president who has been skeptical about the benefits of trade agreements.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/02/business/infosys-hire-10000-american-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Vishal Sikka, chief executive of Infosys, at the company's headquarters in India in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERS) (B6)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (76%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (71%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (71%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (92%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (92%); INFY (NYSE) (92%); INFY (NSE) (92%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); MANUFACTURING (78%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (71%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (67%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); MIKE PENCE (79%)

Geographic: INDIANAPOLIS, IN, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); INDIANA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: May 3, 2017


End of Document
The Activist Investor Done With Finance; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 10:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1702 words
Highlight: Jeff Ubben is leaving the hedge fund he founded for a new venture focused on “inclusive capitalism.” He thinks traditional finance is played out.
Body


Want this delivered to your inbox each day? Sign up here.
Jeff Ubben’s plan to end finance as usual
One of America’s top activist investors said that he’s leaving the $16 billion hedge fund, ValueAct, that he has turned into a major force in corporate boardrooms. His reason is, perhaps, even bigger news.
Mr. Ubben is a force in shareholder activism, who has made companies like Microsoft change strategy to improve returns for investors. But unlike others in the field, he largely avoids splashy public fights — winning praise from defenders of corporate boards like Marty Lipton.
He’s leaving to start a new hedge fund, Inclusive Capital Partners, with co-founders like the investor Lynn Forester de Rothschild, who’s focused on — you guessed it — “inclusive capitalism.” The new firm is focused on environmental and social impact investments. (Mr. Ubben will still manage ValueAct’s $1 billion impact fund as well … for now. More on that below.)
 Definitions can be squishy, but assets tied to socially responsible investment are generally estimated at around $12 trillion in the U.S., out of $30 trillion worldwide.
Mr. Ubben thinks traditional corporate finance is played out. He told Andrew that corporate America thinks too much about the short term, a trend he admitted he helped drive. Traditional activist investing to force a C.E.O. change, shareholder payout or sale of a company won’t accomplish much anymore.
 For good measure, he told The Financial Times: “Finance is, like, done. Everybody’s bought everybody else with low-cost debt. Everybody’s maximized their margin. They’ve bought all their shares back ... There’s nothing there. Every industry has about three players. Elizabeth Warren is right.”
Mr. Ubben’s focus now is a different sort of activist investing, with an eye on big issues like the environment. Impact-focused activism, particularly at older corporate names, can drive bigger profits than traditional activism: “The legacy companies are valued like they’re going out of business and they have the work force, they have the geographies and intellectual property and all of that,” he told Andrew.
 The hedge fund mogul conceded that he’ll need to find “courageous C.E.O.s and boards,” and added, “I think we’re going to have to fire our shareholders. We’re going to have to find new shareholders, shareholders that want to be focused on the long term.”
 He also doesn’t think that investment firms — apparently like, um, ValueAct — can run both traditional funds and impact ones. “I don’t think these two strategies peacefully coexist,” he told the FT.
The Justice Department faces a harsh spotlight
A hearing held by the House Judiciary Committee today is expected to examine whether the Justice Department has let politics seep into enforcement actions — including antitrust cases.
Expect a lot of questions about Roger Stone, the Trump adviser who was convicted last year of witness tampering and lying to the authorities in connection with Robert Mueller’s investigation. A former prosecutor, Aaron Zelinsky, plans to testify that he believes senior law enforcement officials intervened to seek a more lenient prison sentence.
But pay close attention to testimony from John Elias, a career official in the department’s antitrust division, who alleges that under Attorney General Bill Barr his group was asked to pursue cases for political reasons:
 The department purportedly investigated 10 takeovers in the marijuana industry because Mr. Barr “did not like the nature of their underlying business,” according to Mr. Elias’s opening statement. The department’s antitrust chief, Makan Delrahim, reportedly conceded as much to staff last September.
 Mr. Elias also accuses the department of acting on political motives in its review of California’s emissions deal with four big carmakers.
The hearing could raise questions about antitrust investigations in tech. A bipartisan group of state attorneys general have been investigating Silicon Valley titans like Google. But concerns that Justice Department leaders may have ulterior motives — such as beliefs that the companies have an anti-conservative bias — won’t help those cases.
Companies brace for the visa ban
President Trump’s order suspending several types of work visas brought swift corporate condemnation, but it’ll take a while to bite, immigration experts say.
“The immediate impact of the suspension is mostly symbolic,” a policy analyst told The Times’s Gillian Friedman. Consulates aren’t interviewing for most green cards or temporary work visas because of the pandemic. The effects will become clearer when they reopen.
More business leaders are speaking out, with tech executives the most prominent.
Apple’s Tim Cook: “Like Apple, this nation of immigrants has always found strength in our diversity, and hope in the enduring promise of the American Dream. There is no new prosperity without both. Deeply disappointed by this proclamation.”
Microsoft’s Brad Smith: “Now is not the time to cut our nation off from the world’s talent or create uncertainty and anxiety. Immigrants play a vital role at our company and support our country’s critical infrastructure. They are contributing to this country at a time when we need them most.”
Tesla’s Elon Musk: “Very much disagree with this action. In my experience, these skillsets are net job creators. Visa reform makes sense, but this is too broad.”
The suspension sparked outrage in India, where three-quarters of H-1B visa holders come from. Hemant Mohapatra, a partner at Lightspeed Ventures who returned to India in 2018 after more than a decade working on an H-1B visa for Google, Andreesen Horowitz and others, called the ban a “personal betrayal.” He pointed to a post he wrote shortly after his move to help others decide “when it is the right time to head home.”
Here’s what’s happening
A “disturbing surge” suggests that the virus isn’t under control. America’s top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci, told House lawmakers yesterday that the next few weeks would be crucial in dealing with a spike in cases in states like Arizona, Florida and Texas.
Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez won her Democratic primary for the New York seat that she won in 2018. She defeated Michelle Caruso-Cabrera, a former CNBC anchor backed by top Wall Street executives. “Their money couldn’t buy a movement,” Ms. Ocasio-Cortez tweeted.
There’s tech, and there’s everything else. Records set by the Nasdaq highlight how the performance of big tech stocks has diverged sharply from the rest of the market. At this point, the tech-heavy Nasdaq’s advantage over the Dow and S&amp;P 500 is the biggest since the early 1980s, according to The Wall Street Journal.
Some companies are giving executives big bonuses before filing for bankruptcy. The payments, often in cash instead of stock, often aren’t tied to performance and can be tricky for courts to claw back.
Baseball will return. Major League Baseball and its players’ union resolved their differences over a shortened 60-game season, and play will begin — with no fans in the stands — on July 23 or July 24.
The productivity pandemic
Many companies say that their employees are much more efficient working from home, reports The Times’s David Gelles. But as lockdowns drag on, can that last? And if so, at what cost?
Processes that managers took for granted seem less essential now, from long meetings to regular status updates. And that — along with the disappearance of commutes and office-based distractions — means workers can get more done, a host of companies told David. (Home-based distractions are another matter, of course.)
But there is a downside. Managers are worried about the effects of isolation, decaying social capital and lack of camaraderie. Mental health is a particular concern, David tells us, and he dug into his notebook for some extra material about it, based on his reporting:
To combat the risk of burnout, many employers are offering virtual mental health offerings to remote workers.
“Everyone is so focused on the protection of the virus,” said Douglas Merritt, the C.E.O. of the software company Splunk. “But health includes mental health, emotional health, physical health, financial health.” Splunk is among the companies that have started offering daily meditation and mindfulness sessions to remote workers.
Early in the crisis, Salesforce also started a daily mental health call, and was encouraging employees to develop a daily meditation, mindfulness or prayer practice. “We’re in a much more stressful environment than ever before,” Salesforce’s C.E.O., Marc Benioff, said in late March. “We have to take care of that.”
The speed read
Deals
 Dell is reportedly exploring options for its $50 billion holding in the software company VMware, including spinning off the stake to shareholders. (WSJ)
 Amazon will create a $2 billion fund to invest in clean-energy start-ups that could help it become net carbon zero by 2040. (TechCrunch)
 The mall operators Simon and Brookfield Property Partners are reportedly exploring a bid for J.C. Penney, to help out their shopping centers. (WSJ)
Politics and policy
 The Trump administration is considering tariffs on Canadian aluminum, risking a trade war before the new North American free-trade pact goes into effect. (NYT)
 The E.U. may block American travelers as a coronavirus risk. (NYT)
Tech
 Amazon employees are pressing the company to address what they say is systemic racial inequality. (NYT)
 Stacy Brown-Philpot of TaskRabbit, one of Silicon Valley’s few black C.E.O.s, is stepping down. (NYT)
 Palantir appointed Alexandra Wolfe Schiff to its board ahead of a planned I.P.O. The former Wall Street Journal reporter (and daughter of the author Tom Wolfe) is the first woman to serve as a director at the data-mining company. (Bloomberg)
Best of the rest
 Plexiglass supplies are running low, because of all those new virus-proofing barriers. (WSJ)
 “The City of London Has a Slavery Problem” (Bloomberg)
 WeWork’s private jet could now be yours for a mere $50 million. (Business Insider)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Jeff Ubben (PHOTOGRAPH BY Ann Johansson for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ACTIVIST INVESTORS (93%); HEDGE FUNDS (92%); ETHICAL INVESTING (90%); IMPACT INVESTING (90%); SHAREHOLDERS (90%); ACTIVISM (89%); BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (89%); ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (89%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (79%); CORPORATE FINANCE (79%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (78%); FUNDS & INVESTMENT TRUSTS (78%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); ESG FACTORS - SOCIAL (75%); NEW BUSINESSES (74%); WITNESSES (62%); WITNESS TAMPERING (50%); Stocks and Bonds (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Antitrust Laws and Competition Issues (%); Capitalism (Theory and Philosophy) (%); Justice Department (%); ValueAct Capital Partners (%); Ubben, Jeffrey W (%)

Industry: ACTIVIST INVESTORS (93%); HEDGE FUNDS (92%); ETHICAL INVESTING (90%); IMPACT INVESTING (90%); FUNDS & INVESTMENT TRUSTS (78%)

Person: Ubben, Jeffrey W

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
Many Visas Are Sought For Skilled
The New York Times
April 11, 2008 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 548 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal immigration authorities received about 163,000 petitions for temporary work visas for highly skilled immigrants for the year starting Oct. 1, officials said Thursday, nearly twice as many as the number of visas available.
   The government each year offers 65,000 visas, known as H-1Bs, for highly educated foreign workers, and 20,000 visas for immigrants with a master's degree or doctorate from an American college or university. Citizenship and Immigration Services closed the application period  Tuesday after it had been open for the five-day minimum. 
  Although petitions for the 2009 fiscal year increased by about 23 percent over  2008, immigration officials said they had expected an even higher number. A new rule penalizing employers who presented more than one petition for the same  worker  helped keep down the numbers, said Chris Rhatigan, a spokeswoman for the immigration agency.
  Sometime next week, the agency will conduct an electronic lottery to select 85,000 immigrants to receive the H-1B visas, which are valid for three years and can be renewed for another three. 
  The visa announcement brought renewed calls from  American technology companies to raise the annual limits. On Thursday,  senators led by John Cornyn, Republican of Texas,  introduced a bill that would raise the H-1B cap to 145,000 visas each year through 2011. It would also allow businesses to use, over a three-year period, some 150,000 visas that were available in past years but were never issued. 
  The bill also includes measures to address the rapidly expanding use of H-1B visas by major Indian companies to bring workers  for short-term jobs as part of technology outsourcing contracts. It would seek to bar this practice by requiring companies to employ H-1B workers only at their own offices in the United States.
  Labor organizations say that H-1B immigrants have depressed wages  for American technology workers. Some  employers have protested  that they were crowded out of the  visa pool by the Indian outsourcing companies. 
  A Web site  was started in January by American technology workers who said they had been driven from jobs by H-1B immigrants. About 150 members have posted their stories on the site, hireamericansfirst.org.
  ''It's not that you can't find Americans,'' a 55-year-old American technology worker in Florida, who was contacted through the Web site, said in an interview Thursday. ''It's that you can't find Americans at the price you can get away with paying an H-1B worker.'' 
  A computer systems administrator with 25 years of experience, he said he did not want to have his name published for fear of jeopardizing a job he recently found after a four-year search. 
  Technology employers said they used the visas to hire foreigners with exceptional skills. Elizabeth Charnock, chief executive of Cataphora, a six-year-old company in California, said she requested an H-1B visa for a mathematician from Togo who has two master's degrees and specializes in the Internet searches her company offers. 
  Ms. Charnock said it was hard for her company to compete for workers with Silicon Valley giants like Google.
  ''We don't go out looking for foreign workers,'' she said. ''We go out looking for the best talent you can find, and that comes from all over.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); IMMIGRATION (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); OUTSOURCING (89%); PETITIONS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); LEGISLATION (79%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (76%); INTERVIEWS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (76%); LOTTERIES (53%)

Person: JOHN CORNYN (58%)

Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: April 11, 2008


End of Document
Changing Course, U.S. Allows Visas For Online Study
The New York Times
July 15, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1514 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan and Anemona Hartocollis
Body


The Trump administration said it would no longer require international students to attend in-person classes during the coronavirus pandemic in order to remain in the country.
In a rare and swift immigration policy reversal, the Trump administration on Tuesday bowed to snowballing opposition from universities, Silicon Valley and 20 states and abandoned a plan to strip international college students of their visas if they did not attend at least some classes in person. 
  The policy, which would have subjected foreign students to deportation if they did not show up for class on campus, had thrown the higher education world into turmoil at a time when universities are grappling with whether to reopen campuses during the coronavirus pandemic.
  The loss of international students could have cost universities millions of dollars in tuition and jeopardized the ability of U.S. companies to hire the highly skilled workers who often start their careers with an American education.
  Two days after the policy was announced on July 6, Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology filed the first of a litany of lawsuits seeking to block it.
  On Tuesday, minutes before a federal judge in Boston was to hear arguments on their challenge, the judge, Allison D. Burroughs, announced that the administration had agreed to rescind the policy and allow international students to remain in the country even if they are taking all their classes online.
  The government has argued that the requirement that students take at least one in-person class was actually more lenient than the rule that had been in effect for close to 20 years which required foreign students to take most of their classes in person.
  But that rule was temporarily suspended on March 13, when Mr. Trump declared a national emergency and campuses across the country began shutting down, with classes moving online. On July 6, the government made its announcement that foreign students could not remain in the United States if their studies were entirely online.
  ''If they're not going to be a student or they're going to be 100 percent online, then they don't have a basis to be here,'' Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said in an interview on CNN after the policy was announced. ''They should go home, and then they can return when the school opens.''
  Each year, about 1 million international students enroll in American universities. They contribute $41 billion to the economy annually and support more than 458,000 jobs.
  In addition to Harvard and M.I.T., the attorneys general of 20 states, including Massachusetts and California, also sued, charging that the policy was reckless, cruel and senseless. Scores of universities threw their support behind the litigation, along with organizations representing international students.
  The pressure grew on Monday, when more than a dozen technology companies, including Google, Facebook and Twitter, also came out in support of the lawsuit, arguing that the policy would harm their businesses. Then on Tuesday, 15 Republican members of Congress signed a letter urging the Trump administration to restore its previous policy on international students.
  Representative Rodney Davis, an Illinois Republican who had organized the letter, applauded the Trump administration's ''right decision'' to cancel its plan. ''These hardworking students are the best and brightest from their countries, and they help our communities grow both culturally and economically,'' he said.
  The policy about foreign students was one of a number of measures President Trump has taken to advance his agenda on immigration, using the coronavirus pandemic and the need to protect the country from health threats as justification.
  The administration has also stopped processing green cards for applicants abroad; closed the southwestern border to nonessential travel, allowing only Americans and legal permanent residents to enter while barring asylum seekers; and banned the entry of thousands of foreigners on work visas.
  The universities said in their court challenge to the latest policy that ''by all appearances,'' the government's attempt to force international students to study on campus had also been a political move, calculated to advance the Trump administration's agenda to force universities to reopen their gates with in-person classes.
  They said forcing students to return to their home countries would in many cases separate them from families in the United States, returning them to places where they no longer had a home. In some cases, they would be living under the thumb of repressive regimes, which policed or restricted internet access.
  Many international students from Asian countries would have to contend with a time difference that would mean taking classes between 2 a.m. and 7 a.m., if they had internet access.
  Foreign students attending elementary, middle and high schools on visas would have also had to depart the country if their classes went 100 percent online.
  In court filings, universities said that some arriving students already had been barred from entering the country by immigration officials at airports who told them that their institutions were going online.
  After the announcement on Tuesday that the policy had been rescinded, university officials praised the decision and warned that they would be prepared to go back to court should the administration make any further moves to restrict the ability of international students to study online when necessary.
  ''This is a significant victory,'' Harvard's president, Lawrence S. Bacow, said in a statement. ''The directive had disrupted all of American higher education. I have heard from countless international students who said that the July 6 directive had put them at serious risk. These students -- our students -- can now rest easier and focus on their education, which is all they ever wanted to do.''
  L. Rafael Reif, president of M.I.T., said the swift opposition was evidence of ''the important role international students play in our education, research and innovation enterprises here in the United States. These students make us stronger, and we hurt ourselves when we alienate them.''
  The University of Southern California, among the universities with the largest population of international students, said in a statement that it was ''thrilled that the government backed down and rescinded its rule that would have revoked visas for international students.''
  U.S.C., which led a coalition of 20 universities and colleges on the West Coast that sued the government, said its international students ''deserve the right to continue their education without risk of deportation.''
  After the announcement of the now-rescinded policy this month, international students had begun scrambling to figure out next steps. Some said they booked flights home. Others held out hope that their colleges might add classes with an in-person component to enable them to remain in the United States.
  Willow Cai, a rising junior at U.S.C. who is from China, said she had rushed last week to register for a golf class to ensure she had an in-person class. After hearing the administration had rescinded the new policy, she expressed relief and outrage at the government's initiative.
  ''I'm like really emotional right now. The July 6 directive should never have happened,'' said Ms. Cai, 20, a cinema major. She also said she planned to drop the golf class.
  ''All we want is to continue our education in peace during a global pandemic,'' she said on Tuesday in Los Angeles. ''It seems this administration has no concern for international students beyond our wallets.''
  Alexander Auster, 22, a second-year student at George Washington University Law School from Berlin, had already signed a lease on an apartment for the next academic year when the policy was announced. He had arrived in the United States when he was 17 to join the university's varsity swim team.
  ''It feels really good now,'' he said after hearing that the government had walked back its plan. ''Now I am hopeful and optimistic. I thought I had to go home.''
  An analysis of the government's earlier order by Moody's Analytics found that it could have had a serious economic impact. According to NAFSA: Association of International Educators, three jobs are created for every seven international students. In the 2019-20 school year there were over 1 million international students enrolled in the United States, which would translate to almost half a million jobs. ''ICE's policy would put many of those positions at risk,'' Moody's Analytics said.
  A third of all international students are from China, where travel restrictions could make it hard for them to return, Moody's said.
  College towns are heavily dependent on international students for their economic well-being, and the Partnership for a New American Economy and the American Enterprise Institute estimate that every H-1B visa, a foreign worker visa, leads to two jobs being created.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/14/us/coronavirus-international-foreign-student-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Harvard University last week, after the policy announcement that would have required foreign students to leave the United States if they did not take at least one in-person class. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MADDIE MEYER/GETTY IMAGES) (A6)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FOREIGN STUDENTS (92%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (91%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); DISTANCE LEARNING (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); JUDGES (87%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); EPIDEMICS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ONLINE SCHOOLS (78%); PANDEMICS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIAL MEDIA (78%); TECHNOLOGY (78%); TUITION FEES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); VIRUSES (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); DEPORTATION (72%); LITIGATION (72%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (62%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (50%); GOOGLE LLC (50%)

Organization: HARVARD UNIVERSITY (83%); MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (55%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (50%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); ONLINE SCHOOLS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIAL MEDIA (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%)

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (78%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 15, 2020


End of Document
Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
February 5, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1517 words
Byline: DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NELSON D. SCHWARTZ
Highlight: Tech companies say the H-1B program is needed to find highly skilled employees. But it has also been used to lower labor costs and cut jobs.
Body


Correction Appended
SAN FRANCISCO — The “knowledge transfer sessions” started a few months after Jeff Tan received notice last summer that he and about 80 co-workers would be laid off by the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February.
At daily two-hour meetings with employees from HCL Technologies, an Indian tech services company that had landed the outsourcing contract from U.C.S.F., Mr. Tan trained HCL staff members in India by videoconference and employees brought to the United States on H-1B visas how to do his job.
More than any other industry, tech companies dependon the 85,000 foreign workers allowed into the United States annually under the H-1B visa program. The H-1B is a temporary visa intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. Technology giants like Microsoft and Google have pressed for increases in the annual quotas, saying there are not enough Americans with the skills they need.
But for tech workers like Mr. Tan, the program has had very negative consequences.
“I thought the purpose of H-1B visas was to give America a competitive edge, not help companies ship American jobs abroad,” said Mr. Tan, who had worked for the university as an information technology systems administrator for 20 years. “This is now standard practice in the technology industry.”
The debate over H-1B visas has gained new urgency as employers prepare for President Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program. It is not clear what action Mr. Trump plans to take, but a draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked last week. It included a passage saying options for modifying the H-1B program would be considered to “ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.”
The H-1B program’s critics say the system provides a way for American companies to turn over technology departments to outsourcing companies. These are gaming           the system to snap up the visas so they can replace American workers with less expensive, temporary staff members.
A research report by Goldman Sachs estimates that 900,000 to a million H-1B visa holders now reside in the United States, and that they account for up to 13 percent of American technology jobs.
In 2014, 13 outsourcing firms accounted for one-third of all H-1B visas. They use a loophole in the current first-come, first-served lottery system to flood the applicant pool with their candidates. In many cases, those candidates are paid slightly more than the $60,000-a-year minimum salary required by the program for dependent companies seeking a waiver from having to recruit Americans first — but less than what American technology workers make.
Audrey Hatten-Milholin, 54, was notified in July that she would be laid off from the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February after 17 years in its technology department. Along with eight others, she filed a complaint in November with California’s Department of Fair Employment and Housing, charging that replacing her and others with “significantly younger, male” workers “who will then perform the work overseas” was discriminatory.
“We are at a disadvantage as Americans,” Ms. Hatten-Milholin said. “They look at it like, where can we get it cheaper? And for U.C., it’s not here.”
Proponents of the H-1B system argue that it is an important vehicle to attract top talent to America. After coming to the United States, these visa holders may apply their skills to start new companies or create new, innovative products — leading to more jobs in America.
The debate over who wins and who loses as a result of the H-1B visa program echoes similar discussions of how free trade helps or hurts the economy. While the benefits are spread broadly throughout the economy, the costs are much more concentrated and easy to identify.
In other words, it’s true that cheaper labor helps employers increase profits and grow, and having more skilled workers in the United States contributes to economic innovation. But at the same time, individual American employees do face more salary pressure from newcomers who will work for less. And in some cases, they risk losing their jobs entirely, especially older employees who earn higher salaries.
After 11 years working in the I.T. department of Northeast Utilities, a Connecticut-based company now named Eversource Energy, Craig Diangelo was among 220 employees laid off in 2014. Before leaving the company, he was told he needed to train his replacement if he wanted to receive his severance.
Mr. Diangelo, who is now 64 and was receiving $130,000 a year in salary and bonus, said he trained an employee from the Indian outsourcing firm Infosys who was an H-1B visa holder making $60,000 a year. There was also a team of workers in India making $6,000 a year that shadowed him on the computer.
“The problem,” he said, “is that my job is still there. I went away. The American worker went away.”
A representative of Infosys declined to comment. Al Lara, a spokesman for Eversource Energy, said in a statement: “We made changes to our I.T. department three years ago during a period of transition and change to support the merger of our two companies while under much regulatory scrutiny. We are proud of the new I.T. organization.” Mr. Lara was referring to a merger with NStar in 2012.
In other instances, the jobs are filled only temporarily by H-1B workers — before the outsourcing firm moves the job permanently to a lower-cost country.
“That’s the endgame,” said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing former employees of Walt Disney Company, Abbott Laboratories and other companies in discrimination claims pertaining to tech-job outsourcing.
Some economists are skeptical about the claimed lack of qualified workers, especially anoft-cited 500,000 open positions in technology that cannot be filled.
“I’m sure employers might not have as much choice as they would like, but if the shortage story were true, we’d see wages rising more rapidly than they are,” said Dean Baker, co-director of the liberal Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington. There is substantial unemployment, Mr. Baker said, even among workers in so-called STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) fields.
Lawrence F. Katz, a prominent labor economist at Harvard, said companies like the H-1B visa program because it expands the pool of applicants. That means having to pay less in salary and retaining more control over employees.
“From the point of view of an economist, there are two big winners,” he added. “The workers who come here with H-1B visas and the companies that employ them.”
While it remains to be seen what Mr. Trump will do, various members of Congress have proposed measures to change the H-1B system. One idea is to raise the $60,000-salary threshold for some H-1B workers to $100,000 or more. The hope is that this will narrow the gap between the standard pay for an American tech worker and that of a foreign worker.
Another proposed measure is to change the current first-come, first-served lottery system that is benefiting outsourcing firms. Yet another idea is for a salary bidding system, in which companies bid on what they would be willing to pay an applicant, potentially making it more difficult to flood the applicant pool with lower-cost workers.
According to the University of California, San Francisco, technology costs to run U.C.S.F. Health, which encompasses the university’s hospital, medical center and patient care facilities, have tripled from 2011 to 2016. Outsourcing technology jobs will save the university more than $30 million over the next five years.
But this argument has not spared the university from criticism for outsourcing the jobs because — as a public institution — it receives taxpayer funds and is a nonprofit organization.
The university said neither it nor HCL would replace the laid-off employees with H-1B workers, although it acknowledges that HCL brought in some H-1B workers initially to understand the institution’s technology needs. Those workers, U.C.S.F. said, are no longer working on the account.
Mr. Tan, 55, said he was not worried about returning to the job market in a few weeks and understood why the university took such measures. However, he is concerned about what his children will do when they start looking for work.
“Today it’s me, but tomorrow it’s going to be a doctor or an engineer,” he said. “At what point do you draw the line?”
Correction: February 6, 2017, Monday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated the H-1B program’s minimum salary requirement. The minimum salary is for dependent companies that seek a waiver from having to recruit Americans first, not for all companies hiring H-1B candidates.
PHOTO: Hank Nguyen, Audrey Hatten-Milholin and Margaret Horn lost their jobs at University of California, San Francisco. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)
Related Articles
    • Silicon Valley’s Ambivalence Toward Trump Turns to Anger
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); LAYOFFS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (86%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (74%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); RESEARCH REPORTS (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); BUSINESS REPORTS & FORECASTS (59%); Outsourcing (%); Foreign Workers (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Visas (%); University of California (%); United States (%); HCL Technologies (%)

Ticker: University of California; University of California; HCL Technologies

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); BIG TECH (79%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (74%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: February 7, 2017


End of Document
A Chance to Make U.S.-Australia Ties Shipshape
The New York Times
May 4, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 805 words
Byline: By NOAH REMNICK
Body


Among the many people President Trump has antagonized during his brief yet turbulent time in office, few were quite as surprised to receive his ire as the Australians. Though the United States and Australia have long been allied in war and trade, Mr. Trump abruptly ended a phone call with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull in late January after the Australian leader urged him to honor an agreement to accept 1,250 refugees from an Australian detention center.
Things only soured further when Mr. Trump took to Twitter to excoriate the agreement. ''I will study this dumb deal!'' he declared in a post a few days later. 
  On Thursday, the president will have a chance for reconciliation when he boards the hangar deck of the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum for a dinner commemorating the 75th anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea, in which United States and Australian naval and air forces fought Japan during World War II. The conflict is often remembered as ''the battle that saved Australia.''
  ''There's a deep and broad connection between the two countries that most people don't know enough about,'' said John Berry, a former United States ambassador to Australia and the president of the American Australian Association, which is hosting the event. ''I'm glad we're taking a moment to really celebrate that.''
  The American Australian Association, a little-known yet industrious nonprofit organization with offices in the Financial District of Manhattan, has been working for decades to strengthen relations between the countries. Founded in 1948 by the journalist Keith Murdoch, the association was intended to spark American governmental and business interests in Australia after World War II. Since then, the scope of its ambitions has expanded to include cultural, educational and philanthropic activity. Its Education Fund, for example, has financed the participation of more than 200 fellows in postgraduate study between Australia and the United States since 2002.
  The dinner on Thursday will raise money to start a new fund for veterans. It will also be the first time an American president has met with the association, Mr. Berry said, and the first in-person encounter between Mr. Trump and Mr. Turnbull.
  Perhaps nowhere is that burgeoning cultural kinship more apparent than New York, which has experienced a surge of Australian immigration in recent years. The Australian Consulate now estimates that there are approximately 20,000 Australians in New York; a decade ago, a census survey estimated that there were fewer than 6,000.
  With those immigrants has come a swell of Australian culture in a city already rich with international life. New Yorkers have taken notice. In 2014, the website Gothamist posted an article asking, ''What's the Deal With All These Australians in NYC?'' The upswing, as it noted, can be attributed in part to the E-3 program, a class of visa introduced under President George W. Bush in 2005 exclusively for Australians that is easier and less expensive to obtain than the conventional H-1B work visa. Every year, more than 10,000 E-3 visas are reserved for Australian nationals.
  ''Australians focus not only on work but on vacation and quality of life, so when they come it's for six weeks or six months, not just six days like most tourists,'' Mr. Berry said. ''And if you look around the city, you're starting to see their impact.''
  A healthy collection of Australian bars, restaurants, and clothing stores have taken root in a stretch of NoLIta, around Mulberry Street, that some people call Little Australia. Now, alongside the typical Manhattan fare, Australians can find comfort in the familiar taste of flat whites and chants of ''Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi!'' As time has passed, more and more longtime New Yorkers have also begun to better understand their antipodal counterparts.
  ''Back when we first got here, everyone used to think we were all Crocodile Dundee with kangaroos in our backyards,'' said Tim Sykes, 32, a co-owner of Ruby's Cafe, an Australian restaurant on Mulberry Street. ''But now that we're all over the place, Aussie life is kind of taking hold.''
  The transformation has been evident in at least one crucial way for Mr. Sykes. ''Now you can actually find Vegemite in some restaurants,'' he said.
  Still, that sense of comfort was upended by Mr. Trump's clash with Mr. Turnbull. In late April, Vice President Mike Pence helped smooth over relations when during a visit to Australia, he confirmed the countries' ''strong and historic alliance.''
  Since Mr. Trump's comments, Mr. Sykes said, he and many of his Australian friends have been calling their immigration lawyers, worried that their status might shift. For now, Mr. Sykes is counting on the meeting Thursday to help return a sense of normalcy.
  ''That'd be ripper, mate,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/03/nyregion/trump-malcolm-turnbull-australia-new-york.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia in April. He will meet President Trump in person on Thursday in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICK TSIKAS/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: WORLD WAR II (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); ANNIVERSARIES (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); REFUGEES (77%); TRENDS & EVENTS (77%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (76%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (75%); FUNDRAISING (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); AIR FORCES (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%); CHARITIES (69%); ARMED FORCES (68%); EDUCATION FUNDING (67%); PHILANTHROPY (62%)

Industry: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (75%); AIR FORCES (72%); ARMED FORCES (68%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (68%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); MALCOLM TURNBULL (78%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (93%); PACIFIC OCEAN (73%); AUSTRALIA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: May 4, 2017


End of Document
Foreign Visas, Virus, Seattle: Your Monday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
June 24, 2020 Wednesday 17:43 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1261 words
Byline: Victoria Shannon and Hiroko Masuike
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.) 
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. President Trump will sign an order barring hundreds of thousands of foreign workers from the U.S.
The temporary suspension of work visas, including the H-1B program for high-skilled workers, is described by the administration as part of a broad effort to limit entry into the country during the economic downturn caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
The order is opposed by a swath of businesses — including high-tech companies in Silicon Valley and manufacturers — whose leaders say it will block their ability to recruit workers for jobs that Americans are not willing or capable of performing. Above, Mr. Trump at a White House meeting with governors last week.  
So far, lawmakers and governors have mostly pushed for policies that will ensure Americans can go back to the jobs they held before the pandemic. But some cities and states are looking toward a simpler solution: hire workers directly. 
The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription.
2. The W.H.O. chief said that more than 183,000 new coronavirus cases worldwide were reported in the past 24-hour period, “easily the most in a single day so far.”
Increased testing is not driving the global surge in cases, according to the director of the W.H.O. Health Emergencies Program. Above, testing at a fire station in Tolleson, Ariz.
The U.S., with 4.3 percent of the world’s population, accounted for 20 percent of all the new infections worldwide, according to New York Times data.
New cases continued to surge over the weekend in 22 states, especially in the West and the South. Two more White House staff members tested positive for the virus after attending the president’s campaign rally in Tulsa, Okla., on Saturday. The workers joined six other members of the campaign’s advance team who tested positive before the event.
In New York City, offices were allowed to open and as many as 300,000 people were expected to return to work in person.
3. A night of gunfire in Seattle’s protester-led “autonomous zone” sent another person to the hospital with serious injuries.
On Saturday, shootings left a 19-year-old man dead and another in critical condition.
The zone was declared this month in the wake of clashes between protesters and the police after the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody in Minneapolis.
The sustained outcry over his death has compelled many white Americans to acknowledge anti-black racism in the U.S. Though it is hard to know how deep or wide their response is, some whites admit how little they grasp the experience of being black in America.
From our Opinion pages, charts document just how vast the inequality is between whites and blacks in America.
4. A scaled-back hajj.
Saudi Arabia announced that the hajj, the annual pilgrimage that draws millions of Muslims, will be limited to Saudis and pilgrims already inside the country.
In 2019, 2.49 million pilgrims took part in the hajj, and 1.86 million of them came from abroad. Above, last year’s hajj.
The reduced numbers could strike a big financial blow to a kingdom already reeling from low oil prices and an economic slowdown caused by the coronavirus lockdown.
In Europe, Sweden’s Scandinavian neighbors have all closed their borders to Swedes, fearing the country’s lax approach to combating the coronavirus.
5. Joe Biden is winnowing his list of vice-presidential candidates.
The former vice president says he wants a running mate who is ready to assume the presidency, who shares his priorities and with whom he is “simpatico.” He is aiming to announce his choice by Aug. 1.
We list the 12 women we know to be under consideration and explain why each might be chosen, or might not be.
6. Federal authorities are investigating the noose found in Bubba Wallace’s NASCAR garage.
Officials said they were reviewing whether there had been violations of federal law. The Alabama garage was fitted with surveillance cameras, potentially offering crucial clues.
The episode at the Talladega Superspeedway came less than two weeks after NASCAR, at Mr. Wallace’s urging, banned the Confederate battle flag from its races and properties. Above, Mr. Wallace before today’s NASCAR Cup Series race.
“This will not break me,” Mr. Wallace, the only black driver in NASCAR’s top racing series, said in a statement. “I will not give in, nor will I back down.”
7. The statue of Theodore Roosevelt flanked by a Native American and an African is coming down in New York City amid the nationwide conversation about racism.
For many, the bronze statue outside the American Museum of Natural History symbolized a legacy of colonial expansion and racial discrimination. The museum’s president said the decision was based on the statue and not on Roosevelt, whom the museum continues to honor as “a pioneering conservationist.”
And the Eskimo Pie, the chocolate-covered ice cream treat, will soon be renamed. “We are committed to being a part of the solution on racial equality, and recognize the term is inappropriate,” a spokeswoman for the manufacturer said.
8. The Golden Globes move to February.
Since 1973, the Globes have taken place in January, in part to set the pace for the Academy Awards — or at least to try.
Next year’s event was rescheduled to Feb. 28, the date that the Oscars abandoned last week in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. (The Oscars were rescheduled for April 25.) Tina Fey and Amy Poehler will host the Globes at the Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills, Calif. Above, the duo hosting the awards in 2015. 
In sports, the P.G.A. Championship, once scheduled for May 14 to 17, will proceed without spectators from Aug. 6 to 9 in San Francisco, its original location. The U.S. Open had already been moved to Sept. 17, and the Masters had been postponed to Nov. 12.
9. A come-from-behind victor in the supercomputer wars.
China and the U.S., long locked in a contest to develop the world’s most powerful computers, were just bested by a massive Japanese machine.
A supercomputer called Fugaku, which is in Kobe and run by the government-sponsored institute Riken, took first place in a speed ranking. IBM computers scored second and third, while systems in China moved to the fourth and fifth spots. Above, Fugaku.  
The room-size systems are used for complex military and scientific tasks, including breaking codes, modeling climate change and simulating new designs for cars, weapons, aircraft and drugs. Fugaku is already being used to help study, diagnose and treat Covid-19.
10. And finally, blame the pandemic for extra sharp swings in the price of cheese.
Consumers started buying way more cheese in March and April, but demand from restaurants and schools fell. The resulting swings in supply and demand led to the most price volatility ever in the wholesale cheese market.
This month, as restaurants slowly reopened, the return of demand is pushing cheese prices up and suppliers are trying to ramp up. On Friday, the benchmark cheese price, which affects everything from mozzarella to Parmesan, hit a record high.
Have a mild evening.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Doug Mills/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CORONAVIRUSES (91%); VIRUSES (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EPIDEMICS (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); DEATH & DYING (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (89%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (83%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (78%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PANDEMICS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); TEMPORARY LAYOFFS (77%); GEORGE FLOYD KILLING (75%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (68%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (63%); DEATHS & INJURIES BY POLICE (63%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (63%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (63%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (55%); ECONOMIC NEWS (55%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (55%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); MANUFACTURING (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); GEORGE FLOYD (79%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TULSA, OK, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (71%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2020


End of Document
A Towering To-Do List
The New York Times
November 6, 2008 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3097 words
Byline: By The New York Times
Body


The dismal state of the economy helped decide Tuesday's presidential election. And it almost certainly will dominate the early days of the Obama administration.
  Few presidents have entered office with an economy in such turmoil. Reflecting worries that the worst may not be over, the stock market continues to languish, with a 5 percent decline on Wednesday,  leaving it 35 percent below its peak last fall. 
  The reasons are myriad: the financial system, though back from the brink, remains deeply troubled. Housing may no longer be in free fall, but plummeting values and rising defaults have impoverished many homeowners and burdened states with widening budget deficits. The once-mighty auto industry is on the verge of implosion.
  Consumers who piled up credit card debt are pulling back, a major concern because their spending helped power economic growth in recent years. And with unemployment widely expected to increase to 8 percent or higher, from 6.1 percent, consumers are likely to tighten their belts even more.
  Moreover, with upward of $1 trillion already pledged by the federal government to bail out the banking and housing industries, financing a  growing deficit to address the problems could be difficult  --  and saddle the Treasury Department with high levels of debt for years to come.
  But even before  President-elect Obama takes the oath of office, Democrats are likely to push his agenda with urgency, because the economy otherwise could worsen quickly  --  complicating the task ahead.  ''The cost of allowing an economy to flounder is very high in lost output and rising unemployment,'' said James Glassman, chief domestic economist at JPMorgan Chase & Company.
  Here are some of the crucial  issues that economists say will test the new administration, and how it might address them.
  ECONOMIC STIMULUS
  Obama Is Likely 
  To Act Quickly
  Quick passage of an economic stimulus package is high on Mr. Obama's agenda, even more pressing for the moment than the tax package that he promoted repeatedly during his campaign.
  Congress could act on the stimulus this month -- but only if the president-elect signals that he favors a preinauguration special session, Congressional Democrats said. Legislators would more than likely adopt some relatively inexpensive measures rather than try to pass a much larger outlay that the Bush administration might oppose. After he takes office, Mr. Obama is likely to ask Congress for an additional economic lift, those in his camp say. 
  Before the election, the party leadership in Congress discussed a lame-duck session to take up a bill that would pump $150 billion to $200 billion into the economy. That would follow the $168 billion stimulus, most of it in rebate checks mailed to tens of millions of Americans earlier this year.
  Those checks lifted spending a bit. But they came before the credit crisis struck in force in early September. 
  ''We need a package that matches the problem as it exists today, and in my view that means at least $200 billion a year for a couple of years,'' said a senior member of the House Financial Services Committee staff. 
  As private sector spending dries up, the case builds -- among Republicans as well as Democrats -- for the government to jump-start the economy. 
  ''Right now, the economy is in a really deep recession,'' said Kevin Hassett, director of economic policy studies at the American Enterprise Institute and a senior economic adviser to John McCain. 
  Like many Republicans, he wants the stimulus -- whatever its size -- to be a cut in tax rates, not an increase in public spending. The Obama camp also supports a tax cut, possibly front-loaded so that refund checks would go out before tax returns are filed in April. But that would be enacted after the inauguration. 
  As for immediate relief, Obama aides say, a lame-duck session of Congress could pass a $60 billion package of additional outlays for food stamps, extended unemployment benefits and subsidies to the states to minimize their spending cuts.  
  The big question is ''should the Democrats risk a Bush veto in a lame-duck session,'' said Jared Bernstein, a senior economist at the Economic Policy Institute and an Obama adviser, ''or should they wait for Obama to take office in January to get a more effective recovery package.'' 
  As a candidate, Mr. Obama said he would extend the Bush tax cuts of 2001 and 2003 for families whose income is under $250,000 a year. He pledged to add new tax breaks for homeowners who did not itemize deductions and more breaks for savings accounts, college costs and farming. He said he would change the alternative minimum tax so it did not affect the middle class. 
  To raise revenue, Mr. Obama said he would repeal the Bush tax cuts for people in the top two marginal tax brackets before their scheduled expiration at the end of 2010, and raise taxes on capital gains and dividends.
  His tax plans are reminiscent of Clinton administration policies that increased taxes on the affluent but gave targeted breaks to others. He would also repeal corporate loopholes and retain an estate tax. 
  The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimated that the Obama plans would reduce revenue by as much as $2.9 trillion over a decade. The center said Mr. Obama's incentives could strengthen the labor market, while giving further breaks to ''an already favored group -- seniors.'' LOUIS UCHITELLE  and JACKIE CALMES  
  MORTGAGES
  Getting a Handle
  On Foreclosures
  Mr. Obama has pledged to help hard-pressed homeowners, but he will have to move quickly to forestall a new wave of foreclosures. 
  Some in Congress favor direct mortgage relief, but others worry that the cost  -- on top of the bank bailout  -- will be too expensive.
  Judging by positions laid out in his campaign, Mr. Obama might seek to change personal bankruptcy laws to help people avoid losing their homes, a step that the Bush administration and the mortgage industry have resisted. 
  Like other Democrats, Mr. Obama wants to empower bankruptcy judges to ease the terms of home loans on primary residences. Under current laws, judges are prohibited from reducing the balance on those mortgages but can change loans backed by commercial property or second homes. 
  The shift, proponents say, would help keep millions of people in their homes and ease the broader housing crisis. Many mortgage companies and Wall Street investors, however, might suffer greater losses on the loans and securities backed by them. 
  The Bush administration and many lenders have argued that changing the bankruptcy law would ultimately drive up mortgage rates, worsening the downturn in the housing market. They also argue that it would violate the sanctity of contracts and drive investors away from the mortgage market. 
  But with more comfortable majorities in both houses of Congress, Democrats could move quickly. Republicans in the Senate could try to block a change through a filibuster.
  Mr. Obama has generally supported the $700 billion financial rescue package that Congress and the Bush administration negotiated and approved last month. He also endorsed the move by the Treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson Jr., to redirect $250 billion of that money to recapitalizing the nation's banks.
  But Mr. Obama has not specifically said how he would spend the remainder of the money or whether his administration would acquire loans or securities as Congress initially intended. (The Treasury has made no acquisitions yet and it is unclear if it will do so before the Bush administration leaves office in January.) Mr. Obama has said that the government should help homeowners refinance troubled loans that can be saved.  VIKAS BAJAJ 
  FEDERAL REGULATION
  Tighter Reins
  On Wall Street
  Mr. Obama called for reorganizing the financial regulatory system months before the housing and credit crises spiraled into a debacle. He outlined six principles, but offered few details. 
  He said one major priority would be to consolidate the financial regulatory system. He promised to streamline the alphabet soup of agencies, from the Federal Reserve to the Securities and Exchange Commission, that have enforcement powers. 
  But he has not said which agencies he would eliminate or merge.
  Mr. Obama has also pledged to impose stronger liquidity, capital and disclosure requirements on financial institutions, and to subject unregulated financial businesses -- like hedge funds, mortgage brokers, derivatives traders and credit-rating agencies -- to federal oversight. 
  Mr. Obama promised he would increase penalties for market manipulation and predatory lending, and create a new financial-market oversight commission to review conditions regularly and advise the president and Congress about potential risks. 
  In one of his campaign-ending speeches on Monday, Mr. Obama said, ''The last thing we can afford is four more years where no one in Washington is watching anyone on Wall Street because politicians and lobbyists killed common-sense regulations.'' 
  He returned to that theme on Tuesday night after he clinched the election, signaling that the financial industry should brace itself for a regulatory crackdown. Some Democratic lawmakers already have held hearings on what a new financial regulatory landscape would look like.    JACKIE CALMES
  AUTO INDUSTRY
  In Detroit, No Cash,
  No Credit, No Time
  General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler are rapidly running out of cash in the worst sales market for new vehicles in 15 years. Both G.M. and Ford are expected to announce billions of dollars more in losses for the third quarter on Friday, and the threat of bankruptcy will grow without some form of federal assistance.
  The Bush administration has so far denied G.M., Ford and Chrysler any aid from the $700 billion financial rescue fund or any other new source of assistance. It will, however, pay out the $25 billion in low-interest loans for cleaner cars sooner than had  been promised. 
  The pleas for help from the Big Three are growing louder. ''This is really a severe, severe recession for the U.S. auto industry and something we cannot sustain,'' said Michael DiGiovanni, G.M.'s chief market analyst.
  Mr. Obama has promised to meet soon with the chief executives of the Big Three to discuss adding another $25 billion in aid to the loan program for more fuel-efficient vehicles.
  Democratic leaders in Congress are also considering ways to inject new cash into Detroit as quickly as possible. Michigan's ranking Democrats, Senators Carl Levin and Representative John D. Dingell, will be instrumental in devising any proposed legislation.
  The aid could come in the form of government-backed, low-interest loans, similar to the bailout package for Chrysler in 1979. In addition, the Congress and Mr. Obama could tap the $700 billion financial assistance fund to buy up bad car loans and help automotive lenders get credit flowing to consumers again.
  One potential hurdle for aid, however, is the proposed merger of G.M. and Chrysler, which is majority-owned by the private equity firm Cerberus Capital Management. The deal, if completed, would cost thousands of jobs and has so far found little support in Washington. 
  BILL VLASIC 
  HEALTH CARE
  An Overhaul
  Will Have to Wait
  Democrats' campaign rhetoric aside, few health care analysts expect the new president and Congress to undertake a sweeping overhaul of the health care industry any time soon. 
  The more pressing needs of a faltering economy make it unlikely that big changes in health care can quickly make their way to the top of the new agenda. But analysts say the newly empowered Democrats are likely to abandon some of the health care positions staked out by the Bush administration, particularly when it comes to Medicare. 
  Private insurers' role in Medicare ''is target No. 1 for Democrats,'' said Robert Laszewski, the president of Health Policy and Strategy Associates, a consulting firm in Alexandria, Va.
  Under the privatization approach of the Bush White House, commercial insurers now provide coverage to about a quarter of the nation's 44 million Medicare enrollees -- at a cost to the Medicare program of about 15 percent more than when the government provides the benefits directly. With the threat of a Bush veto removed, Congress will now be looking to shrink or end those industry subsidies to save Medicare money, Mr. Laszewski said. 
  The president-elect and the Democratic Congress also are likely to give Medicare the power to directly negotiate with pharmaceutical companies -- a change that the Bush administration has resisted  --  though the impact on prices would depend on the authority Congress grants. 
  Analysts also expect the Democrats to seek closer scrutiny of the drug industry through the Food and Drug Administration, an agency that has been stretched thin in recent years. 
  And many analysts expect Congress to take some steps to address the increasing cost of medical care. High on the list might be covering more children under the federally subsidized State Children's Health Insurance Program. Congress might also try some relatively inexpensive other changes, like pushing harder for the adoption of electronic health records or requiring hospitals and doctors to report publicly both the cost and the outcomes of their care, to enable patients to comparison-shop. 
  REED ABELSON  
  TECHNOLOGY
  To Shape Policy, 
  A Cabinet Voice
  Technology companies have long argued that they need the best and brightest engineers if they are going to compete in the global economy. President-elect Obama has endorsed the industry's call for raising the number of H-1B temporary work visas, which are available now to only 65,000 skilled foreign engineers each year. (The visas are all claimed within minutes.)
  But even with a sympathetic ear in the White House, getting Congress to agree to more visas could present a major challenge given the probability that, in a recession, public sentiment will be heightened that foreigners are taking Americans' jobs.
  In the meantime, the tech industry -- which has grown much more politically active in recent years -- will greet the new president with a list of other wishes. One is that he push policies to spread high-speed Internet access, which provides a conduit for e-commerce, online advertising and other Web-centric business models. The industry argues that the United States has fallen to 16th in the world in terms of broadband penetration, frustrating consumers with a lack of services -- like the high-speed downloading of movies -- and the still-choppy performance of their Internet connections.
  The industry also hopes Mr. Obama will stand behind his stated support of ''net neutrality,'' which is a government requirement that telecommunications companies provide Internet content providers equal access to delivery lines.  
  Such tech policy could fall to a chief technology officer, a cabinet position the president-elect has pledged to create. MATT RICHTEL 
  ENERGY
  An Agenda Faces
  Possible Delays
  An Obama presidency could mean a sharp shift in the nation's energy policies, with particular emphasis on conservation and renewable power. But some of the candidate's bolder proposals, like a global warming bill, may have to wait for the economy to recover, according to analysts and energy experts.
  High energy costs and concerns about global warming have heightened the sense of urgency for a broad policy that tackles both the nation's oil use and its energy-related carbon emissions. As a candidate, Mr. Obama shifted from his initial opposition to expanding offshore drilling, but his core message remained that the United States should reduce its oil consumption, encourage energy conservation and efficiency, and develop low-carbon forms of energy.
  ''There is an opportunity to address energy needs in a way that hasn't been possible for decades,'' said Daniel Yergin, the chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates. ''It almost feels like we're picking up from where we were in the 1970s.''
  But, he added, ''resources are going to be constrained, and spending on energy will have to compete for dollars with spending on the financial crisis and two wars.''
  The Obama energy plan called for investing $150 billion in clean energy technologies over the next 10 years, creating green jobs and ensuring that a growing share of the country's electricity came from renewable sources. He also proposed an aggressive mandate over the next four decades to cut greenhouse gas emissions, which cause global warming. 
  Given the size of the Democratic majority, an Obama administration is also likely to impose stricter environmental regulations and place higher taxes on oil companies than the Bush administration did. JAD MOUAWAD
  TRADE
  Cooperation Fades,
  Protectionism Rises
  What consensus there was on international trade seemed to evaporate with the failure of world trade talks this summer. Indeed, with the world on the brink of a global recession, led by the United States and Europe, the fear of a rise in protectionism grows.
  The first test of sustaining international cooperation will come on Nov. 14 and 15, long before  Mr.  Obama takes office. Leaders from 20 major countries will gather in Washington with President Bush to embark on an effort to rewrite international financial regulations -- an undertaking some liken to a latter-day Bretton Woods conference. 
  Whether or not he attends, Mr. Obama will cast a long shadow. 
  In short order, the recession and a likely spike in unemployment are sure to put him under pressure from union supporters, as well as Congressional Democrats, to take a tougher line on trade.
  ''China is the issue that should be part of Obama's trade policy right away,'' said Thea M. Lee, the chief economist of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. ''Part of it is sending a strong message to the Chinese government that the U.S. is not willing to tolerate currency manipulation and violation of workers' rights.''
  But China's economy is slowing, making its leaders even less receptive to demands to allow their currency to rise. The United States will also need the Chinese to buy a good chunk of the debt being run up by the bailout of banks and housing.
  It is also unclear whether Mr. Obama will pursue a renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which he discussed in the hard-fought primaries. 
  ''He parsed his answers in a way that suggests he understands the importance of global trade,'' said Hank Cox, a spokesman for the National Association of Manufacturers. MARK LANDLER 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: As he indicated during the campaign, Mr. Obama might seek to change personal bankruptcy laws to help people avoid losing their homes.
President-elect Obama has encouraged the development of low-carbon forms of energy, like wind, solar and nuclear power.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN LOK/THE SEATTLE TIMES, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)
The problems of the cash-poor Big Three automakers are too pressing to wait for the new administration to take over.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE GROLL/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Few analysts expect the new president and Congress to try to overhaul the health care industry any time soon.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID ZALUBOWSKI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(pg. B5)  DRAWING                                                                                
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); CONSUMERS (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (89%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); SALES REBATES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); BAILOUTS (78%); CREDIT CRISIS (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (78%); ECONOMICS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (78%); POLITICS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); HOMEOWNERS (76%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (72%); TAX LAW (61%); BANK FAILURES (52%)

Company:  JPMORGAN CHASE & CO (84%)

Ticker: JPM (NYSE) (84%); JPM (LSE) (84%)

Industry: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (84%); NAICS523999 MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES (84%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (84%); SIC6022 STATE COMMERCIAL BANKS (84%); SALES REBATES (89%); BUDGETS (78%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); REAL ESTATE (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); PERSONAL DEBT (75%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (72%); AUTOMOTIVE (69%); BUDGET DEFICITS (69%); CREDIT CARDS (69%); BANK FAILURES (52%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (89%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: November 6, 2008


End of Document
U.S. Rescinds Plan to Strip Visas From International Students in Online Classes
The New York Times 
July 16, 2020 Thursday 08:30 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1535 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Anemona Hartocollis
Highlight: The Trump administration said it would no longer require foreign students to attend in-person classes during the coronavirus pandemic in order to remain in the country.
Body


The Trump administration said it would no longer require foreign students to attend in-person classes during the coronavirus pandemic in order to remain in the country.
In a rare and swift immigration policy reversal, the Trump administration on Tuesday bowed to snowballing opposition from universities, Silicon Valley and 20 states and abandoned a plan to strip international college students of their visas if they did not attend at least some classes in person.
The policy, which would have subjected foreign students to deportation if they did not show up for class on campus, had thrown the higher education world into turmoil at a time when universities are grappling with whether to reopen campuses during the coronavirus pandemic.
The loss of international students could have cost universities millions of dollars in tuition and jeopardized the ability of U.S. companies to hire the highly skilled workers who often start their careers with an American education.
Two days after the policy was announced on July 6, Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology filed the first of a litany of lawsuits seeking to block it.
On Tuesday, minutes before a federal judge in Boston was to hear arguments on their challenge, the judge, Allison D. Burroughs, announced that the administration had agreed to rescind the policy and allow international students to remain in the country even if they are taking all their classes online.
The government has argued that the requirement that students take at least one in-person class was actually more lenient than the rule that had been in effect for close to 20 years which required foreign students to take most of their classes in person.
But that rule was temporarily suspended on March 13, when Mr. Trump declared a national emergency and campuses across the country began shutting down, with classes moving online. On July 6, the government made its announcement that foreign students could not remain in the United States if their studies were entirely online.
“If they’re not going to be a student or they’re going to be 100 percent online, then they don’t have a basis to be here,” Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, the acting deputy secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, said in an interview on CNN after the policy was announced. “They should go home, and then they can return when the school opens.”
Each year, about 1 million international students enroll in American universities. They contribute $41 billion to the economy annually and support more than 458,000 jobs.
In addition to Harvard and M.I.T., the attorneys general of 20 states, including Massachusetts and California, also sued, charging that the policy was reckless, cruel and senseless. Scores of universities threw their support behind the litigation, along with organizations representing international students.
The pressure grew on Monday, when more than a dozen technology companies, including Google, Facebook and Twitter, also came out in support of the lawsuit, arguing that the policy would harm their businesses. Then on Tuesday, 15 Republican members of Congress signed a letter urging the Trump administration to restore its previous policy on international students.
Representative Rodney Davis, an Illinois Republican who had organized the letter, applauded the Trump administration’s “right decision” to cancel its plan. “These hardworking students are the best and brightest from their countries, and they help our communities grow both culturally and economically,” he said.
The policy about foreign students was one of a number of measures President Trump has taken to advance his agenda on immigration, using the coronavirus pandemic and the need to protect the country from health threats as justification.
The administration has also stopped processing green cards for applicants abroad; closed the southwestern border to nonessential travel, allowing only Americans and legal permanent residents to enter while barring asylum seekers; and banned the entry of thousands of foreigners on work visas.
The universities said in their court challenge to the latest policy that “by all appearances,” the government’s attempt to force international students to study on campus had also been a political move, calculated to advance the Trump administration’s agenda to force universities to reopen their gates with in-person classes.
They said forcing students to return to their home countries would in many cases separate them from families in the United States, returning them to places where they no longer had a home. In some cases, they would be living under the thumb of repressive regimes, which policed or restricted internet access.
Many international students from Asian countries would have to contend with a time difference that would mean taking classes between 2 a.m. and 7 a.m., if they had internet access.
Foreign students attending elementary, middle and high schools on visas would have also had to depart the country if their classes went 100 percent online.
In court filings, universities said that some arriving students already had been barred from entering the country by immigration officials at airports who told them that their institutions were going online.
After the announcement on Tuesday that the policy had been rescinded, university officials praised the decision and warned that they would be prepared to go back to court should the administration make any further moves to restrict the ability of international students to study online when necessary.
“This is a significant victory,” Harvard’s president, Lawrence S. Bacow, said in a statement. “The directive had disrupted all of American higher education. I have heard from countless international students who said that the July 6 directive had put them at serious risk. These students — our students — can now rest easier and focus on their education, which is all they ever wanted to do.”
L. Rafael Reif, president of M.I.T., said the swift opposition was evidence of “the important role international students play in our education, research and innovation enterprises here in the United States. These students make us stronger, and we hurt ourselves when we alienate them.”
The University of Southern California, among the universities with the largest population of international students, said in a statement that it was “thrilled that the government backed down and rescinded its rule that would have revoked visas for international students.”
U.S.C., which led a coalition of 20 universities and colleges on the West Coast that sued the government, said its international students “deserve the right to continue their education without risk of deportation.”
After the announcement of the now-rescinded policy this month, international students had begun scrambling to figure out next steps. Some said they booked flights home. Others held out hope that their colleges might add classes with an in-person component to enable them to remain in the United States.
Willow Cai, a rising junior at U.S.C. who is from China, said she had rushed last week to register for a golf class to ensure she had an in-person class. After hearing the administration had rescinded the new policy, she expressed relief and outrage at the government’s initiative.
“I’m like really emotional right now. The July 6 directive should never have happened,” said Ms. Cai, 20, a cinema major. She also said she planned to drop the golf class.
“All we want is to continue our education in peace during a global pandemic,” she said on Tuesday in Los Angeles. “It seems this administration has no concern for international students beyond our wallets.”
Alexander Auster, 22, a second-year student at George Washington University Law School from Berlin, had already signed a lease on an apartment for the next academic year when the policy was announced. He had arrived in the United States when he was 17 to join the university’s varsity swim team.
“It feels really good now,” he said after hearing that the government had walked back its plan. “Now I am hopeful and optimistic. I thought I had to go home.”
An analysis of the government’s earlier order by Moody’s Analytics found that it could have had a serious economic impact. According to NAFSA: Association of International Educators, three jobs are created for every seven international students. In the 2019-20 school year there were over 1 million international students enrolled in the United States, which would translate to almost half a million jobs. “ICE’s policy would put many of those positions at risk,” Moody’s Analytics said.
A third of all international students are from China, where travel restrictions could make it hard for them to return, Moody’s said.
College towns are heavily dependent on international students for their economic well-being, and the Partnership for a New American Economy and the American Enterprise Institute estimate that every H-1B visa, a foreign worker visa, leads to two jobs being created.
PHOTO: Harvard University last week, after the policy announcement that would have required foreign students to leave the United States if they did not take at least one in-person class. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MADDIE MEYER/GETTY IMAGES) (A6)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (95%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (93%); EPIDEMICS (92%); CORONAVIRUSES (91%); VIRUSES (91%); DISTANCE LEARNING (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PANDEMICS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); VIRTUAL EVENTS (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); JUDGES (89%); LITIGATION (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ONLINE SCHOOLS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); TUITION FEES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); SOCIAL MEDIA (77%); TECHNOLOGY (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (62%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Colleges and Universities (%); Suits and Litigation (Civil) (%); Harvard University (%); Immigration and Customs Enforcement (US) (%); Massachusetts Institute of Technology (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); E-Learning (%); Visas (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Organization: HARVARD UNIVERSITY (83%); MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (82%)

Industry: COLLEGE STUDENTS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); ONLINE SCHOOLS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIAL MEDIA (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%)

Person: Trump, Donald J

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 16, 2020


End of Document
Some Tech Workers See Visas as Threat
The New York Times
February 6, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1435 words
Byline: By DAISUKE WAKABAYASHI and NELSON D. SCHWARTZ
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- The ''knowledge transfer sessions'' started a few months after Jeff Tan received notice last summer that he and about 80 co-workers would be laid off by the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February.
At daily two-hour meetings with employees from HCL Technologies, an Indian tech services company that had landed the outsourcing contract from U.C.S.F., Mr. Tan trained HCL staff members in India by videoconference and employees brought to the United States on H-1B visas how to do his job. 
  More than any other industry, tech companies depend on the 85,000 foreign workers allowed into the United States annually under the H-1B visa program. The H-1B is a temporary visa intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. Technology giants like Microsoft and Google have pressed for increases in the annual quotas, saying there are not enough Americans with the skills they need.
  But for tech workers like Mr. Tan, the program has had very negative consequences.
  ''I thought the purpose of H-1B visas was to give America a competitive edge, not help companies ship American jobs abroad,'' said Mr. Tan, who had worked for the university as an information technology systems administrator for 20 years. ''This is now standard practice in the technology industry.''
  The debate over H-1B visas has gained new urgency as employers prepare for President Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program. It is not clear what action Mr. Trump plans to take, but a draft of a proposed executive order on the matter was leaked last week. It included a passage saying options for modifying the H-1B program would be considered to ''ensure that beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.''
  The H-1B program's critics say the system provides a way for American companies to turn over technology departments to outsourcing companies. These are gaming the system to snap up the visas so they can replace American workers with less expensive, temporary staff members.
  A research report by Goldman Sachs estimates that 900,000 to a million H-1B visa holders now reside in the United States, and that they account for up to 13 percent of American technology jobs.
  In 2014, 13 outsourcing firms accounted for one-third of all H-1B visas. They use a loophole in the current first-come, first-served lottery system to flood the applicant pool with their candidates. In many cases, those candidates are paid slightly more than the $60,000-a-year minimum salary required by the program for dependent companies seeking a waiver from having to recruit Americans first -- but less than what American technology workers make.
  Audrey Hatten-Milholin, 54, was notified in July that she would be laid off from the University of California, San Francisco, at the end of February after 17 years in its technology department. Along with eight others, she filed a complaint in November with California's Department of Fair Employment and Housing, charging that replacing her and others with ''significantly younger, male'' workers ''who will then perform the work overseas'' was discriminatory.
  ''We are at a disadvantage as Americans,'' Ms. Hatten-Milholin said. ''They look at it like, where can we get it cheaper? And for U.C., it's not here.''
  Proponents of the H-1B system argue that it is an important vehicle to attract top talent to America. After coming to the United States, these visa holders may apply their skills to start new companies or create new, innovative products -- leading to more jobs in America.
  The debate over who wins and who loses as a result of the H-1B visa program echoes similar discussions of how free trade helps or hurts the economy. While the benefits are spread broadly throughout the economy, the costs are much more concentrated and easy to identify.
  In other words, it's true that cheaper labor helps employers increase profits and grow, and having more skilled workers in the United States contributes to economic innovation. But at the same time, individual American employees do face more salary pressure from newcomers who will work for less. And in some cases, they risk losing their jobs entirely, especially older employees who earn higher salaries.
  After 11 years working in the I.T. department of Northeast Utilities, a Connecticut-based company now named Eversource Energy, Craig Diangelo was among 220 employees laid off in 2014. Before leaving the company, he was told he needed to train his replacement if he wanted to receive his severance.
  Mr. Diangelo, who is now 64 and was receiving $130,000 a year in salary and bonus, said he trained an employee from the Indian outsourcing firm Infosys who was an H-1B visa holder making $60,000 a year. There was also a team of workers in India making $6,000 a year that shadowed him on the computer.
  ''The problem,'' he said, ''is that my job is still there. I went away. The American worker went away.''
  A representative of Infosys declined to comment. Al Lara, a spokesman for Eversource Energy, said in a statement: ''We made changes to our I.T. department three years ago during a period of transition and change to support the merger of our two companies while under much regulatory scrutiny. We are proud of the new I.T. organization.'' Mr. Lara was referring to a merger with NStar in 2012.
  In other instances, the jobs are filled only temporarily by H-1B workers -- before the outsourcing firm moves the job permanently to a lower-cost country.
  ''That's the endgame,'' said Sara Blackwell, a lawyer representing former employees of Walt Disney Company, Abbott Laboratories and other companies in discrimination claims pertaining to tech-job outsourcing.
  Some economists are skeptical about the claimed lack of qualified workers, especially an oft-cited 500,000 open positions in technology that cannot be filled.
  ''I'm sure employers might not have as much choice as they would like, but if the shortage story were true, we'd see wages rising more rapidly than they are,'' said Dean Baker, co-director of the liberal Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington. There is substantial unemployment, Mr. Baker said, even among workers in so-called STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) fields.
  Lawrence F. Katz, a prominent labor economist at Harvard, said companies like the H-1B visa program because it expands the pool of applicants. That means having to pay less in salary and retaining more control over employees.
  ''From the point of view of an economist, there are two big winners,'' he added. ''The workers who come here with H-1B visas and the companies that employ them.''
  While it remains to be seen what Mr. Trump will do, various members of Congress have proposed measures to change the H-1B system. One idea is to raise the minimum salary the $60,000-salary threshold for some H-1B workers to $100,000 or more. The hope is that this will narrow the gap between the standard pay for an American tech worker and that of a foreign worker.
  Another proposed measure is to change the current first-come, first-served lottery system that is benefiting outsourcing firms. Yet another idea is for a salary bidding system, in which companies bid on what they would be willing to pay an applicant, potentially making it more difficult to flood the applicant pool with lower-cost workers.
  According to the University of California, San Francisco, technology costs to run U.C.S.F. Health, which encompasses the university's hospital, medical center and patient care facilities, have tripled from 2011 to 2016. Outsourcing technology jobs will save the university more than $30 million over the next five years.
  But this argument has not spared the university from criticism for outsourcing the jobs because -- as a public institution -- it receives taxpayer funds and is a nonprofit organization.
  The university said neither it nor HCL would replace the laid-off employees with H-1B workers, although it acknowledges that HCL brought in some H-1B workers initially to understand the institution's technology needs. Those workers, U.C.S.F. said, are no longer working on the account.
  Mr. Tan, 55, said he was not worried about returning to the job market in a few weeks and understood why the university took such measures. However, he is concerned about what his children will do when they start looking for work.
  ''Today it's me, but tomorrow it's going to be a doctor or an engineer,'' he said. ''At what point do you draw the line?''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/05/business/h-1b-visa-tech-cheers-for-foreign-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Hank Nguyen, Audrey Hatten-Milholin and Margaret Horn lost their jobs at University of California, San Francisco. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B4)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); LAYOFFS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (86%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (72%); RESEARCH REPORTS (68%); BUSINESS REPORTS & FORECASTS (58%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (83%);  TECHNICAL SERVICES CO LTD (72%);  GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC (53%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (84%)

Ticker: GS (NYSE) (53%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (83%); SIC5063 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS & EQUIPMENT (72%); NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (53%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (53%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (53%); SIC6289 SERVICES ALLIED WITH THE EXCHANGE OF SECURITIES OR COMMODITIES, NEC (53%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (53%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (53%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); BIG TECH (78%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (73%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: February 6, 2017


End of Document
A U.S. Hiring Plan Falls Short of Reform; Editorial
The New York Times 
May 5, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 492 words
Byline: THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Highlight: A giant Indian staffing firm will hire 10,000 American tech workers. But major changes are still needed in the visa it usually uses to import workers.
Body


Infosys, the giant Indian company that supplies American businesses with foreign technology workers, has announced that it will hire 10,000 Americans in the United States in the next two years. This might seem like an early victory in President Trump’s “           Hire American” campaign, but it’s less of a cause for celebration than it appears.
Mr. Trump has condemned the loss of Americans’ jobs to foreign replacements. And Infosys has been one of the biggest users of H-1B visas — intended for specially talented foreigners — to bring in cheaper labor to fill American jobs or replace Americans, often in entry-level positions.
But individual corporate measures like Infosys’ hiring of Americans, no matter how headline-grabbing, are no substitute for true reform to eliminate systemic abuses. Worse, by creating the appearance of change, they may actually entrench those problems. Rather than say what he wants to see changed about a system he has pilloried, Mr. Trump has simply told executive agencies to recommend reforms in the H-1B program.
Infosys is, in effect, getting out in front of presidential criticism of outsourcing in a way that makes Mr. Trump’s plan appear effective — even though no real reforms have been broached. The situation is akin to what happened last year at Carrier, when the company blunted criticism from Mr. Trump, then the president-elect, by keeping 800 jobs in the United States rather than offshoring them to Mexico as planned. The workers were happy and Mr. Trump declared victory. But the populist appeal of the deal has far outweighed its practical effect, not just because that deal involved only one plant, but because the Trump administration has shown no interest in or aptitude for addressing the underlying trends in technology, anti-unionism and public policy that undermine blue-collar jobs.
Similarly, the Infosys pledge to hire 10,000 American workers pales in comparison to roughly 85,000 H-1B visas that are granted each year — and the hundreds of thousands of jobs that could go to Americans over the years if the H-1B system were reformed. Will Mr. Trump follow through? If recent history is any guide, the answer is no.
A fair H-1B system would require companies seeking foreign workers to prove that they have actively tried and failed to find American workers with the requisite skills. It would require higher wages for H-1B workers to ensure that they cannot be used as cheaper substitute labor. It would also include an enforcement system of random audits and steep penalties for noncompliance. Most important — and most unlikely given the demonstrated corporate-friendly bias of the Trump administration — the rules would apply to American companies like Facebook and Qualcomm that use H-1B visas, as well as to foreign staffing firms.
The United States needs comprehensive reform of the H-1B system more than it needs Infosys’ pledge of 10,000 new jobs. It also needs a president who understands that.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (93%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POPULISM (79%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (78%); LAYOFFS (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); OFFSHORING (75%); NEGATIVE NEWS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); TECHNOLOGY TRENDS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (59%); Foreign Workers (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Visas (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Infosys Technologies Ltd (%)

Ticker: Infosys Technologies Ltd

Industry: EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (99%)

Load-Date: May 7, 2017


End of Document
The Open-Door Bailout
The New York Times
February 11, 2009 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 830 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Dateline: Bangalore, India 
Body


  Leave it to a brainy Indian to come up with the cheapest and surest way to stimulate our economy: immigration. 
  ''All you need to do is grant visas to two million Indians, Chinese and Koreans,'' said Shekhar Gupta, editor of The Indian Express newspaper. ''We will buy up all the subprime homes. We will work 18 hours a day to pay for them. We will immediately improve your savings rate  --  no Indian bank today has more than 2 percent nonperforming loans because not paying your mortgage is considered shameful here. And we will start new companies to create our own jobs and jobs for more Americans.'' 
  While his tongue was slightly in cheek, Gupta and many other Indian business people I spoke to this week were trying to make a point that sometimes non-Americans can make best: ''Dear America, please remember how you got to be the wealthiest country in history. It wasn't through protectionism, or state-owned banks or fearing free trade. No, the formula was very simple: build this really flexible, really open economy, tolerate creative destruction so dead capital is quickly redeployed to better ideas and companies, pour into it the most diverse, smart and energetic immigrants from every corner of the world and then stir and repeat, stir and repeat, stir and repeat, stir and repeat.'' 
  While I think President Obama has been doing his best to keep the worst protectionist impulses in Congress out of his stimulus plan, the U.S. Senate unfortunately voted on Feb. 6 to restrict banks and other financial institutions that receive taxpayer bailout money from hiring high-skilled immigrants on temporary work permits known as H-1B visas.
  Bad signal. In an age when attracting the first-round intellectual draft choices from around the world is the most important competitive advantage a knowledge economy can have, why would we add barriers against such brainpower  --  anywhere? That's called ''Old Europe.'' That's spelled: S-T-U-P-I-D.
  ''If you do this, it will be one of the best things for India and one of the worst for Americans, [because] Indians will be forced to innovate at home,'' said Subhash B. Dhar, a member of the executive council that runs Infosys, the well-known Indian technology company that sends Indian workers to the U.S. to support a wide range of firms. ''We protected our jobs for many years and look where it got us. Do you know that for an Indian company, it is still easier to do business with a company in the U.S. than it is to do business today with another Indian state?'' 
  Each Indian state tries to protect its little economy with its own rules. America should not be trying to copy that. ''Your attitude,'' said Dhar, should be '' 'whoever can make us competitive and dominant, let's bring them in.' ''
  If there is one thing we know for absolute certain, it's this: Protectionism did not cause the Great Depression, but it sure helped to make it ''Great.'' From 1929 to 1934, world trade plunged by more than 60 percent  --  and we were all worse off.
  We live in a technological age where every study shows that the more knowledge you have as a worker and the more knowledge workers you have as an economy, the faster your incomes will rise. Therefore, the centerpiece of our stimulus, the core driving principle, should be to stimulate everything that makes us smarter and attracts more smart people to our shores. That is the best way to create good jobs.
  According to research by Vivek Wadhwa, a senior research associate at the Labor and Worklife Program at Harvard Law School, more than half of Silicon Valley start-ups were founded by immigrants over the last decade. These immigrant-founded tech companies employed 450,000 workers and had sales of $52 billion in 2005, said Wadhwa in an essay published this week on BusinessWeek.com. 
  He also cited a recent study by William R. Kerr of Harvard Business School and William F. Lincoln of the University of Michigan that ''found that in periods when H-1B visa numbers went down, so did patent applications filed by immigrants [in the U.S.]. And when H-1B visa numbers went up, patent applications followed suit.''
  We don't want to come out of this crisis with just inflation, a mountain of debt and more shovel-ready jobs. We want to -- we have to --  come out of it with a new Intel, Google, Microsoft and Apple. I would have loved to have seen the stimulus package include a government-funded venture capital bank to help finance all the start-ups that are clearly not starting up today  --  in the clean-energy space they're dying like flies  --  because of a lack of liquidity from traditional lending sources.
  Newsweek had an essay this week that began: ''Could Silicon Valley become another Detroit?'' Well, yes, it could. When the best brains in the world are on sale, you don't shut them out. You open your doors wider. We need to attack this financial crisis with green cards not just greenbacks, and with start-ups not just bailouts. One Detroit is enough. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BAILOUTS (90%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PROTECTIONISM (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); NEW BUSINESSES (78%); NEW ECONOMY (78%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (78%); US CONGRESS (74%); STATE OWNED BUSINESSES (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (71%); JOB CREATION (69%); US PRESIDENTS (64%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (51%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (51%); INFY (NYSE) (51%); INFY (NSE) (51%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (51%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (51%); BANKING INSTITUTIONS & SYSTEMS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); BANKING & FINANCE (75%); NON-PERFORMING LOANS (75%); SUBPRIME LENDING (71%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (50%)

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (94%)

Load-Date: February 11, 2009


End of Document
Trump Cracks Down on Visas. Indian Firms May Benefit.
The New York Times 
October 2, 2020 Friday 23:10 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1540 words
Byline: Maria Abi-Habib and Karan Deep Singh
Highlight: As the president clashes with the courts, some companies and investors say tougher limits on temporary work visas will help push jobs overseas.
Body


As the president clashes with the courts, some companies and investors say tougher limits on temporary work visas will help push jobs overseas.
When President Trump suspended a raft of visaprograms in June, including temporary permits for highly technical foreign workers known as H-1B visas, he portrayed the order as a victory for the American work force. Further overhauls were in the works, he said weeks later, “so that no American worker is replaced ever again.”
The order is now in front of the courts, after a judge on Thursday blocked the order and ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority. The move will allow some companies, like Microsoft and Exxon Mobil, to bring temporary workers into the United States again. The issue will now go to an appeals court, which may rule in favor of Mr. Trump’s sweeping order.
But the fate of the program still remains in doubt. The Department of Homeland Security has submitted a new regulation for federal review that would toughen H-1B eligibility and impose new obligations on the companies trying to bring in foreign workers.
The uncertainty has thrown the plans of major companies in doubt and has already disrupted the lives of thousands of foreign workers, particularly those from India, who claim more than two-thirds of the H-1B visas issued each year.
The confusion might all be in vain, however. Experts say restrictions will do little to accomplish their stated goal of encouraging companies to hire Americans instead of workers from abroad. In fact, limits on H-1B visas may have the unintended effect of spurring American companies to shift even more work abroad.
Already, Indian outsourcing companies are working to cast the new restrictions as an opportunity to do just that.
“In America, there is a genius mix of homegrown and transplanted talent. The high level of global competition gives America its tech edge,” said Sandeep Kishore, the chief executive officer of Zensar Technologies, an Indian firm that employs more than 9,500 people globally.
More than 400 are on work visas in Zensar’s offices in the United States, he said, but more work could drift to India if companies cannot hire who they want.
The United States “risks giving up its edge,” Mr. Kishore said. “If we can’t bring this talent into the U.S., we’ll place them in our offices overseas.”
The pandemic, which has forced millions to work from home, could reinforce the idea that more American jobs can be done remotely.
The June suspension did not affect the foreign workers already in the United States on H-1B visas. But it upended the lives of those who were outside the country when the president issued his suspension.
Sonal Thakkar, a lead consultant at an Indian information technology firm in San Jose, Calif., rushed back to India last year to apply for an extension of her visa.
In March, her visa interview was canceled after India’s government imposed a nationwide lockdown to stop the coronavirus. Then, Mr. Trump’s suspension came.
This week, Ms. Thakkar received an email from the office of the U.S. Consulate General in Mumbai, saying her visa application had been “refused” and sent for “mandatory administrative processing.” It’s a process that could take months and she fears she could still be denied a visa after that.
Now, Ms. Thakkar is not sure when she can return to the United States and her husband, who is still in San Jose on an H-1B visa.
“I can’t sleep at night,” she said. “We’ve been together for six years. I am losing so many memories and I’m unable to create new ones.”
An executive at Infosys, one of India’s biggest technology companies, said in a LinkedIn post that it arranged a chartered flight to bring back more than 200 workers and their families to India, after their American visas expired. The company declined to comment.
Even before Mr. Trump’s election, limiting the H-1B program had won some bipartisan support. The program allows companies to bring in well-educated or technically skilled workers from abroad temporarily. About 65,000 candidates are selected each year by lottery. The workers can bring their families, but they must apply for green cards separately if they want to remain in the United States once their work ends.
Some labor groups say companies use the program to bring in cheap labor. Often, they say, H-1B visa holders are not stars in their fields but hold skills that can be easily found domestically.
“There are very few people in this world who are truly innovative, and our economy depends on them,” said Russell Harrison, the director of government relations for the IEEE-USA, an association representing more than 170,000 technology professionals that supports H-1B restrictions.
Sensitive to the criticism, Indian outsourcing companies have long stressed plans to hire in the United States. In early September, Infosys announced it would hire 12,000 more Americans over the next two years.
Indian outsourcing companies dominated the H-1B lottery a decade ago, but sponsors now include some of the biggest names in American technology. Seven of the top 10 sponsors last year were American, including Amazon and Google, according to official citizenship data. About 15 percent of Facebook’s employees are H-1B holders.
If the government considerably limits the number of H-1B workers they can bring in, companies may send the work overseas instead.
“The work will go to India more because there is an abundance of high-quality college-educated tech labor in India,” said William Lazonick, an economist and professor emeritus at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business. “It is obviously an advantage if that higher-quality labor force is less expensive to employ than workers in the company’s home country.”
Research is scant, but at least one study has found that limits on H-1B visas lead to more hiring overseas. The study, by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, compared periods of tightened H-1B restrictions with hiring by major firms and found greater hiring in places like China and India, which have a large pool of skilled workers, and Canada, which has looser immigration policies.
Like industries around the globe, the outsourcing business took a substantial hit during the coronavirus pandemic. The troubles were particularly acute in India, where many workers lack the equipment or the internet connections to work from home.
Tech companies struggled to source hundreds of thousands of laptops in the early weeks of the pandemic. They sent desktop computers to workers’ homes and enabled firewalls to fend off cyberattacks.
At Tata Consultancy Services, India’s largest information technology firm with more than 400,000 workers globally, these responsibilities fell on the shoulders of Amit Jain, the global head of I.T. infrastructure, based in Mumbai.
Mr. Jain, who worked at the company for 32 years, died in March after suffering a heart attack.
“He was overworked and extremely exhausted,” said his brother, Mukul Jain. “He told me he hadn’t slept in two to three days because he was helping employees in India, Europe and the U.S. to work from home.”
T.C.S. declined to comment about Mr. Jain’s death. A public relations firm that represents the company said that about 95 percent of T.C.S. employees were now working remotely.
Now India’s outsourcing companies are seeing their results stabilize. Share prices have risen as investors bet that companies looking to trim costs and reduce head count seek their services.
Indeed, companies have resumed looking toward outsourcing companies. In July, Vanguard, the mutual fund company, said it struck a deal with Infosys of India to assume 1,300 back office positions, like record keeping and technology services. Workers would be offered comparable jobs at Infosys, said a spokeswoman for Vanguard, adding that the decision was unrelated to the pandemic or the shifts in the H1-B program.
India’s outsourcing companies face long-term challenges. Cutting-edge technologies like artificial intelligence could eventually take over some of their tasks. The companies themselves are trying to move up the value chain to do more of the innovative technology work done in Silicon Valley and China.
“Most of the larger Indian I.T. companies haven’t expanded in that direction. They haven’t expanded to semiconductors, e-commerce, gaming and other technologies,” said Nitin Soni, a Singapore-based analyst and senior director at Fitch Ratings, a credit rating firm. “They have stuck to their core strengths, which are all in the realm of automation of organizational stuff.”
But companies rethinking the future of the office could offer them new opportunities.
“If you can get the same or better talent at lower cost, which allows you to do your business 24 hours, then that’s a good value proposition,” said Ajay Gupta, a Mumbai-based partner at global consulting firm Kearney.
Of traditional offices, he added, “even companies within India are saying, ‘We don’t need this rigid infrastructure.’”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting.
PHOTO: Sonal Thakkar, a tech consultant whose visa extension has been refused, is unsure when she can return to America. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SONAL THAKKAR) (B3)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (94%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); TECHNOLOGY (89%); OUTSOURCING (79%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); APPEALS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); ENTERPRISE GLOBALIZATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); HOME BASED EMPLOYMENT (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); TELECOMMUTING (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES (73%); LABOR FORCE (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (53%); India (%); Foreign Workers (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Visas (%); Outsourcing (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Telecommuting (%)

Company:  ZENSAR TECHNOLOGIES LTD (74%);  MICROSOFT CORP (56%);  EXXON MOBIL CORP (56%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

Ticker: ZENSARTECH (NSE) (74%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%); XOM (NYSE) (56%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (74%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (74%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (56%); NAICS211130 NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (56%); NAICS211120 CRUDE PETROLEUM EXTRACTION (56%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (94%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (74%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (78%)

Geographic: SAN JOSE, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (94%)

Load-Date: October 4, 2020


End of Document
Daily Report: Tech’s Continuing Immigration Debate; Bits
The New York Times 
February 6, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 223 words
Byline: PUI-WING TAM
Highlight: The tech world’s pushback against President Trump’s policies is set to escalate if, as expected, he signs an executive order concerning H-1B visa holders.
Body


The tech industry has been up in arms about President Trump’s immigration moves. That shows no signs of abating anytime soon.
For more than a week, tech companies have been denouncing the president’s executive orders to bar refugees and others from seven countries that are predominantly Muslim. Tech workers have staged protests, Uber employees asked their chief executive to consider stepping down from a presidential economic advisory council (           he eventually did), and tech leaders have            spoken           out against the immigration actions. On Sunday,            nearly 100 companies           joined the court fight against those actions.
The furor is set to continue if, as expected, Mr. Trump signs an executive order concerning H-1B visa holders, who typically are skilled foreign workers. These types of workers have been critical to the tech industry, which has long lamented a shortage of engineers with the right kinds of skills.
But the debate over H-1B visas is not cut and dry. Daisuke Wakabayashi and Nelson D. Schwartz, reporters at The New York Times, found that some American tech workers think that people with H-1Bs have unfairly helped displace them. Others say the influx of people with H-1Bs has put downward pressure on salaries. The issue is thorny, spurring a variety of suggestions for how to overhaul the visa program.
The next move is Mr. Trump’s.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); IMMIGRATION (93%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (79%); EXECUTIVES (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (75%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); WORKER CATEGORIES (73%); Foreign Workers (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: February 8, 2017


End of Document
A U.S. Hiring Plan Falls Short of Reform
The New York Times
May 6, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; EDITORIAL
Length: 495 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


Infosys, the giant Indian company that supplies American businesses with foreign technology workers, has announced that it will hire 10,000 Americans in the United States in the next two years. This might seem like an early victory in President Trump's ''Hire American'' campaign, but it's less of a cause for celebration than it appears.
Mr. Trump has condemned the loss of Americans' jobs to foreign replacements. And Infosys has been one of the biggest users of H-1B visas -- intended for specially talented foreigners -- to bring in cheaper labor to fill American jobs or replace Americans, often in entry-level positions. 
  But individual corporate measures like Infosys' hiring of Americans, no matter how headline-grabbing, are no substitute for true reform to eliminate systemic abuses. Worse, by creating the appearance of change, they may actually entrench those problems. Rather than say what he wants to see changed about a system he has pilloried, Mr. Trump has simply told executive agencies to recommend reforms in the H-1B program.
  Infosys is, in effect, getting out in front of presidential criticism of outsourcing in a way that makes Mr. Trump's plan appear effective -- even though no real reforms have been broached. The situation is akin to what happened last year at Carrier, when the company blunted criticism from Mr. Trump, then the president-elect, by keeping 800 jobs in the United States rather than offshoring them to Mexico as planned. The workers were happy and Mr. Trump declared victory. But the populist appeal of the deal has far outweighed its practical effect, not just because that deal involved only one plant, but because the Trump administration has shown no interest in or aptitude for addressing the underlying trends in technology, anti-unionism and public policy that undermine blue-collar jobs.
  Similarly, the Infosys pledge to hire 10,000 American workers pales in comparison to roughly 85,000 H-1B visas that are granted each year -- and the hundreds of thousands of jobs that could go to Americans over the years if the H-1B system were reformed. Will Mr. Trump follow through? If recent history is any guide, the answer is no.
  A fair H-1B system would require companies seeking foreign workers to prove that they have actively tried and failed to find American workers with the requisite skills. It would require higher wages for H-1B workers to ensure that they cannot be used as cheaper substitute labor. It would also include an enforcement system of random audits and steep penalties for noncompliance. Most important -- and most unlikely given the demonstrated corporate-friendly bias of the Trump administration -- the rules would apply to American companies like Facebook and Qualcomm that use H-1B visas, as well as to foreign staffing firms.
  The United States needs comprehensive reform of the H-1B system more than it needs Infosys' pledge of 10,000 new jobs. It also needs a president who understands that.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/05/opinion/infosys-hiring-plan-falls-short-of-visa-reform.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (78%); LAYOFFS (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); POPULISM (77%); OFFSHORING (75%); NEGATIVE NEWS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); TECHNOLOGY TRENDS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (91%);  FACEBOOK INC (50%);  QUALCOMM INC (50%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (91%); INFY (NYSE) (91%); INFY (NSE) (91%); FB (NASDAQ) (50%); QCOM (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (50%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS334220 RADIO & TELEVISION BROADCASTING & WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (50%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: May 6, 2017


End of Document
A Hiring Bind For Foreigners And Banks
The New York Times
March 10, 2009 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 833 words
Byline: By JONATHAN D. GLATER
Body


What could be worse than graduating from an American business school this year with an interest in banking?
  Being such a graduate who is not a United States citizen.
  A provision in the economic stimulus package  limits the hiring of foreign workers by any company receiving government bailout money. In finance, that is nearly every big employer.
  At least one financial institution, Bank of America, has rescinded job offers to foreign citizens, citing the new law, signed by President Obama last month. 
  Some banks are quietly trying to sidestep the limits  -- and perhaps to make good on their job offers  -- by finding positions abroad for noncitizens, according to college officials.
  Financial institutions seem to be tiptoeing around the core debate about whether it is best to protect American jobs or allow unfettered competition, wishing not to alienate the very lawmakers who are dispensing taxpayer money that is keeping some of them afloat. 
  Absent precise regulations, which have yet to be issued, big banks are being forced to re-examine the hundreds of students that many of them would normally add to their training classes at the end of the academic year. The bill affects people who might have obtained what are called H-1B visas, typically granted to foreign professional workers with skills sought by United States employers.  Existing workers are not affected.
  Patricia Rose, director of career services at the University of Pennsylvania, said companies were coming up with ad hoc policies.  ''Each bank is consulting with their outside legal counsel,'' she said,  ''and trying to determine what they can and cannot do.'' 
  The provision --  sometimes called Made in America, because it is intended to preserve jobs for Americans in this time of distress --  is being criticized by some immigration advocates and deans of business schools, which draw significant numbers of students from overseas.
  ''It sends a protectionist-oriented message that's not necessarily conducive to fostering economic recovery,'' said Bob Sakinawa, associate director of advocacy at the American Immigration Lawyers Association in Washington. People like the business school students affected by the law are valuable assets that the country should use, he said. ''Why cut off that avenue of talent?''
  R. Glenn Hubbard, the dean of Columbia's business school, raised concerns about the restrictions on hiring in letters to Timothy F. Geithner, the secretary of the Treasury, and Lawrence H.  Summers, head of the National Economic Council. 
  In talking with students recently, Mr. Hubbard called the limits on companies receiving federal bailout funds ''absolutely terrible,'' according to Columbia.  He added, ''It gives an advantage to international institutions over American institutions.''
  The number of people affected is small relative to the job losses of late. According to David M. Santos, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the number of H-1B visas is capped at 65,000 annually, with some exceptions. And several big colleges and business schools said the effect on their students was minimal. 
  But the subject of immigration is highly contentious at a time of rapidly rising unemployment.
  ''What the folks at the financial institutions have done is essentially hire people from abroad at lower wages when there are plenty of American workers who can do very fine work,'' said Bernard Sanders, the independent senator from Vermont and a sponsor of the provision.  
  Mr. Sanders  said that he was sympathetic to the plight of students whose job offers had vanished. 
  ''I'm sure they're decent, bright young people,'' Mr. Sanders said of business school students from abroad. ''But I also appreciate the people in this country, who have worked their entire lives, who were laid off by the industry. I think they should have the first opportunity.''
  Representatives of several banks declined to comment  about the visa issue, including JPMorgan Chase, which according to the government had about 150 H-1B visa applications approved last year, and Citigroup. At  Wells Fargo and PNC, representatives  said that the visa provision would have very little effect because the companies hired few H-1B workers.
  A spokeswoman for Bank of America confirmed that the company had rescinded job offers to a small number of people who would have needed H-1B visas, citing ''recent changes in legislation.'' The spokeswoman, in an e-mail message, added that the bank ''had very much looked forward to these individuals joining the company.''
  Officials of several colleges and business schools held out hope that when the rules putting the restrictions into effect are issued, they will help resolve concerns. ''We're waiting to see, to better understand for each firm, what the implications will be,'' said Regina Resnick, assistant dean and director of career services at Columbia's business school. ''We've reached out to all the firms that recruit here.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: R. Glenn Hubbard of Columbia's business school has concerns about limiting visas.(pg. B8)                                               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BUSINESS EDUCATION (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (90%); BAILOUTS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); STUDY ABROAD PROGRAMS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); ECONOMIC POLICY (77%); ECONOMIC RECOVERY (77%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (77%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (77%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (76%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (76%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); LAWYERS (72%)

Company:  BANK OF AMERICA CORP (90%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA (54%)

Ticker: BAC (NYSE) (90%); BAC (LSE) (90%); 8648 (TSE) (90%)

Industry: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (90%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (90%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (91%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); LAWYERS (72%)

Person: LAWRENCE SUMMERS (57%); BARACK OBAMA (55%); TIMOTHY GEITHNER (55%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: March 10, 2009


End of Document
U.S. Freeze Of Tech Visas May Benefit Indian Firms
The New York Times
October 5, 2020 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1533 words
Byline: By Maria Abi-Habib and Karan Deep Singh
Body


As the president clashes with the courts, some companies and investors say tougher limits on temporary work visas will help push jobs overseas.
When President Trump suspended a raft of visa programs in June, including temporary permits for highly technical foreign workers known as H-1B visas, he portrayed the order as a victory for the American work force. Further overhauls were in the works, he said weeks later, ''so that no American worker is replaced ever again.'' 
  The order is now in front of the courts, after a judge on Thursday blocked the order and ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority. The move will allow some companies, like Microsoft and Exxon Mobil, to bring temporary workers into the United States again. The issue will now go to an appeals court, which may rule in favor of Mr. Trump's sweeping order.
  But the fate of the program still remains in doubt. The Department of Homeland Security has submitted a new regulation for federal review that would toughen H-1B eligibility and impose new obligations on the companies trying to bring in foreign workers.
  The uncertainty has thrown the plans of major companies in doubt and has already disrupted the lives of thousands of foreign workers, particularly those from India, who claim more than two-thirds of the H-1B visas issued each year.
  The confusion might all be in vain, however. Experts say restrictions will do little to accomplish their stated goal of encouraging companies to hire Americans instead of workers from abroad. In fact, limits on H-1B visas may have the unintended effect of spurring American companies to shift even more work abroad.
  Already, Indian outsourcing companies are working to cast the new restrictions as an opportunity to do just that.
  ''In America, there is a genius mix of homegrown and transplanted talent. The high level of global competition gives America its tech edge,'' said Sandeep Kishore, the chief executive officer of Zensar Technologies, an Indian firm that employs more than 9,500 people globally.
  More than 400 are on work visas in Zensar's offices in the United States, he said, but more work could drift to India if companies cannot hire who they want.
  The United States ''risks giving up its edge,'' Mr. Kishore said. ''If we can't bring this talent into the U.S., we'll place them in our offices overseas.''
  The pandemic, which has forced millions to work from home, could reinforce the idea that more American jobs can be done remotely.
  The June suspension did not affect the foreign workers already in the United States on H-1B visas. But it upended the lives of those who were outside the country when the president issued his suspension.
  Sonal Thakkar, a lead consultant at an Indian information technology firm in San Jose, Calif., rushed back to India last year to apply for an extension of her visa.
  In March, her visa interview was canceled after India's government imposed a nationwide lockdown to stop the coronavirus. Then, Mr. Trump's suspension came.
  This week, Ms. Thakkar received an email from the office of the U.S. Consulate General in Mumbai, saying her visa application had been ''refused'' and sent for ''mandatory administrative processing.'' It's a process that could take months and she fears she could still be denied a visa after that.
  Now, Ms. Thakkar is not sure when she can return to the United States and her husband, who is still in San Jose on an H-1B visa.
  ''I can't sleep at night,'' she said. ''We've been together for six years. I am losing so many memories and I'm unable to create new ones.''
  An executive at Infosys, one of India's biggest technology companies, said in a LinkedIn post that it arranged a chartered flight to bring back more than 200 workers and their families to India, after their American visas expired. The company declined to comment.
  Even before Mr. Trump's election, limiting the H-1B program had won some bipartisan support. The program allows companies to bring in well-educated or technically skilled workers from abroad temporarily. About 65,000 candidates are selected each year by lottery. The workers can bring their families, but they must apply for green cards separately if they want to remain in the United States once their work ends.
  Some labor groups say companies use the program to bring in cheap labor. Often, they say, H-1B visa holders are not stars in their fields but hold skills that can be easily found domestically.
  ''There are very few people in this world who are truly innovative, and our economy depends on them,'' said Russell Harrison, the director of government relations for the IEEE-USA, an association representing more than 170,000 technology professionals that supports H-1B restrictions.
  Sensitive to the criticism, Indian outsourcing companies have long stressed plans to hire in the United States. In early September, Infosys announced it would hire 12,000 more Americans over the next two years.
  Indian outsourcing companies dominated the H-1B lottery a decade ago, but sponsors now include some of the biggest names in American technology. Seven of the top 10 sponsors last year were American, including Amazon and Google, according to official citizenship data. About 15 percent of Facebook's employees are H-1B holders.
  If the government considerably limits the number of H-1B workers they can bring in, companies may send the work overseas instead.
  ''The work will go to India more because there is an abundance of high-quality college-educated tech labor in India,'' said William Lazonick, an economist and professor emeritus at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business. ''It is obviously an advantage if that higher-quality labor force is less expensive to employ than workers in the company's home country.''
  Research is scant, but at least one study has found that limits on H-1B visas lead to more hiring overseas. The study, by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania Wharton School, compared periods of tightened H-1B restrictions with hiring by major firms and found greater hiring in places like China and India, which have a large pool of skilled workers, and Canada, which has looser immigration policies.
  Like industries around the globe, the outsourcing business took a substantial hit during the coronavirus pandemic. The troubles were particularly acute in India, where many workers lack the equipment or the internet connections to work from home.
  Tech companies struggled to source hundreds of thousands of laptops in the early weeks of the pandemic. They sent desktop computers to workers' homes and enabled firewalls to fend off cyberattacks.
  At Tata Consultancy Services, India's largest information technology firm with more than 400,000 workers globally, these responsibilities fell on the shoulders of Amit Jain, the global head of I.T. infrastructure, based in Mumbai.
  Mr. Jain, who worked at the company for 32 years, died in March after suffering a heart attack.
  ''He was overworked and extremely exhausted,'' said his brother, Mukul Jain. ''He told me he hadn't slept in two to three days because he was helping employees in India, Europe and the U.S. to work from home.''
  T.C.S. declined to comment about Mr. Jain's death. A public relations firm that represents the company said that about 95 percent of T.C.S. employees were now working remotely.
  Now India's outsourcing companies are seeing their results stabilize. Share prices have risen as investors bet that companies looking to trim costs and reduce head count seek their services.
  Indeed, companies have resumed looking toward outsourcing companies. In July, Vanguard, the mutual fund company, said it struck a deal with Infosys of India to assume 1,300 back office positions, like record keeping and technology services. Workers would be offered comparable jobs at Infosys, said a spokeswoman for Vanguard, adding that the decision was unrelated to the pandemic or the shifts in the H1-B program.
  India's outsourcing companies face long-term challenges. Cutting-edge technologies like artificial intelligence could eventually take over some of their tasks. The companies themselves are trying to move up the value chain to do more of the innovative technology work done in Silicon Valley and China.
  ''Most of the larger Indian I.T. companies haven't expanded in that direction. They haven't expanded to semiconductors, e-commerce, gaming and other technologies,'' said Nitin Soni, a Singapore-based analyst and senior director at Fitch Ratings, a credit rating firm. ''They have stuck to their core strengths, which are all in the realm of automation of organizational stuff.''
  But companies rethinking the future of the office could offer them new opportunities.
  ''If you can get the same or better talent at lower cost, which allows you to do your business 24 hours, then that's a good value proposition,'' said Ajay Gupta, a Mumbai-based partner at global consulting firm Kearney.
  Of traditional offices, he added, ''even companies within India are saying, 'We don't need this rigid infrastructure.'''
  Vindu Goel contributed reporting.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/02/technology/trump-india-hib-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sonal Thakkar, a tech consultant whose visa extension has been refused, is unsure when she can return to America. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SONAL THAKKAR) (B3)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); APPEALS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); ENTERPRISE GLOBALIZATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); HOME BASED EMPLOYMENT (78%); JUDGES (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); TECHNOLOGY (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES (73%); LABOR FORCE (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (67%); TELECOMMUTING (62%)

Company:  ZENSAR TECHNOLOGIES LTD (74%);  MICROSOFT CORP (56%);  EXXON MOBIL CORP (56%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

Ticker: ZENSARTECH (NSE) (74%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%); XOM (NYSE) (56%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (74%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (74%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (56%); NAICS211130 NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (56%); NAICS211120 CRUDE PETROLEUM EXTRACTION (56%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (73%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (78%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: October 5, 2020


End of Document
Morning Agenda: Trump’s Immigration Order, (Modest) Diversity Gains
The New York Times 
February 6, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 728 words
Byline: AMIE TSANG
Highlight: The confrontation over President Trump’s immigration order has reached the courts, foreshadowing years of legal battles.
Body


The confrontation over President Trump’s ban on refugees and visitors from several predominantly Muslim countries reached the courts at the weekend, foreshadowing the years of legal battles that could lie ahead for the administration.
The ban was blocked at a Federal District Court in Seattle and an appeals court in California refused to reinstate it. The government was instead ordered to file a brief defending Mr. Trump’s order.
That is not the only immigration issue that is in the headlines.
Debate over the use of H-1B visas has also been simmering as employers prepare for Mr. Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program.
H-1B visas are intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. There could be as many as a million H-1B visa holders residing in the United States, accounting for up to 13 percent of jobs in the technology sector alone.
A draft on an executive order leaked last week showed that options for modifying the program would be considered to “ensure that the beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.”
Critics say that American companies are gaming the system to snap up visas so that they can replace American workers with cheaper, temporary staff members. But proponents of the H-1B say it is an important way to attract top talent to the country.
The status of the immigrants protected by the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program is also a source of concern.
Many of these people are worried that they will lose the protections that allowed hundreds of thousands of people taken to the United States as children to obtain jobs, pursue college degrees and live openly in the country where they were raised.
They already face difficulties in completing their education. One of these people, Mitzie Perez, is trying to challenge policies that make it difficult for undocumented students to finance higher education with a lawsuit seeking class-action status.
The subject of immigration even featured at the Super Bowl:
 Airbnb’s advertisement said, “We believe no matter who you are, where you’re from, who you love or who you worship, we all belong. The world is more beautiful the more you accept.”
 Coca-Cola revived an ad from the 2014 Super Bowl, which featured people singing a multilingual version of “           America the Beautiful.”
At the same time, the unwinding of government regulations put in place during the Obama administration continues apace.
Ajit Pai, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, stopped nine companies from providing high-speed interest service at a discount to low-income individuals. He also withdrew an effort to keep prison phone rates down and scrapped a proposal to break open the cable box market, as part of a flurry of actions last week, many of which were not publicly announced.
Consumer advocacy groups and telecoms analysts were stunned. The message was: the F.C.C., an independent agency, will mirror the Trump administration’s rollback of government regulations.
Modest Gains for Diversity
The proportion of women and minorities on the board seats of Fortune 500 companies has increased (a little), but most of the positions are still held by white men, according to the Alliance for Board Diversity and Deloitte.
Why aren’t more women and minorities on these boards?
Companies still turn to people with chief executive experience and these tend to be men. There is also little turnover in board seats, so change is unlikely to come quickly.
One possible bright spot: many board members are in their 70s and likely to step down in the coming years, opening up seats to more diverse members.
Coming Up
 The International Monetary Fund will hold a board meeting to discuss whether it will participate in Greece’s current bailout program. It must reach an agreement with Greece’s European creditors over debt calculations and austerity conditions by Feb. 20, when European finance ministers meet in Brussels to review the program.
 Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, will speak to members of the European Parliament. He is expected to face questions about what the Trump presidency means for the eurozone and whether rising inflation rates will prompt the central bank to begin withdrawing its economic stimulus measures.
Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (79%); APPEALS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); REFUGEES (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENTS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (74%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (74%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); CLASS ACTIONS (73%); CONSUMER PROTECTION (73%); CONSUMER WATCHDOGS (73%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (72%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (70%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); MULTILINGUALISM (62%); CONSUMER LAW (60%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (60%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENTS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); COMMUNICATIONS REGULATION & POLICY (66%); TELEPHONE RATES (65%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (60%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (58%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: February 8, 2017


End of Document
Visa Shortage Spurs Vacancies, for Jobs, at a Tourist Getaway
The New York Times 
June 8, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1415 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: The tourism industry on Mackinac Island, Mich., and other regional industries that define the American summer are stuck in the middle of a struggle over jobs and who should be doing them.
Body


Mackinac Island has a permanent population of about 500 people and just as many horses, but no cars. From May to October, the picturesque Michigan getaway relies on about 3,000 workers to power its economic engine: summer tourism.
Historically, up to a third of those workers are foreigners, including Mexicans, Filipinos, Canadians and Jamaicans, who are hired on seasonal visas. But when many of the island’s business owners applied for those visas this year, they heard from the government that none were left.
So at the Iroquois Hotel, a Victorian property on the waterfront where rooms command up to $1,200 a night, the owner is trying to figure out how to maintain its high standards without 30 Jamaican housekeepers. Other hotels are contemplating closing off whole sections. Even those who own the ubiquitous horses are wondering if they will have enough workers.
“It’s urgent for us to get more visas to save the season,” Brad Chambers, who operates horse tours and taxis, said.
The island whose selling point is being stuck in time is now suffering because it is stuck in the middle of a modern-day struggle over jobs and who should be doing them. So, too, are a number of the regional industries that define the American summer but have increasingly relied on non-American workers, from vacation spots in Maine and Minnesota to Gulf Coast shrimpers and the salmon fisheries of Alaska.
The visas in question, known as H-2Bs, have an annual nationwide quota of 66,000, divided between winter and summer. But the summer allotment was exhausted quickly because Congress, concerned about the program’s impact on American workers, chose in December not to renew a provision that allowed workers who had H-2Bs in some previous years to work without being counted against the quota. That decision effectively sliced the number of visas by at least 50 percent.
Congress has also given the homeland security secretary, John F. Kelly, the authority to release more visas, and a bipartisan group of lawmakers urged him in a May 12 letter to do so swiftly.
Citing the importance of the $5.8 billion seafood industry to her state, Senator Lisa Murkowski, an Alaska Republican, told Mr. Kelly during a recent Senate hearing that a “short-term fix is urgently needed.”
Mr. Kelly responded, “For every senator or congressman who has your view, I have another who says, ‘Don’t you dare. This is about American jobs.’ ”
He added that he would probably release additional visas but did not specify when or how many. Even if he does, it would take two to four weeks for new workers to arrive because they must first pass an interview at an American consulate in their country of origin to obtain a visa.
President Trump — who uses H-2B workers in the winter at his Mar-a-Lago club in Palm Beach, Fla. — campaigned on a promise of reducing immigration and protecting American jobs. And while the H-2B, the offshoot of a temporary work visa created in 1952, has spawned less controversy than the H-1B visas for tech and other skilled workers, critics say the program displaces Americans just the same.
Unions, citing low wages, dispute employers’ assertions that they need the visas because domestic workers will not take the low-skilled jobs. In a 2015 report, the Labor Department’s inspector general expressed concern that employers were not trying hard enough to recruit Americans, as they are required to do before applying for the visas. The department has also documented cases of exploitation of foreign workers.
“Immigration flows are often driven by a desire to exploit a new foreign labor pool,” said Dan Stein, the president of Federation for American Immigration Reform, which advocates stricter immigration policies. “Nowhere is there more evidence of this than in the illegal and temporary foreign labor pools.”
Employers say that they would not use a program they regard as bureaucratic and expensive — they must pay fees for lawyers and for workers’ transportation to the United States — unless they had to. And they complain that they are falling victim to a dysfunctional immigration system, even as they do the right thing by hiring legal workers.
Simply put, the companies say, Americans are not very interested in menial, short-term work.
Eric Haugen, who runs a landscaping company in the Denver area, regularly posts ads in newspapers, on Craigslist and on street signs for positions that pay $14 to $25 an hour, with health care and benefits.
“We hire every single person who shows up” for an interview, he said. “We are lucky if one reports to work.”
Mr. Haugen has offered current workers $100 bonuses for referrals, to no avail. “The labor pool really doesn’t exist,” he said, which is why he turns to the H-2B program for part of the year. He has secured 32 visas for Mexican workers who arrived in April.
Making matters more difficult is the tight labor market. In Maine, where unemployment is 3 percent, innkeepers and other employers have been hit hard by the dearth of H-2B visas. Last month, Gov. Paul R. LePage, a tough-on-crime conservative, conditionally commuted the prison sentences of some low-level offenders to help fill tourism jobs.
In late May, dozens of employers phoned in to an emotional 90-minute conference call with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which administers the visa program.
On the call was Andrea Hance, president of the Texas Shrimp Association. The industry, which has been buffeted by cheap Asian imports, is now “in crisis” because of the visa shortage, she said. Some 400 to 500 H-2B visa holders, mainly Mexicans, work on vessels that ply the Gulf of Mexico from mid-July to early November. Efforts to find Americans willing to spend 30 to 60 days at sea have failed, Ms. Hance said.
During the salmon run, Alaska Glacier Seafoods in Juneau operates two shifts seven days a week to process the catch. The company typically relies on H-2Bs to fill 60 out of 200 positions but did not get any this year. “That may cause us to buy less fish, which would impact fishermen and their families,” Mike Erickson, the company’s president, said.
He dispatched two human resources workers to recruit in other states. In a month, they hired only 12 people. “At the end of the day, a lot of Americans think working in a fishy, smelly environment is not the thing for them,” Mr. Erickson said.
On Mackinac, Mr. Chambers, the horse-tour operator, said he had found five workers to fill 20 positions for which he sought H-2B visas.
“We have done recruiting over the internet, in newspapers and in horse country to get people to come,” he said.
His great-great-grandfather wrote a bill in 1898 banning cars, giving the island in Lake Huron its vintage appeal that draws a million visitors annually.
The 393-room Grand Hotel, the setting for the 1979 movie “Somewhere in Time,” starring Christopher Reeve and Jane Seymour, has been hiring seasonal foreign workers for decades. “Without them, we would be looking at changing our entire business model,” Jennifer King, general manager of the property, said.
The hotel got the visas it needed. Other businesses on the island have not been as lucky.
Phil Harrington, the sous chef at Yankee Rebel Tavern, has been coming in at noon instead of 3 p.m. to make sure preparations are complete before dinner guests arrive. “With the shortage of visas, it’s more stress on me and others who have to work longer hours to do more of the grunt work,” he said while chopping herbs, a task usually relegated to foreign workers.
Patti Ann Moskwa, the owner and a fourth-generation restaurateur, has been washing dishes herself.
“This is a legal program to supplement American workers,” she said of the visas. “We aren’t taking jobs from anybody.”
PHOTOS: Shantel Scarlett, from Jamaica, clearing dishes during afternoon tea at the Grand Hotel on Mackinac Island, Mich. The hotel has been hiring seasonal foreign workers for decades.; Visa workers from Mexico, above, after a shift at the Grand Hotel. Erik Schubert, below, took over as farrier at Mackinac Island Carriage Tours because the company’s longtime farrier, who lives 50 miles away in Canada, was not granted a visa this year.; Fewer foreign workers means Cecilia Wooley works longer hours at the Harbor View Inn. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Donald Trump to Foreign Workers for Florida Club: You’re Hired
    • Maine’s Governor Wants Inmates to Fill Jobs, Not Prison Beds
    • With Ally in Oval Office, Immigration Hard-Liners Ascend to Power
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TOURISM EMPLOYMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POPULATION SIZE (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (78%); FISHING WORKERS (78%); HOTEL STAFF (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LEISURE TRAVEL (78%); OCEAN ECONOMY (78%); SEASONAL WORKERS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (61%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Summer (Season) (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Mackinac Island (Mich) (%); Travel and Vacations (%)

Industry: LODGING (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TOURISM (90%); TOURISM EMPLOYMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FISHING WORKERS (78%); HOTEL STAFF (78%); HOTELS & MOTELS (78%); LEISURE TRAVEL (78%); TRAVEL, HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (78%); HOTEL HOUSEKEEPING (70%)

Person: JOHN F KELLY (79%); DONALD TRUMP (74%); LISA MURKOWSKI (50%)

Geographic: MICHIGAN, USA (94%); ALASKA, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); SOUTHEAST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); CANADA (79%)

Load-Date: June 10, 2017


End of Document
Trump’s Fights Are Their Fights. They Have His Back Unapologetically.
The New York Times 
August 25, 2020 Tuesday 08:33 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 2310 words
Byline: Trip Gabriel
Highlight: Many supporters of President Trump said in interviews that he had succeeded on issues that matter to them. And they dismissed as unimportant the behavior that critics say makes him unfit for office.
Body


Many supporters of President Trump said in interviews that he had succeeded on issues that matter to them. And they dismissed as unimportant the behavior that critics say makes him unfit for office.
DiAnna Schenkel is a law school graduate who once ran on the Democratic ticket for her city council. She voted twice for Barack Obama. A 59-year-old suburbanite in North Carolina, she worries about her Black son-in-law being racially profiled by the police, pulled over and beaten or worse.
The portrait of a Biden voter?
No, Ms. Schenkel, who is white, is a confirmed supporter of Donald J. Trump. She voted for him enthusiastically four years ago after becoming disillusioned with the Obama presidency, and plans to vote for his re-election. At the same time, she is wary of expressing her politics openly because she believes that stereotypes of what she calls “Trumpers” like herself, as portrayed on social media and in conversations, are smug and spiteful.
“There’s so many people throwing down really inflammatory words: Racist. Xenophobic,” she said of the way people regard Trump supporters. “And these inflammatory words carry emotions. It just pivots people to where they’re not going to even tolerate someone for supporting that person. You’re automatically put on trial and you have to testify why you believe what you believe.”
As Mr. Trump takes center stage at the Republican National Convention this week, he maintains a core of rock-solid supporters like Ms. Schenkel who believe he is fighting in America’s best interests and has achieved many of his goals — which are their goals too. He has aggressively cultivated these voters over the last few months with scathing criticism of vandalism that has occasionally arisen from mostly peaceful protests calling for racial justice, and by boasting that, pre-coronavirus, he had built an economy second to none.
For Democrats and many independents, Mr. Trump has shattered the norms of presidential behavior with racist tweets and divisive policies; his use of federal agencies to advance his personal interests; and, perhaps most important, his detachment from managing the pandemic, which has killed more than 175,000 Americans.
The revulsion toward the president that his opponents feel has colored how many regard Mr. Trump’s supporters. Portrayals of his base, these supporters say, are often distilled into a caricature: that they are all white bigots, in thrall to an authoritarian leader and lost in a fog of fact-denial.
While polling and interviews turn up ample evidence of these traits, tens of millions of Americans will vote for Mr. Trump, and there are plenty of supporters who transcend the stereotypes, whose personal experiences or policy interests make him the right fit for them.
In lengthy interviews over the last several weeks, a cross-section of Trump voters said they believed he had succeeded on issues like hardening the Southern border, appointing conservative judges, taking on China and putting “America first.” Many said the president’s grievances were their grievances, too. They believed kneeling during the national anthem was un-American, and they were appalled at what they viewed as liberals’ minimizing of violence that at times grew out of the protests over the killing of George Floyd.
At the same time, Trump voters dismissed as irrelevant aspects of the president’s behavior that critics say make him historically unfit for office. All politicians lie, many said; as for the president’s suggestion that he might not accept the election results, supporters said voters should judge his actions, not his loose talk or tweets.
“I didn’t vote for Trump because I wanted him to be my best friend,” Ms. Schenkel said. “I wanted to make a change and a difference.”
“If he thinks it’s the right thing, he doesn’t care who’s going to get mad at him,” she added. “I think he’s very misunderstood.”
Asked about her two votes for Mr. Obama, Ms. Schenkel faulted him for doing little, in her view, to heal racial divisions or lift the Black community. She cited a “blood bath” of crime in Chicago whose victims are mainly young Black men, and a high abortion rate for African-American women. “I feel he made race relations the worst I’ve seen in my 50 years,” she said.
A longtime resident of Minnesota, Ms. Schenkel moved with her husband last year to North Carolina to be closer to their grandchildren. She found work using her law degree in a bank loan department, while her husband babysits.
She grades the president highly on having met his promises, including slowing the flow of undocumented immigrants and building a strong economy before the virus struck.
Other Trump supporters outlined myriad reasons for wanting to re-elect him, ranging from the pragmatic, like a new job made possible by the administration’s policies, to a gut-level attraction to his hard-nosed personality. His supporters related “aha” moments in their upbringing when they realized they were conservatives, which they spoke of as nonnegotiable beliefs woven into their identity, like opposition to abortion. 
Joseph Karlovich of Jacksonville, Fla. is also a former Obama voter who abandoned the Democrats for Mr. Trump. Mr. Karlovich, 33, an engineer, explained that he was working for a government contractor on a Navy missile system in 2015 when the news cycle became consumed with Hillary Clinton’s private email server, which had held some classified information.
“That’s like a huge no-no, what she did,” he said, noting that he believes he would have been fired for a similar offense. Offended by what he said were Mrs. Clinton’s attempts to minimize the issue, he voted for Mr. Trump.
Mr. Karlovich is from a family of five adult siblings with diverse political leanings. A sister who is a nurse is a Republican. A brother who leans Democratic works for the National Rifle Association.
Mr. Karlovich said he had personally benefited from the president’s America First policies. After the Trump administration restricted H-1B visas for immigrants with high-tech skills, Mr. Karlovich landed a better-paying job just this month in his field, robotics. “I don’t think I would have gotten offered the position” without the restrictions on foreign workers, he said. “There was less competition out there for me applying for that position.”
He takes the president’s bullying outbursts and lying with a grain of salt. “He’s selling a pitch, for the most part,” he said. “My dad’s a salesman. For me, it’s the same with all politicians. They’re trying to get you to buy in, and you have to do your own research.”
When Shelley Taylor was 17 in rural Ohio, she crossed a teachers’ picket line at her high school and told the school board the teachers were selfishly depriving seniors of credits they needed to graduate. Supporters of the teachers boycotted her parents’ hardware store, she recalled. The episode shaped her political identity as a conservative.
Now a resident of Deltona, Fla., Ms. Taylor, 59, still considers herself outspoken, and she was drawn in four years ago by that same quality in Mr. Trump. “I liked how he was very straight up,” she said. “I laughed at his demeanor. I thought, all right, we got a guy here who’s going to whoop some butt on these politicians.”
Ms. Taylor believes the president’s enemies, including Democrats who she says behave like “spoiled little kids,” have tried to undermine him from Day 1. Among the developments she said were being manipulated to damage the president are the coronavirus outbreak and the protests after the death of Mr. Floyd, a Black man killed in the custody of white police officers in Minneapolis.
“We’ve had more cops gun down white people than Black people,” she said. “Do we throw a fit if a white guy gets killed by the cops? No.”
“I’m not racist,” she said. “I’m not. I have all kinds of friends. There’s good cops and there’s bad cops, I see that. We just need to weed them out. I think this George Floyd incident got escalated to be ridiculous.”
“He was doing such a great job,” Ms. Taylor said of the president. “They couldn’t impeach him. Everything was going good and wham, all of a sudden, we got a freaking virus.”
Ms. Taylor and others blamed the news media’s coverage of the virus, complaining that the media is being hypocritical when it condemns unmasked crowds in bars but not unmasked protesters in Portland and Seattle. They echoed a Gallup poll from March that showed Republicans’ trust in the media’s response to the pandemic was lower than for any institution.
Mr. Trump has called journalists “the enemy of the people” and has worked to undercut confidence in other institutions, including science, the electoral process and government.
Ludwig Pikulski, 57, of Pennsylvania, said he had stopped watching all TV news a couple of months ago. “There’s no real news sources anymore,” he said. “I don’t trust anything.” He even tried watching a French channel in English.
Kathleen O’Boyle, who sells real estate in the Pittsburgh suburbs, said she didn’t believe Mr. Trump had soft-pedaled the virus at all.
On the contrary, the coronavirus turned out to be “a lot less severe” than initially feared, with fatalities concentrated among older people but barely touching young ones, said Ms. O’Boyle, a law school graduate and former litigator.
Mr. Trump, she said, had “overreacted based on the information he had available.” She added, “I would have been opposed to an economic shutdown.”
Ms. O’Boyle, 60, who called herself a constitutional conservative, said those who fixate on the president’s behavior didn’t understand what supporters like her admire in him: He has accomplished what she would want from any Republican president.
“It seems there’s an argument that anybody who’s a Trump supporter is not rational, is a racist, just likes him for his personality,” she said. “None of that is true with me. I actually don’t particularly like his personality.”
“For some reason, people who are not Trump supporters can’t understand that Trump supporters are pleased because he’s done what they elected him for,” she added.
She ticked off a list: putting conservatives on the Supreme Court, withdrawing from the Paris climate accord, renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement and presiding over the lowest unemployment in 50 years before the pandemic. Moreover, she said, he did so amid a special counsel investigation and an impeachment.
“It’s a very chaotic atmosphere to accomplish those things, so I give him credit for that,” she said.
Robin Sinsabaugh, who lives outside Charlotte, N.C., supervises seven McDonald’s franchises. Many of her employees are African-Americans, and initially she was sympathetic to the outrage over Mr. Floyd’s killing.
“Obviously Black men, especially younger men, are targeted,” she said. “I say that because I’m able to talk to a lot of my employees. I talked to a young man who said, ‘I’ve been pulled over a dozen times when I’ve done nothing wrong.’”
But she believes that grievances that were peacefully expressed at first got out of hand in early June, when the police in Charlotte said that protesters had aimed rocks and fireworks at officers, and the authorities responded with pepper spray and tear gas.
“I’m not going to remember them for anything they said,” Ms. Sinsabaugh said of the marchers. “I’m going to remember them for what they did to their own city.”
Ms. Sinsabaugh, 47, is married to a retired police officer.
She said the nationwide fracture between the president’s support of aggressive policing and the protesters’ fury at law enforcement had split her own household. Her 17-year-old son, who will vote for the first time in November, is vehemently anti-Trump. When he watched the video of Mr. Floyd’s killing, he erupted, saying “all cops should be shot.”
Ms. Sinsabaugh hit the roof. She took her son aside, she recalled, and said: “From now on, I don’t want to hear you say one more word. We don’t talk about cops in this house. Your father being a cop for 26 years is why we have what we have. That level of respect needs to change.”
Polls show that Mr. Trump’s most unwavering supporters are white evangelical Christians. Despite the moral lapses in his life — his infidelity, his bankruptcies or questionable enterprises like his now-defunct charity — they have continued to stick with him.
When Sarah Danes was an adolescent, her parents were Christian missionaries on the Navajo Reservation. Today she, her husband and their five children, 8 to 17, live in rural Western Michigan. He works at a food processing plant and she is a homemaker. They both strongly oppose abortion, and believe Mr. Trump will further that cause.
They don’t spend much time on the internet. “I get a little news through a pro-life TV network,” said Ms. Danes, 39. “They said Trump was the first-ever president to speak at the March for Life,” she added, referring to the annual anti-abortion rally on the National Mall. “I’m like, wow, that’s awesome. When I hear him talk about life, it’s not just a social issue, it’s a God-says-it’s-wrong issue.”
She feels a long way from Washington and what elected officials there seem to understand about the lives of people like her.
“We’re in a lot better place financially than we used to be, but we’ve lived in a lot of trailers,” she said of her family. “I’ve had crazy neighbors dropping f-bombs at their children. I don’t think people up in Washington have much of any clue about what my life looks like.”
PHOTOS: SHELLEY TAYLOR, 59, of Deltona, Fla., who says bad police officers just need to be weeded out (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLOTTE KESL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); ROBIN SINSABAUGH, 47, who lives near Charlotte, N.C., about violence at protests (PHOTOGRAPH BY TRAVIS DOVE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); SARAH DANES, 39, who lives in rural western Michigan and strongly opposes abortion (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRITTANY GREESON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: INTERVIEWS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); EMOTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); JUDGES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); TRENDS & EVENTS (78%); RACIAL JUSTICE (76%); RACIAL PROFILING (76%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (76%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (75%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); CITY GOVERNMENT (72%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); HATE SPEECH (72%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); VANDALISM (69%); SOCIAL MEDIA (67%); CORONAVIRUSES (62%); US REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTIONS (58%); CITIES (57%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (50%); VIRUSES (50%); Trump, Donald J (%); Polls and Public Opinion (%); Republican Party (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: LAWYERS (74%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); SOCIAL MEDIA (67%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); BARACK OBAMA (88%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: January 7, 2021


End of Document
Mr. Obama's Trade Agenda
The New York Times
March 11, 2009 Wednesday
National Edition


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30; EDITORIAL
Length: 595 words
Body


In tough times, there is a strong temptation to turn inward. With so many Americans already out of work, why shouldn't the country raise trade barriers to protect its workers from foreign competition? 
  The answer is clear: Trade will play an important role in the world's eventual recovery, transmitting economic growth from one country to the next. Protectionism leads to further protectionism, and yielding to its temptation could unleash destructive trade wars that would crush any chance of recovery. 
  Unfortunately, few politicians are willing to tell their constituents that unpopular truth. Instead, governments are succumbing to protectionism's dangerous lure. In recent months, Russia has jacked up import barriers on cars, farm machinery and other products. The European Union has reintroduced subsidies on dairy products. Europe, India and Brazil raised tariffs on imported steel. 
  Protectionism is also taking subtler forms, like Britain's requirement that bailed-out banks favor domestic lending. The United States is not immune. The stimulus bill had a ''Buy America'' provision, and it made it more difficult for companies receiving stimulus dollars to hire foreign workers under the H-1B visa program. 
  President Obama's choice for United States trade representative, Ron Kirk, appears ambivalent about the value of free trade. As part of his confirmation hearings this week, Mr. Kirk testified that he would work to expand trade but also argued ''that not all Americans are winning from it and that our trading partners are not always playing by the rules.'' He suggested that the administration could press ahead on the ratification of the trade agreement with Panama, which was negotiated by the Bush administration. But he said that Mr. Obama was prepared to walk away from the Bush administration's agreement with South Korea, calling it ''unfair.'' 
  Mr. Obama's annual trade report to Congress is similarly worrisome. It suggested opening a ''discourse with the public'' on whether the trade agreements awaiting ratification --  with Colombia, South Korea and Panama --  are a good idea. It committed the administration to ''improving'' the North American Free Trade Agreement, without saying how. And it poured cold water on efforts to restart the World Trade Organization's round of international negotiations. 
  Those talks, which were supposed to open markets for the world's poorest countries, are flawed. Still, the administration's argument that negotiations are imbalanced because it is not clear what they offer to the United States is wrongheaded. The administration should press ahead on a deal and try to revive at least some of its original intent. 
  If ever there was a need for collective action -- on fiscal stimuli, monetary policy, aid to the developing world, fighting protectionism -- it is now. A place to start the rethinking is China and how to encourage increased domestic consumption and investment in China and other cash-rich Asian countries so they can start pulling the world out of recession. 
  China's leaders, in particular, need to understand that export-led growth no longer works for them or for the world. The United States will have more influence if it stops beating on Beijing for its foreign-exchange policy and engages China's leaders as partners, not rivals. 
  Vigorous trade will help the world recover. For that to happen, the United States will have to provide strong leadership and a clear commitment to fighting protectionism. Any sign of ambivalence from Washington will only make things worse. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: AGRICULTURAL TRADE (90%); GOVERNMENT GRANTS & SUBSIDIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (90%); PROTECTIONISM (90%); TRADE DISPUTES (90%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); AGREEMENTS (89%); EMERGING MARKETS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); IMPORT TRADE (78%); INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (78%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (77%); INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS & BODIES (77%); BAILOUTS (76%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (76%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION (74%); EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (74%); IMPORT CONTROLS (74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (72%); ECONOMIC POLICY (71%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (70%); AUTOMOTIVE EXPORTS & IMPORTS (69%); BANK FAILURES (53%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%); MONETARY POLICY (50%)

Organization:  EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

Industry: AGRICULTURAL TRADE (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION & POLICY (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%); AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT (69%); AUTOMOTIVE EXPORTS & IMPORTS (69%); DAIRY PRODUCTS (69%); FOOD PRODUCTS (69%); BANK FAILURES (53%); MONETARY POLICY (50%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (79%); RON KIRK (58%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%); EUROPE (92%); SOUTH KOREA (92%); BRAZIL (79%); COLOMBIA (79%); INDIA (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (71%)

Load-Date: March 11, 2009


End of Document
Trump Moves to Tighten Visa Access for High-Skilled Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
October 6, 2020 Tuesday 12:28 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1077 words
Byline: Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Four weeks before the election, the Trump administration has announced stricter rules for the H-1B visa program, which U.S. companies have long valued.
Body


Four weeks before the election, the Trump administration has announced stricter rules for the H-1B visa program, which U.S. companies have long valued.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration announced significant changes on Tuesday to the H-1B visa program for high-skilled workers, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants.
Top administration officials framed the changes as a way to protect American jobs during the coronavirus pandemic, even though the Trump administration first committed to overhauling the program in 2017 as part of its efforts to reduce the number of foreign citizens employed in the United States.
“With millions of Americans looking for work, and as the economy continues its recovery, immediate action is needed to guard against the risk lower-cost foreign labor can pose to the well-being of U.S. workers,” Patrick Pizzella, the deputy secretary of labor, told reporters on Tuesday.
The rules will directly affect foreign workers and employers, especially tech companies that have long supported the H-1B program and pushed hard for its expansion.
Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, said he expected the changes to cut by one-third the number of petitions filed annually for the coveted visas.
The changes will be published this week as interim final rules, meaning that the agency believes it has “good cause” to claim exemption from the normal requirement to obtain feedback from the public before completing them.
Immigration lawyers and experts predicted that the changes would be swiftly challenged in court because they bypassed the normal regulatory process.
“The public hasn’t even seen these regulations yet and won’t have the usual opportunity to provide comments, as required by Congress,” said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship. “Given the inevitability of court challenges, it seems like slim odds that these policies are built to last.”
The government issues 85,000 H-1B visas each year, often using a lottery to award them because the number of workers sought by companies almost always surpasses the number of available visas. Many workers are eventually sponsored by their employers for green cards to remain permanently in the United States.
Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the election, were politically motivated.
“Why this, why now, and why is it an interim final rule?” said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center. “There’s no estimate of the amount of jobs this would actually free up for U.S. workers. It’s a bank shot at best.”
The Labor Department rule, which takes effect upon publication, would increase wages across the board for foreign workers, based on surveys of salaries in each profession. Companies would have to pay entry-level workers in the program in the 45th percentile of their profession’s salary rather than the 17th percentile. Wages for higher-skilled workers would rise to the 95th percentile from the 67th percentile.
“It will also likely result in higher personnel costs for some employers,” according to the Labor Department rule. “The purpose of protecting U.S. workers outweighs such interests and justifies such increased costs,” the agency added.
But Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor of immigration law at Cornell Law School, said the rule would have the opposite effect.
“By increasing the required wages, the new rules will harm all employers trying to hire foreign workers, but especially start-up companies and smaller firms who may not be able to meet the increased wage requirements,” he said.
The Department of Homeland Security’s rule, which takes effect in 60 days, would also tighten the eligibility for visa applicants. The rule would require the foreign workers to have a degree in the “specialty occupation” they apply for, rather than any college degree. Some would also need to show how their studies provided “a body of highly specialized knowledge” for a potential job in the United States.
The largest share of H-1B visa holders are employed by the tech sector, where they work as computer engineers and software developers. The visas are also issued to architects, accountants and physicians, among other professionals.
The rule will almost certainly have an adverse effect on rural hospitals and other health care providers that depend on a steady pipeline of physicians from abroad because they cannot attract enough American doctors, who generally prefer to practice in urban areas.
For example, instead of offering a minimum starting salary of $120,000 to $130,000, a clinic in northeastern Pennsylvania, which is considered an underserved area, would have to pay a foreign physician around $195,000 or $200,000.
“Entry-level doctors in rural areas will have to be offered experienced-level wages, which may be more than their supervisor is being paid,” said William A. Stock, an employment immigration lawyer in Philadelphia. “This will further restrict the supply of doctors willing to move to parts of rural America. It will put providers in a jam that they can’t afford to hire foreign-born doctors.”
The H-1B rule comes on the heels of a proclamation signed by President Trump in June that suspended an array of worker visas until at least Dec. 31. Groups representing thousands of businesses challenged that proclamation, which affected H-1Bs, H-2B seasonal work visas, L-1 visas for executives being transferred by companies and cultural-exchange J-1 visas, including au pairs.
The groups won a reprieve last week, when a federal judge ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority in banning the visas.
“There must be some measure of constraint on presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power,” the judge said.
His order was at odds with an earlier decision by a federal judge in Washington, which ensured that an appeals court would make the ultimate determination.
But it immediately set aside the ban for companies that employed large numbers of foreign workers.
PHOTO: Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the presidential election, were politically motivated. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Scott Olson/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); REGULATORY ACTIONS (78%); PETITIONS (73%); WAGE GROWTH (73%); CORONAVIRUSES (70%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (68%); LAWYERS (66%); EPIDEMICS (56%); PANDEMICS (56%); VIRUSES (56%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Labor Department (US) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); LAWYERS (66%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: October 7, 2020


End of Document
Immigration Ban, Betsy DeVos, Tom Brady: Your Tuesday Briefing
The New York Times 
February 7, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1040 words
Byline: SEAN ALFANO and MARK A. WALSH
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
 Court showdown looms for immigration ban.
Oral arguments on the legality of President Trump’s executive order are set to be heard today in a U.S. Court of Appeals in San Francisco. On Monday night, the Justice Department urged the court to reinstate the measure, which bars all refugees as well as visitors from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
Here are the main points in the case.
The court plans to begin the session at 3 p.m. Pacific and will live-stream it. The ruling is likely to be followed by an appeal to the Supreme Court.
 Tensions in Senate over confirmation vote.
Democrats continue to protest the nomination of the billionaire philanthropist Betsy DeVos as education secretary, whose confirmation vote is set for today.
Critics say that Ms. DeVos favors voucher programs over repairing public schools — her defenders say she advocates giving parents choices. Two Republican senators have said they will not support her, setting up a possible 50-50 tie that Vice President Mike Pence would have to break.
Separately, the nomination of Mr. Trump’s choice to run the Labor Department, Andrew F. Puzder, may be in peril. Mr. Puzder has acknowledged that he once employed an undocumented immigrant to clean his house.
 Cautionary tale about rebuilding America’s roads.
Mr. Trump is seeking to spend a trillion dollars on infrastructure, but attempting such major projects can be unwieldy.
A case in point: the traffic choke point in Breezewood, Pa. “It shows how legal quirks, powerful politicians and opaque bureaucratic procedures can influence decisions about how to spend taxpayer dollars,” our reporter writes.
 A “milestone” of corruption.
Somalia has languished without a functioning central government for more than 25 years, but it is holding a presidential election this week.
Investigators, though, suggest that outside forces like Qatar, Sudan, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates have been buying off candidates to get business deals, spread a harsh version of Islam or spy on American forces.
 Public health breakthrough.
Scientists may have found the tools to stop cholera, which rose from the swamps of Bangladesh two centuries ago, killing tens of millions of people over the years.
A research center in Dhaka, the capital, has developed treatments that save 99.9 percent of all victims. And a vaccine accepted by the W.H.O. is being stockpiled for epidemics.
 Introducing The Daily, your audio news report.
Our reporter Michael Barbaro runs down the big stories and the big ideas. Fifteen minutes a day, five days a week.
Listen here if you’re on a computer,            here if you have an iOS device or            here for an Android device.
Business
 Net neutrality rules  intended to ensure equal access to content on the internet are being rolled           back by the new chairman of the Federal Communications Commission.
 Technology companies rely heavily on the 85,000 foreign workers allowed into the U.S. annually under the H-1B visa program. But some critics say the program has been used to lower labor costs and cut jobs.
 A Syrian refugee is suing Facebook in Germany after a selfie he took with Chancellor Angela Merkel was used in fake news reports tying him to terrorist acts.
 U.S. stocks were down on Monday. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
Smarter Living
 We’re all busy in the morning, so here’s how to do the shortest effective workout possible.
 Two brothers and a sister credit a surprising source for their lifelong closeness: their parents’ ugly divorce.
 Recipe of the day: Everyone needs a spicy noodle dish that comes together in less than half an hour. Here’s a great one.
Noteworthy
 Best of late-night TV.
We’re trying out a new feature this week: a rundown of the funniest and most memorable moments from the comedy shows.
Super Bowl jokes dominated Monday night, with Jimmy Kimmel getting into a fight with his special guest, “Tom Brady” — a surprisingly short guy who sounded suspiciously like someone else.
[Video: Super Bowl MVP Tom Brady Makes Surprise Appearance on Kimmel Watch on YouTube.]
 Speaking of Tom Brady …
The quarterback won the big game, but he seems to have lost his jersey.
At some point during the chaos that followed the New England Patriots’ Super Bowl victory on Sunday, part of his uniform disappeared.
 A small town’s stand.
Residents of Yellow Springs, Ohio, a small, predominantly white village, denounced aggressive policing after a black man ended up face down on the ground after a New Year’s celebration.
Not all of their concerns are the same, however.
 The slave who defied George Washington.
Ona Judge, who escaped the presidential residence in Philadelphia in 1796 and defied all efforts to recapture her, is the subject of an exhibition and a new book.
Back Story
The Berlin International Film Festival opens this week with a tale of survival, that of one of the 20th century’s greatest jazz guitarists:            Django Reinhardt.
He was born in Belgium in 1910 to a Roma family that earned a living playing music from town to town.
Reinhardt started off playing the banjo in Paris dance halls. At 18, he lost the use of two fingers on his left hand in a fire, and adapted with a new technique.
He rose to fame in the ’30s. But with World War II and the Nazi occupation of France, Reinhardt tried to flee, fearing that, as a Roma and a jazz musician, he would be detained and killed.
Instead, his fame — and the popularity of an officially discredited art form — may have saved him.
“The Germans used Paris as the base for soldiers to rest and relax,” said Michael Dregni, a Reinhardt biographer. “Jazz was the hot music of the time, so they all want to go out and see jazz, and Django was the biggest star in Europe.”
Reinhardt lived through the war, dying of a sudden stroke in 1953. His legacy lives on in the genre he helped create: Gypsy jazz.
Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and            updated on the web all morning.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); APPEALS (90%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (89%); PUBLIC HEALTH (87%); APPEALS COURTS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); INTERNET SERVICE REGULATION (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); CORRUPTION (74%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); TRENDS & EVENTS (74%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (74%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); RELIGION (71%); PHILANTHROPY (68%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (68%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENTS (68%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (68%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (67%); INVESTIGATIONS (66%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (65%); EPIDEMICS (65%); VACCINES (64%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%); TROPICAL DISEASES (60%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (50%)

Industry: TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); INTERNET & WWW (78%); INTERNET SERVICE REGULATION (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (73%); MOBILE DEVICES (73%); STREAMING MEDIA (70%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (68%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENTS (68%); VACCINES (64%); NET NEUTRALITY (60%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (50%)

Person: BETSY DEVOS (92%); MIKE PENCE (79%); ANDREW F PUZDER (57%)

Geographic: DHAKA, BANGLADESH (69%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); BANGLADESH (92%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
Preparing for a Summer Of Help-Wanted Signs
The New York Times
June 9, 2017 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 1301 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


Mackinac Island has a permanent population of about 500 people and just as many horses, but no cars. From May to October, the picturesque Michigan getaway relies on about 3,000 workers to power its economic engine: summer tourism.
Historically, up to a third of those workers are foreigners, including Mexicans, Filipinos, Canadians and Jamaicans, who are hired on seasonal visas. But when many of the island's business owners applied for those visas this year, they heard from the government that none were left. 
  So at the Iroquois Hotel, a Victorian property on the waterfront where rooms command up to $1,200 a night, the owner is trying to figure out how to maintain its high standards without 30 Jamaican housekeepers. Other hotels are contemplating closing off whole sections. Even those who own the ubiquitous horses are wondering if they will have enough workers.
  ''It's urgent for us to get more visas to save the season,'' Brad Chambers, who operates horse tours and taxis, said.
  The island whose selling point is being stuck in time is now suffering because it is stuck in the middle of a modern-day struggle over jobs and who should be doing them. So, too, are a number of the regional industries that define the American summer but have increasingly relied on non-American workers, from vacation spots in Maine and Minnesota to Gulf Coast shrimpers and the salmon fisheries of Alaska.
  The visas in question, known as H-2Bs, have an annual nationwide quota of 66,000, divided between winter and summer. But the summer allotment was exhausted quickly because Congress, concerned about the program's impact on American workers, chose in December not to renew a provision that allowed workers who had H-2Bs in some previous years to work without being counted against the quota. That decision effectively sliced the number of visas by at least 50 percent.
  Congress has also given the homeland security secretary, John F. Kelly, the authority to release more visas, and a bipartisan group of lawmakers urged him in a May 12 letter to do so swiftly.
  Citing the importance of the $5.8 billion seafood industry to her state, Senator Lisa Murkowski, an Alaska Republican, told Mr. Kelly during a recent Senate hearing that a ''short-term fix is urgently needed.''
  Mr. Kelly responded, ''For every senator or congressman who has your view, I have another who says, 'Don't you dare. This is about American jobs.' ''
  He added that he would probably release additional visas but did not specify when or how many. Even if he does, it would take two to four weeks for new workers to arrive because they must first pass an interview at an American consulate in their country of origin to obtain a visa.
  President Trump -- who uses H-2B workers in the winter at his Mar-a-Lago club in Palm Beach, Fla. -- campaigned on a promise of reducing immigration and protecting American jobs. And while the H-2B, the offshoot of a temporary work visa created in 1952, has spawned less controversy than the H-1B visas for tech and other skilled workers, critics say the program displaces Americans just the same.
  Unions, citing low wages, dispute employers' assertions that they need the visas because domestic workers will not take the low-skilled jobs. In a 2015 report, the Labor Department's inspector general expressed concern that employers were not trying hard enough to recruit Americans, as they are required to do before applying for the visas. The department has also documented cases of exploitation of foreign workers.
  ''Immigration flows are often driven by a desire to exploit a new foreign labor pool,'' said Dan Stein, the president of Federation for American Immigration Reform, which advocates stricter immigration policies. ''Nowhere is there more evidence of this than in the illegal and temporary foreign labor pools.''
  Employers say that they would not use a program they regard as bureaucratic and expensive -- they must pay fees for lawyers and for workers' transportation to the United States -- unless they had to. And they complain that they are falling victim to a dysfunctional immigration system, even as they do the right thing by hiring legal workers.
  Simply put, the companies say, Americans are not very interested in menial, short-term work.
  Eric Haugen, who runs a landscaping company in the Denver area, regularly posts ads in newspapers, on Craigslist and on street signs for positions that pay $14 to $25 an hour, with health care and benefits.
  ''We hire every single person who shows up'' for an interview, he said. ''We are lucky if one reports to work.''
  Mr. Haugen has offered current workers $100 bonuses for referrals, to no avail. ''The labor pool really doesn't exist,'' he said, which is why he turns to the H-2B program for part of the year. He has secured 32 visas for Mexican workers who arrived in April.
  Making matters more difficult is the tight labor market. In Maine, where unemployment is 3 percent, innkeepers and other employers have been hit hard by the dearth of H-2B visas. Last month, Gov. Paul R. LePage, a tough-on-crime conservative, conditionally commuted the prison sentences of some low-level offenders to help fill tourism jobs.
  In late May, dozens of employers phoned in to an emotional 90-minute conference call with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which administers the visa program.
  On the call was Andrea Hance, president of the Texas Shrimp Association. The industry, which has been buffeted by cheap Asian imports, is now ''in crisis'' because of the visa shortage, she said. Some 400 to 500 H-2B visa holders, mainly Mexicans, work on vessels that ply the Gulf of Mexico from mid-July to early November. Efforts to find Americans willing to spend 30 to 60 days at sea have failed, Ms. Hance said.
  During the salmon run, Alaska Glacier Seafoods in Juneau operates two shifts seven days a week to process the catch. The company typically relies on H-2Bs to fill 60 out of 200 positions but did not get any this year. ''That may cause us to buy less fish, which would impact fishermen and their families,'' Mike Erickson, the company's president, said.
  He dispatched two human resources workers to recruit in other states. In a month, they hired only 12 people. ''At the end of the day, a lot of Americans think working in a fishy, smelly environment is not the thing for them,'' Mr. Erickson said.
  On Mackinac, Mr. Chambers, the horse-tour operator, said he had found five workers to fill 20 positions for which he sought H-2B visas.
  ''We have done recruiting over the internet, in newspapers and in horse country to get people to come,'' he said.
  His great-great-grandfather wrote a bill in 1898 banning cars, giving the island in Lake Huron its vintage appeal that draws a million visitors annually.
  The 393-room Grand Hotel, the setting for the 1979 movie ''Somewhere in Time,'' starring Christopher Reeve and Jane Seymour, has been hiring seasonal foreign workers for decades. ''Without them, we would be looking at changing our entire business model,'' Jennifer King, general manager of the property, said.
  The hotel got the visas it needed. Other businesses on the island have not been as lucky.
  Phil Harrington, the sous chef at Yankee Rebel Tavern, has been coming in at noon instead of 3 p.m. to make sure preparations are complete before dinner guests arrive. ''With the shortage of visas, it's more stress on me and others who have to work longer hours to do more of the grunt work,'' he said while chopping herbs, a task usually relegated to foreign workers.
  Patti Ann Moskwa, the owner and a fourth-generation restaurateur, has been washing dishes herself.
  ''This is a legal program to supplement American workers,'' she said of the visas. ''We aren't taking jobs from anybody.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/us/summer-jobs-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Shantel Scarlett, from Jamaica, clearing dishes during afternoon tea at the Grand Hotel on Mackinac Island, Mich. The hotel has been hiring seasonal foreign workers for decades.
Visa workers from Mexico, above, after a shift at the Grand Hotel. Erik Schubert, below, took over as farrier at Mackinac Island Carriage Tours because the company's longtime farrier, who lives 50 miles away in Canada, was not granted a visa this year.
 Fewer foreign workers means Cecilia Wooley works longer hours at the Harbor View Inn. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT LISTINGS & SITES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POPULATION SIZE (89%); INTERVIEWS (78%); SEASONAL WORKERS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); FISHING WORKERS (77%); HOTEL STAFF (77%); LEISURE TRAVEL (77%); OCEAN ECONOMY (77%); BIPARTISANSHIP (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (61%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); TRAVEL, HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (78%); FISHING WORKERS (77%); HOTEL STAFF (77%); HOTELS & MOTELS (77%); LEISURE TRAVEL (77%); HOTEL HOUSEKEEPING (70%)

Person: JOHN F KELLY (79%); LISA MURKOWSKI (50%)

Geographic: ALASKA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%); CANADA (79%)

Load-Date: June 9, 2017


End of Document
Trump's Goals Are Their Goals, And the Tweets Are Irrelevant
The New York Times
August 26, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2270 words
Byline: By Trip Gabriel
Body


Many supporters of President Trump said in interviews that he had succeeded on issues that matter to them. And they dismissed as unimportant the behavior that critics say makes him unfit for office.
DiAnna Schenkel is a law school graduate who once ran on the Democratic ticket for her city council. She voted twice for Barack Obama. A 59-year-old suburbanite in North Carolina, she worries about her Black son-in-law being racially profiled by the police, pulled over and beaten or worse. 
  The portrait of a Biden voter?
  No, Ms. Schenkel, who is white, is a confirmed supporter of Donald J. Trump. She voted for him enthusiastically four years ago after becoming disillusioned with the Obama presidency, and plans to vote for his re-election. At the same time, she is wary of expressing her politics openly because she believes that stereotypes of what she calls ''Trumpers'' like herself, as portrayed on social media and in conversations, are smug and spiteful.
  ''There's so many people throwing down really inflammatory words: Racist. Xenophobic,'' she said of the way people regard Trump supporters. ''And these inflammatory words carry emotions. It just pivots people to where they're not going to even tolerate someone for supporting that person. You're automatically put on trial and you have to testify why you believe what you believe.''
  As Mr. Trump takes center stage at the Republican National Convention this week, he maintains a core of rock-solid supporters like Ms. Schenkel who believe he is fighting in America's best interests and has achieved many of his goals -- which are their goals too. He has aggressively cultivated these voters over the last few months with scathing criticism of vandalism that has occasionally arisen from mostly peaceful protests calling for racial justice, and by boasting that, pre-coronavirus, he had built an economy second to none.
  For Democrats and many independents, Mr. Trump has shattered the norms of presidential behavior with racist tweets and divisive policies; his use of federal agencies to advance his personal interests; and, perhaps most important, his detachment from managing the pandemic, which has killed more than 175,000 Americans.
  The revulsion toward the president that his opponents feel has colored how many regard Mr. Trump's supporters. Portrayals of his base, these supporters say, are often distilled into a caricature: that they are all white bigots, in thrall to an authoritarian leader and lost in a fog of fact-denial.
  While polling and interviews turn up ample evidence of these traits, tens of millions of Americans will vote for Mr. Trump, and there are plenty of supporters who transcend the stereotypes, whose personal experiences or policy interests make him the right fit for them.
  In lengthy interviews over the last several weeks, a cross-section of Trump voters said they believed he had succeeded on issues like hardening the Southern border, appointing conservative judges, taking on China and putting ''America first.'' Many said the president's grievances were their grievances, too. They believed kneeling during the national anthem was un-American, and they were appalled at what they viewed as liberals' minimizing of violence that at times grew out of the protests over the killing of George Floyd.
  At the same time, Trump voters dismissed as irrelevant aspects of the president's behavior that critics say make him historically unfit for office. All politicians lie, many said; as for the president's suggestion that he might not accept the election results, supporters said voters should judge his actions, not his loose talk or tweets.
  ''I didn't vote for Trump because I wanted him to be my best friend,'' Ms. Schenkel said. ''I wanted to make a change and a difference.''
  ''If he thinks it's the right thing, he doesn't care who's going to get mad at him,'' she added. ''I think he's very misunderstood.''
  Asked about her two votes for Mr. Obama, Ms. Schenkel faulted him for doing little, in her view, to heal racial divisions or lift the Black community. She cited a ''blood bath'' of crime in Chicago whose victims are mainly young Black men, and a high abortion rate for African-American women. ''I feel he made race relations the worst I've seen in my 50 years,'' she said.
  A longtime resident of Minnesota, Ms. Schenkel moved with her husband last year to North Carolina to be closer to their grandchildren. She found work using her law degree in a bank loan department, while her husband babysits.
  She grades the president highly on having met his promises, including slowing the flow of undocumented immigrants and building a strong economy before the virus struck.
  Other Trump supporters outlined myriad reasons for wanting to re-elect him, ranging from the pragmatic, like a new job made possible by the administration's policies, to a gut-level attraction to his hard-nosed personality. His supporters related ''aha'' moments in their upbringing when they realized they were conservatives, which they spoke of as nonnegotiable beliefs woven into their identity, like opposition to abortion. 
  Joseph Karlovich of Jacksonville, Fla. is also a former Obama voter who abandoned the Democrats for Mr. Trump. Mr. Karlovich, 33, an engineer, explained that he was working for a government contractor on a Navy missile system in 2015 when the news cycle became consumed with Hillary Clinton's private email server, which had held some classified information.
  ''That's like a huge no-no, what she did,'' he said, noting that he believes he would have been fired for a similar offense. Offended by what he said were Mrs. Clinton's attempts to minimize the issue, he voted for Mr. Trump.
  Mr. Karlovich is from a family of five adult siblings with diverse political leanings. A sister who is a nurse is a Republican. A brother who leans Democratic works for the National Rifle Association.
  Mr. Karlovich said he had personally benefited from the president's America First policies. After the Trump administration restricted H-1B visas for immigrants with high-tech skills, Mr. Karlovich landed a better-paying job just this month in his field, robotics. ''I don't think I would have gotten offered the position'' without the restrictions on foreign workers, he said. ''There was less competition out there for me applying for that position.''
  He takes the president's bullying outbursts and lying with a grain of salt. ''He's selling a pitch, for the most part,'' he said. ''My dad's a salesman. For me, it's the same with all politicians. They're trying to get you to buy in, and you have to do your own research.''
  When Shelley Taylor was 17 in rural Ohio, she crossed a teachers' picket line at her high school and told the school board the teachers were selfishly depriving seniors of credits they needed to graduate. Supporters of the teachers boycotted her parents' hardware store, she recalled. The episode shaped her political identity as a conservative.
  Now a resident of Deltona, Fla., Ms. Taylor, 59, still considers herself outspoken, and she was drawn in four years ago by that same quality in Mr. Trump. ''I liked how he was very straight up,'' she said. ''I laughed at his demeanor. I thought, all right, we got a guy here who's going to whoop some butt on these politicians.''
  Ms. Taylor believes the president's enemies, including Democrats who she says behave like ''spoiled little kids,'' have tried to undermine him from Day 1. Among the developments she said were being manipulated to damage the president are the coronavirus outbreak and the protests after the death of Mr. Floyd, a Black man killed in the custody of white police officers in Minneapolis.
  ''We've had more cops gun down white people than Black people,'' she said. ''Do we throw a fit if a white guy gets killed by the cops? No.''
  ''I'm not racist,'' she said. ''I'm not. I have all kinds of friends. There's good cops and there's bad cops, I see that. We just need to weed them out. I think this George Floyd incident got escalated to be ridiculous.''
  ''He was doing such a great job,'' Ms. Taylor said of the president. ''They couldn't impeach him. Everything was going good and wham, all of a sudden, we got a freaking virus.''
  Ms. Taylor and others blamed the news media's coverage of the virus, complaining that the media is being hypocritical when it condemns unmasked crowds in bars but not unmasked protesters in Portland and Seattle. They echoed a Gallup poll from March that showed Republicans' trust in the media's response to the pandemic was lower than for any institution.
  Mr. Trump has called journalists ''the enemy of the people'' and has worked to undercut confidence in other institutions, including science, the electoral process and government.
  Ludwig Pikulski, 57, of Pennsylvania, said he had stopped watching all TV news a couple of months ago. ''There's no real news sources anymore,'' he said. ''I don't trust anything.'' He even tried watching a French channel in English.
  Kathleen O'Boyle, who sells real estate in the Pittsburgh suburbs, said she didn't believe Mr. Trump had soft-pedaled the virus at all.
  On the contrary, the coronavirus turned out to be ''a lot less severe'' than initially feared, with fatalities concentrated among older people but barely touching young ones, said Ms. O'Boyle, a law school graduate and former litigator.
  Mr. Trump, she said, had ''overreacted based on the information he had available.'' She added, ''I would have been opposed to an economic shutdown.''
  Ms. O'Boyle, 60, who called herself a constitutional conservative, said those who fixate on the president's behavior didn't understand what supporters like her admire in him: He has accomplished what she would want from any Republican president.
  ''It seems there's an argument that anybody who's a Trump supporter is not rational, is a racist, just likes him for his personality,'' she said. ''None of that is true with me. I actually don't particularly like his personality.''
  ''For some reason, people who are not Trump supporters can't understand that Trump supporters are pleased because he's done what they elected him for,'' she added.
  She ticked off a list: putting conservatives on the Supreme Court, withdrawing from the Paris climate accord, renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement and presiding over the lowest unemployment in 50 years before the pandemic. Moreover, she said, he did so amid a special counsel investigation and an impeachment.
  ''It's a very chaotic atmosphere to accomplish those things, so I give him credit for that,'' she said.
  Robin Sinsabaugh, who lives outside Charlotte, N.C., supervises seven McDonald's franchises. Many of her employees are African-Americans, and initially she was sympathetic to the outrage over Mr. Floyd's killing.
  ''Obviously Black men, especially younger men, are targeted,'' she said. ''I say that because I'm able to talk to a lot of my employees. I talked to a young man who said, 'I've been pulled over a dozen times when I've done nothing wrong.'''
  But she believes that grievances that were peacefully expressed at first got out of hand in early June, when the police in Charlotte said that protesters had aimed rocks and fireworks at officers, and the authorities responded with pepper spray and tear gas.
  ''I'm not going to remember them for anything they said,'' Ms. Sinsabaugh said of the marchers. ''I'm going to remember them for what they did to their own city.''
  Ms. Sinsabaugh, 47, is married to a retired police officer.
  She said the nationwide fracture between the president's support of aggressive policing and the protesters' fury at law enforcement had split her own household. Her 17-year-old son, who will vote for the first time in November, is vehemently anti-Trump. When he watched the video of Mr. Floyd's killing, he erupted, saying ''all cops should be shot.''
  Ms. Sinsabaugh hit the roof. She took her son aside, she recalled, and said: ''From now on, I don't want to hear you say one more word. We don't talk about cops in this house. Your father being a cop for 26 years is why we have what we have. That level of respect needs to change.''
  Polls show that Mr. Trump's most unwavering supporters are white evangelical Christians. Despite the moral lapses in his life -- his infidelity, his bankruptcies or questionable enterprises like his now-defunct charity -- they have continued to stick with him.
  When Sarah Danes was an adolescent, her parents were Christian missionaries on the Navajo Reservation. Today she, her husband and their five children, 8 to 17, live in rural Western Michigan. He works at a food processing plant and she is a homemaker. They both strongly oppose abortion, and believe Mr. Trump will further that cause.
  They don't spend much time on the internet. ''I get a little news through a pro-life TV network,'' said Ms. Danes, 39. ''They said Trump was the first-ever president to speak at the March for Life,'' she added, referring to the annual anti-abortion rally on the National Mall. ''I'm like, wow, that's awesome. When I hear him talk about life, it's not just a social issue, it's a God-says-it's-wrong issue.''
  She feels a long way from Washington and what elected officials there seem to understand about the lives of people like her.
  ''We're in a lot better place financially than we used to be, but we've lived in a lot of trailers,'' she said of her family. ''I've had crazy neighbors dropping f-bombs at their children. I don't think people up in Washington have much of any clue about what my life looks like.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/25/us/politics/trump-reelection-supporters.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: SHELLEY TAYLOR, 59, of Deltona, Fla., who says bad police officers just need to be weeded out (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHARLOTTE KESL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
ROBIN SINSABAUGH, 47, who lives near Charlotte, N.C., about violence at protests (PHOTOGRAPH BY TRAVIS DOVE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 SARAH DANES, 39, who lives in rural western Michigan and strongly opposes abortion (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRITTANY GREESON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A20)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: INTERVIEWS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); EMOTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); POLITICS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (77%); VOTERS & VOTING (77%); RACIAL JUSTICE (76%); RACIAL PROFILING (76%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (76%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (75%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (75%); TRENDS & EVENTS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); CITY GOVERNMENT (72%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); HATE SPEECH (72%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); SOCIAL MEDIA (72%); VANDALISM (68%); CORONAVIRUSES (61%); CITIES (57%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (50%); US REPUBLICAN NATIONAL CONVENTIONS (50%); VIRUSES (50%)

Industry: LAWYERS (74%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (72%); SOCIAL MEDIA (72%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); BARACK OBAMA (88%)

Geographic: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: August 26, 2020


End of Document
A Rush for Work Visas Even as Demand Dips
The New York Times
April 2, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 710 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The yearly scramble by employers for temporary visas for foreign scientists and technology engineers started on Wednesday, with immigration authorities expecting fewer new petitions this year because of the recession and because of new restrictions on financial companies that received emergency federal aid. 
  For five business days beginning Wednesday, Citizenship and Immigration Services will accept petitions for the temporary visas known as H-1B for the 2010 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1. In recent years, visa limits were reached in the first days of the application period. 
  Over the weekend, employers like Microsoft and Cisco Systems rushed to send petitions by express mail and courier services so they would reach the agency when it opened Wednesday. 
  In spite of an expected lull in demand, employers and researchers predicted that the limits would quickly be reached again this year in part because of backlogs from last year. The annual H-1B limit is 65,000 visas, with a few exemptions, including the first 20,000 petitions from immigrants with degrees at the master's level or above from American universities. In 2008, about 163,000 petitions were filed. 
  At many American universities, more than half of graduates with advanced degrees in science and engineering are foreign. ''These visas are really the only practical way for employers to hire them,'' said Stuart Anderson, executive director of the National Foundation for American Policy, who has studied use of the visas. 
  In February, as part of the economic stimulus legislation, Congress added conditions for H-1B visas for banks that received assistance from the Troubled Asset Relief Program, known as TARP. The banks must show that they will not displace an American from a job to be filled by an immigrant for three months before and after the immigrant is hired.
  Bank of America and Merrill Lynch, among others, said that provision led them to rescind small numbers of job offers to graduating foreign students and financial technology engineers.
  In 2008, according to figures from Citizenship and Immigration Services, the top four companies seeking H-1B visas were  from India. By far the most visas -- 4,559 --went to Infosys Technologies, a $4 billion company in Bangalore, which used them to place Indian information technology workers in American companies. Microsoft, the first American company on the list, received 1,037 visas last year. 
  One of the biggest Indian companies using H-1B visas last year was Satyam Computer Services, based in Hyderabad. Its founder and chairman, B. Ramalinga Raju, is facing criminal charges in India, accused of inflating his employee rolls by more than 10,000 workers and falsifying accounts by more than $1 billion. The company is up for auction. 
  Indian companies' heavy use of the visas has drawn accusations of fraud from some lawmakers. Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said they intended to introduce a bill this week that would impose stricter hiring terms for all H-1B visas and increase enforcement. The senators said they would not consider raising the numerical limits on the visas until loopholes they had identified were closed. 
  ''With unemployment at rates higher than we've seen in decades, there is no shortage of people looking for work,'' Mr. Grassley said Wednesday, ''so companies should need less H-1B visas than last year.''
  In January, in a move that unsettled the outsourcing industry, federal prosecutors in Iowa brought criminal charges against the Vision Systems Group, a New Jersey company that provides temporary information technology workers to companies in several states. The company is accused of seeking H-1B visas for workers for an office in Iowa that did not exist, and of paying the workers based on the prevailing wage in Iowa, which is lower than in many states where the immigrants actually worked.
  Lawyers for Vision Systems asked the Iowa court on Wednesday to dismiss the case. ''We don't believe that bringing highly trained and highly productive people to work in the U.S. in an industry that is underserved by our own population is or should be a crime,'' a lawyer for the company, Mark Weinhardt, said. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); ENGINEERING (90%); PETITIONS (90%); RECESSION (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); TROUBLED ASSET RELIEF PROGRAM (86%); FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CREDIT CRISIS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (75%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (72%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (72%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (72%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (71%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (62%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (60%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (63%);  MERRILL LYNCH & CO INC (58%);  BANK OF AMERICA CORP (58%);  CISCO SYSTEMS INC (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (57%);  TECH MAHINDRA LTD (52%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (63%); INFY (NYSE) (63%); INFY (NSE) (63%); BAC (NYSE) (58%); BAC (LSE) (58%); 8648 (TSE) (58%); CSCO (NASDAQ) (58%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (57%); TECHM (NSE) (52%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (63%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (63%); NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (58%); NAICS523120 SECURITIES BROKERAGE (58%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (58%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (58%); NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (58%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (58%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (58%); NAICS334210 TELEPHONE APPARATUS MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC3661 TELEPHONE & TELEGRAPH APPARATUS (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (57%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (57%); NAICS541690 OTHER SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL CONSULTING SERVICES (52%); SIC8748 BUSINESS CONSULTING SERVICES, NEC (52%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); ENGINEERING (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); TROUBLED ASSET RELIEF PROGRAM (86%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (75%); PACKAGE SHIPPING (70%)

Person: CHUCK GRASSLEY (50%); RICHARD DURBIN (50%)

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (76%); HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (72%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: April 2, 2009


End of Document
Applications for Foreign Worker Visas Are Down
The New York Times
April 9, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 299 words
Byline: By KIRK SEMPLE
Body


Federal immigration authorities said Wednesday that they were still accepting petitions by employers for temporary visas for foreign scientists and technology engineers for the next fiscal year, reflecting a sharp drop in applications over last year.
  The announcement came as a surprise to some employers, researchers and immigration advocates, who had predicted that in spite of the recession and other factors, the quotas for petitions for the so-called H-1B visa would most likely be reached within the initial five-day period, which began on April 1. 
  The State Department issues up to 85,000 H-1B visas, including 65,000 for applicants with a bachelor's degree or similar training and 20,000 for those with a master's degree or higher from an American university. 
  Some analysts have attributed the decline to the economic downturn and to new restrictions on financial companies that received emergency federal aid.
  But Chris Rhatigan, a spokeswoman for the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, which handles the petitions, said that in 2006, the agency did not reach the regular H-1B cap for at least a month and did not reach the master's  cap until July. 
  In 2007, the regular cap was met in the first five-day filing period and the master's degree cap was met within a month. Last year, the agency received about 163,000 petitions within the first five-day petition period, more than meeting the quotas.
  ''The last two years were anomalies,'' Ms. Rhatigan said. ''This is going back to normal.'' 
  As part of the economic stimulus legislation, Congress added conditions for H-1B visas requiring banks that received bailout money to show that a newly hired immigrant is not displacing an American from a job for three months before and after the immigrant is hired. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (90%); PETITIONS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); RECESSION (78%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (78%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (77%); BAILOUTS (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (71%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (56%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: April 9, 2009


End of Document
Daily Report: Tech's Continuing Immigration Debate
The New York Times
February 7, 2017 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. ; BITS
Length: 224 words
Byline: By PUI-WING TAM
Body


The tech industry has been up in arms about President Trump's immigration moves. That shows no signs of abating anytime soon.
For more than a week, tech companies have been denouncing the president's executive orders to bar refugees and others from seven countries that are predominantly Muslim. Tech workers have staged protests, Uber employees asked their chief executive to consider stepping down from a presidential economic advisory council (he eventually did), and tech leaders have spoken out against the immigration actions. On Sunday, nearly 100 companies joined the court fight against those actions. 
  The furor is set to continue if, as expected, Mr. Trump signs an executive order concerning H-1B visa holders, who typically are skilled foreign workers. These types of workers have been critical to the tech industry, which has long lamented a shortage of engineers with the right kinds of skills.
  But the debate over H-1B visas is not cut and dry. Daisuke Wakabayashi and Nelson D. Schwartz, reporters at The New York Times, found that some American tech workers think that people with H-1Bs have unfairly helped displace them. Others say the influx of people with H-1Bs has put downward pressure on salaries. The issue is thorny, spurring a variety of suggestions for how to overhaul the visa program.
  The next move is Mr. Trump's.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/06/technology/daily-report-techs-continuing-immigration-debate.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); IMMIGRATION (93%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EXECUTIVES (78%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (75%); REFUGEES (73%); LABOR SHORTAGES (72%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); WORKER CATEGORIES (72%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (57%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (77%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (78%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: February 7, 2017


End of Document
The Country I Love; Op-Ed Contributor
The New York Times 
July 4, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 908 words
Byline: PRAMILA JAYAPAL
Highlight: America embraced me when I was 16. Now I’m a member of Congress.
Body


SEATTLE — Seventeen years ago, I celebrated my first Independence Day as a United States citizen. I couldn’t have predicted then that I would one day have the enormous privilege of being the first Indian-American woman to serve in the United States House of Representatives, and one of only six members of Congress who are naturalized citizens.
After arriving here from India at age 16, I spent more than a dozen years on an alphabet soup of visas — F1, H1B and more — before I finally got my green card through marriage to an American. Some years later, I was awarded a fellowship from the Institute of Current World Affairs, which allowed me to spend two years living in my birth country. I just had to come back to the United States once a year to keep my permanent resident status current. When I became pregnant during the second year of the program, my husband and I planned to return to the United States in time for my last trimester, so I could deliver the baby at home, and then return to India.
That plan did not work out. Just two weeks before we were scheduled to board our flight back to the United States, I developed a leak in my amniotic sac. My son was born prematurely at 26.5 weeks, weighing less than two pounds. I was now faced with a choice. In order to preserve my permanent resident status, I needed to return to the United States within weeks of his birth. But he was so tiny and in such critical condition that he could not fly, and I refused to leave his bedside knowing he might die.
So I stayed in India. I lost my green card status and only through the help and hard work of the institute was I able to regain my permanent residence status and return to the United States three months later when my son was finally able to fly.
I became determined to get my citizenship as soon as I was eligible so that I would never again face the prospect of being separated from my son, who was a United States citizen by virtue of being the child of a United States citizen father. Part of the agreement that had allowed me to return to the United States again and regain my permanent residence status was that I would have to start from zero to qualify for citizenship again. That process took three years.
When I finally walked into the cavernous hall at the old location of Immigration and Naturalization Services (now called United States Citizenship and Immigration Services) south of downtown Seattle, I was prepared for a simple transaction that would finally grant me citizenship and ensure that I would always be with my son. I did not anticipate the emotion that would come with the moment, or the way it would shape my future, and my understanding of this country.
There were hundreds of others at the ceremony from all over the world, and I could hear languages from every continent spoken. We all carried small American flags. Grandparents held children; moms and dads held hands. As we took the oath of citizenship, the solemnity of the moment spiked through me. Tears welled up and rolled down my cheeks as I took in the mixed emotions of renouncing any allegiance to my birth country of India where I had been a citizen for 35 years and embracing my new country.
America, a country that had embraced me as a 16-year-old who had come here by myself to study and build a life of better opportunity.
America, a country built on the idea of being a refuge for those in need, “the tired masses, yearning to breathe free.”
America, a country that has always celebrated itself as a nation of immigrants.
In that moment, as I took my oath, I realized how lucky I was. I knew that my future had opened up, and that citizenship would offer me the chance to seek opportunity and to take part in our democracy. I knew, too, that with those freedoms and opportunity came enormous responsibility: to do everything I could to preserve and build our democracy, to vote, and to use my life to pay it forward and ensure opportunity for others.
I became an immigrant, civil and human rights advocate, then the first South Asian elected to the Washington State Legislature and the only woman of color in the Washington State Senate, and then was elected in 2016 to the United States Congress.
These are difficult times for immigrants and for Americans across our country. President Trump has harnessed the fear and prejudice that have accompanied every wave of immigrants in United States history, and stoked those fears to further his own agenda.
Restricting immigration from Muslim-majority countries, and cracking down on unauthorized immigration in a way that tears families apart and creates an atmosphere of fear, cuts at the very fabric of what really does make America great: the diversity that is our greatest strength.
This Fourth of July, as I remember my own naturalization ceremony and give thanks for the honor of being a United States citizen and a member of Congress, I call on the president and my fellow Americans to remember our history. What makes America great is our commitment to our values of inclusivity and opportunity for all. Immigration is about more than just who comes here and who is allowed to stay. It is about who we are as a country and what we are willing to stand up for.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and            Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the            Opinion Today newsletter. 
Pramila Jayapal, a Democrat, is the United States representative for Washington’s Seventh Congressional District.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); US INDEPENDENCE DAY (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (79%); NATURALIZATION (79%); US CONGRESS (79%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (74%); AGREEMENTS (73%); EMOTIONS (73%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (59%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Indian-Americans (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Ticker: Citizenship and Immigration Services (US)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (92%); WASHINGTON, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: July 6, 2017


End of Document
Judge Blocks Trump’s Ban on Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
October 1, 2020 Thursday 13:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1055 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The court overruled limits on visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers during the coronavirus pandemic.
Body


The court overruled limits on visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers during the coronavirus pandemic.
LOS ANGELES — A federal judge ruled on Thursday that President Trump overstepped his authority in suspending new visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers amid the coronavirus pandemic, enabling major companies like Microsoft, Goodyear Tire and Exxon Mobil to resume bringing employees from abroad.
Judge Jeffrey S. White of U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California temporarily blocked further implementation of the sweeping order, issued in June, as it applied to thousands of companies seeking to bring workers to the United States on a wide array of visas, including the H-1B for high-skilled workers, seasonal employees on guest-worker visas and others, such as au pairs, who enter the country on cultural exchange visas.
“Congress’ delegation of authority in the immigration context does not afford the President unbridled authority to set domestic policy regarding employment of nonimmigrant foreigners,” the judge wrote in his 25-page decision.
“Indeed, there must be some measure of constraint on Presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power in the immigration context, an area within clear legislative prerogative,” said Judge White, who was appointed by President George W. Bush.
The president had said that his proclamation, initially effective until Dec. 31, would protect Americans from foreign competition for jobs amid soaring unemployment caused by the coronavirus pandemic. In his proclamation, he described the entry of additional workers under work visas as an “unusual threat to the employment of American workers.”
The proclamation also restricted the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for extended stints. And it blocked visas for the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
In a scathing opinion, Judge White said the proclamation did not address the problem it purported to tackle, namely to lift the economy by providing job opportunities for Americans.
“The proclamation completely disregards both economic reality and the pre-existing statutory framework,” he wrote. “Furthermore, without any consideration of the impact on American firms and their business planning, the proclamation changes the scope of immigration policy in the United States.”
The judge’s order is at odds with an earlier decision reached by a federal judge in Washington, D.C., which ensures that the ultimate determination will be made by an appeals court.
Still, it immediately sets aside the visa ban for the plaintiffs who brought the case. They include the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Retail Federation and groups representing tech giants like Microsoft and Amazon; their members include hundreds of thousands of American businesses of all sizes from a cross-section of sectors.
“We are competing with the rest of the world to find and develop top talent to support innovation in our industry,” said Linda Kelly, a senior vice president and general counsel at the manufacturers’ association. “Today’s decision is a temporary win for manufacturers committed to building that innovation in the United States.”
“The restrictions both undermined our industry at a critical time and conflicted with the law,” she said.
The judge’s ruling was a lifeline, said Marcie Schneider, the president of Intrax, a cultural-exchange company that brings au pairs to the United States.
“This decision means that our staff can continue to do the important work that they do to bring cultural exchange participants on our programs and to remain employed in this vital field,” she said.
The administration did not immediately comment on the ruling.
Stephen Miller, the White House aide who is the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate many foreign worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. In recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
While the president’s pledge to build a “big, beautiful wall” to prevent illegal immigrants from swarming the border has garnered the most attention, his moves to slow legal immigration have been ongoing and even more effective.
And as the election nears, Mr. Trump has doubled down on his commitment to curb immigration of all kinds.
This week, the federal government said it would admit 15,000 refugees, an all-time low, during the coming fiscal year. That number is even fewer than the 18,000 refugees authorized for resettlement last year and a sliver of the 110,000 slots approved by President Barack Obama in 2016.
In April, Mr. Trump signed an executive order that suspended new permanent residence authorization, or green cards, to most foreigners looking to live in the United States.
Under another policy that took effect early this year, known as the public-charge rule, immigrants applying for green cards can be disqualified based on their likelihood of using public benefits and their English proficiency.
This week, Judge White issued a preliminary injunction blocking a series of fee hikes for visas and other immigration benefits that were to go into effect on Friday, saying they would irreparably harm poor immigrants.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services had planned to increase the cost of naturalization applications to $1,170 from $725 for most applicants; it would have also charged asylum seekers, who have never paid for refuge, a $50 application fee. The cost of applying for a deportation suspension or expulsion cancellation would have jumped to $1,810 from $285.
Most fee waivers for immigrants who are unable to afford paying the full cost would have been eliminated.
PHOTO: Stephen Miller, the White House aide who is the architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate many foreign worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Anna Moneymaker for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EPIDEMICS (94%); VIRUSES (93%); CORONAVIRUSES (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); PANDEMICS (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); JUDGES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); APPEALS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (76%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (73%); FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES (73%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (73%); SEASONAL WORKERS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (60%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Visas (%); Decisions and Verdicts (%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (58%);  GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER CO (58%);  EXXON MOBIL CORP (57%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (58%); GT (SWX) (58%); GT (NASDAQ) (58%); XOM (NYSE) (57%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); NAICS441320 TIRE DEALERS (58%); NAICS326220 RUBBER & PLASTICS HOSES & BELTING MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS326211 TIRE MANUFACTURING (EXCEPT RETREADING) (58%); SIC5531 AUTO & HOME SUPPLY STORES (58%); SIC3052 RUBBER & PLASTICS HOSE & BELTING (58%); SIC3011 TIRES & INNER TUBES (58%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (57%); NAICS211130 NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (57%); NAICS211120 CRUDE PETROLEUM EXTRACTION (57%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); MANUFACTURING (78%); TRAVEL BANS (78%); BIG TECH (77%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (73%)

Person: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); DONALD TRUMP (57%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON DC, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: October 2, 2020


End of Document
A Google Whiz Searches for His Place on Earth - Correction Appended
The New York Times
April 12, 2009 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


 Correction Appended

Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3265 words
Byline: By MATT RICHTEL
Dateline: MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif. 
Body


Where's Sanjay? 
  The question comes from one of dozens of engineers around a crowded conference table at Google. They have gathered to discuss how to build easy-to-use maps that could turn hundreds of millions of mobile phones into digital Sherpas -- guiding travelers to businesses, restaurants and landmarks. 
  ''His plane gets in at 9:30,'' the group's manager responds.
  Google is based here in Silicon Valley. But Sanjay G. Mavinkurve, one of the key engineers on this project, is not.
  Mr. Mavinkurve, a 28-year-old Indian immigrant who helped lay the foundation for Facebook while a student at Harvard, instead works out of a Google sales office in Toronto, a lone engineer among marketers. 
  He has a visa to work in the United States, but his wife, Samvita Padukone, also born in India, does not. So he moved to Canada.
  ''Every American I've talked to says: 'Dude, it's ridiculous that we're not doing everything we can to keep you in the country. We need people like you!' '' he said.
  ''The people of America get it,'' he added. ''And in a matter of time, I think current lawmakers are going to realize how dumb they're being.''
  Immigrants like Mr. Mavinkurve are the lifeblood of Google and Silicon Valley, where half the engineers were born overseas, up from 10 percent in 1970. Google and other big companies say the Chinese, Indian, Russian and other immigrant technologists have transformed the industry, creating wealth and jobs.
  Just over half the companies founded in Silicon Valley from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s had founders born abroad, according to Vivek Wadhwa, an immigration scholar working at Duke and Harvard. 
  The foreign-born elite dating back even further includes Andrew S. Grove, the Hungarian-born co-founder of Intel; Jerry Yang, the Chinese-born co-founder of Yahoo; Vinod Khosla of India and Andreas von Bechtolsheim of Germany, the co-founders of Sun Microsystems; and Google's Russian-born co-founder, Sergey Brin. 
  But technology executives say that byzantine and increasingly restrictive visa and immigration rules have imperiled their ability to hire more of the world's best engineers. 
  While it could be said that Mr. Mavinkurve's case is one of a self-entitled immigrant refusing to live in the United States because his wife would not be able to work, he exemplifies how immigration policies can chase away a potential entrepreneur who aspires to create wealth and jobs here. 
  His case highlights the technology industry's argument that the United States will struggle to compete if it cannot more easily hire foreign-born engineers.
  ''We are watching the decline and fall of the United States as an economic power -- not hypothetically, but as we speak,'' said Craig R. Barrett, the chairman of Intel. 
  Mr. Barrett blames a slouching education system that cannot be easily fixed, but he says a stopgap measure would be to let companies hire more foreign engineers.
  ''With a snap of the fingers, you can say, 'I'm going to make it such that those smart kids -- and as many of them as want to -- can stay in the United States.' They're here today, they're graduating today -- and they're going home today.''
  He is opposed by staunch foes of liberalized immigration and by advocates for American-born engineers. 
  ''There are probably two billion people in the world who would like to live in California and work, but not everyone in the world can live here,'' said Kim Berry, an engineer who operates a nonprofit advocacy group for American-born technologists. ''There are plenty of Americans to do these jobs.''
  The debate has only sharpened as the country's economic downturn has deepened. Advocates for American-born workers are criticizing companies that lay off employees even as they retain engineers living here on visas. But the technology industry counters that innovations from highly skilled workers are central to American long-term growth.
  It is a debate well known to Google, and it is a deeply personal one to Mr. Mavinkurve. 
  An Eye on America
  Sanjay Mavinkurve (pronounced MAY-vin-kur-VAY) was born in Bombay to working-class parents who soon moved to Saudi Arabia.
  He thought everything important in life was American -- from Baskin-Robbins and Nike Airs to the Hardees's and Domino's in the food court at the shopping mall. When in the car, he and his older brother played a game, naming all the things they could see that came from the United States.
  ''I know this sounds romantic, but it's true: I always wanted to come to America,'' said Mr. Mavinkurve, lanky, with bushy hair and an easy smile. ''I admired everything in the way America portrayed itself -- the opportunity, U.S. Constitution, its history, enterprising middle class.''
  When he was 14, he and his brother were accepted at Western Reserve Academy, a private school in Cleveland, and received scholarships. During his senior year, Mr. Mavinkurve finished near the top of his class, ran cross-country and track, and scored 1560 out of 1600 on the SAT.
  Next stop: Harvard. His freshman year, he won the prize for best essay written in French, a comparison of books by Annie Ernaux. His friends described him as social but with a quiet, determined work ethic. He took the toughest classes, and to make money he took a job cleaning toilets in the dorm.
  He remained patriotic; on his dorm wall, he hung an American flag his brother had purchased at Fort McHenry in Baltimore, where ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' was written.
  But he knew he could lose his immigration status after he graduated and his student visa expired. So he decided to major in computer science, which he understood to be in demand, and entered a four-year program for a master's degree. 
  In 2003, his final  year, he and three friends decided to build a Web site where college students could connect. Mr. Mavinkurve wrote the computer code. Eventually, the team disbanded, although some of its work evolved into Facebook. He had helped create the foundation for a product that has become a national sensation.
  He started at Google in August 2003, as a product manager on the teams that developed Google News and the Google toolbar, then worked on the look and feel of the video search, and on the early versions of Google Maps for cellphones. He developed a reputation for helping design the way the products look, and making them simple to use.
  Still, he had ample reason to worry about his visa status, given the limits on how many visas are issued for skilled immigrant labor.
  It is a category whose significance has been growing since the 1920s, when politicians and business executives started recognizing the value of skilled immigrants. After World War II, companies began actively recruiting scientists, among them Nobel Prize winners, from around the world. 
  The emphasis on skilled labor was codified in the Hart-Celler Immigrant Act of 1965, which said that for 20 percent of immigration spots, candidates with certain skills would get preference to stay indefinitely, though that 20 percent also included the family members of those skilled immigrants. 
  (At the time, 74 percent of visas were given to people to be reunited with family members here, and 6 percent for political refugees from the Eastern Hemisphere.) 
  Reflecting the growing importance of technology -- and responding to industry lobbying -- in 1990 Congress set aside 65,000 temporary work visas, known as H-1B visas, for skilled workers. The visas, which are sponsored by companies on behalf of employees, permit three years of work, with an automatic three-year extension.
  The limit was raised twice as the technology sector boomed, to 115,000 in 1999 and to 195,000 in 2001. But those temporary increases were not renewed for 2004, and the number of H-1B visas reverted to 65,000. (There are an additional 20,000 H1-B's for people with graduate degrees from American universities.) 
  Since 2004, there has been a growing gap between the number of H-1B visas sought and those granted, through a lottery. In 2008, companies made 163,000 applications for the 65,000 slots. Google applied for 300 of them; 90 were denied. 
  In 2004, Mr. Mavinkurve was one of the lucky ones. ''You can be very proud,'' said the congratulatory e-mail message he received from an immigration lawyer at Google. 
  Good fortune followed at Google. In honor of the country that made it possible, on June 14, 2004, Flag Day, Mr. Mavinkurve made a laser print of an American flag and taped it to a white board in a Google hallway. The flag remains.
  When Google went public that August, Mr. Mavinkurve was on his way to becoming a multimillionaire. 
  ''I remember quantifying: for each dollar the stock goes up, I make more than my mother and father make together in a whole month at work,'' he said. 
  Indeed, recent immigrants like those at Google have been successful. 
  ''The thing distinctive about this generation, and I think unprecedented, is that they are coming with the highest level of skills in the leading industries,'' said AnnaLee Saxenian of the school of information at the University of California, Berkeley. 
  She added that this was acute in Silicon Valley because of its entrepreneurial culture. 
  ''You don't see immigrant success at any other place in the U.S. at anywhere near the same scale,'' she said.
  The Guy With the Answer
  The role Mr. Mavinkurve played in Google's success was on stark display in early 2007, when the company's map-making team faced a problem that even the best and brightest could not solve. The team met in Winnipeg, one of many conference rooms at Google headquarters named for foreign cities, like Algiers, Tunis and Haifa.
  International tributes take other forms; over cubicles in one building hang flags from dozens of countries. The cafeteria, where much of the fare is ethnic, includes Indian and Chinese food stations.
  These touches are appropriate. Of Google's 20,000 workers, 2,000 were born abroad and work on temporary visas, while numerous others (the company would not disclose how many) have become American citizens or been granted permanent residency, the so-called green card status.
  The work force is international, and so is the company's market. With the mobile phone, Google believes it can expand in places where reaching the Internet over computers is difficult, and create advertising-supported versions of maps and other services so consumers can effectively use the services free, exchanging not money, but attention. 
  But back in late 2006, maps produced by the service were taking too long to download and appear on phones. As customers waited for the maps to form, they racked up huge bills from cellphone providers, which at the time were charging for every minute or every byte of data transferred. 
  Enter Mr. Mavinkurve, who floated an alternative: cut the number of colors in each map section to 20 or 40 from around 256. The user would not see the difference, but the load times would be reduced 20 percent.
  Mr. Mavinkurve used a rare combination of creativity, analysis, engineering and an understanding of graphics to find a solution that had eluded the rest of the team, said Mark Crady, a manager in the maps group.
  ''He's one of the best U.I. guys I've ever seen,'' Mr. Crady said, referring to user interfaces. ''Google Maps for mobile reflects Sanjay.''
  Many innovators in Silicon Valley come from overseas; 42 percent of engineers with master's degrees and 60 percent of those with engineering Ph.D.'s in the United States are foreign-born. 
  Foreigners also spur innovation by broadening understanding of consumers abroad. For instance, on the advice of Chinese-born workers, Google dotted its mobile maps for China with fast-food restaurants, which locals use as navigational landmarks. 
  When Google cannot get visas for people it wants to hire, it seeks to accommodate them in overseas offices, like the bureaus in Britain and Brazil from which map-team members attend meetings via video conference. 
  That work-around presents a number of drawbacks, one of which is especially apparent when one worker is in California and a colleague is in India.
  ''It's 11 hours to Hyderabad,'' Peter Norvig, director of research for Google, says of the time difference. ''We do video conferences where we're up late and they're up early. Maybe a video conference is as good as a formal meeting, but there are no informal meetings. As a result, we lose the pace of work, and we lose trust.''
  The larger risk is employees growing unhappy working at a distance, or foreign companies recruiting them. 
  For his part, Mr. Mavinkurve, in Toronto, typically talks with colleagues via video conference, e-mail or instant message. But he does fly twice a month to headquarters and once a month to Britain, his life a whirlwind of time zones and virtual interaction.
  For Google and Mr. Mavinkurve, working here would be better. The trouble is, he fell in love.
  Stuck North of the Border
  He sits at a rooftop pub in Toronto, drinking Canadian amber beer. His wife, Ms. Padukone, 27, sips sangria. Evident between them is a respect, and slight emotional distance -- understandable given their brief history together.
  In 2006, while working for Google in Mountain View, Mr. Mavinkurve saw his future wife's photo on the cover of a newsletter published by his Indian ethnic community, the Konkani. She was attending college in Singapore. He found her pretty, so he e-mailed her.
  ''For three months, we sent messages back and forth -- but regularly,'' she said.
  ''I hate talking on the phone,'' he explained.
  They arranged to meet while Mr. Mavinkurve was in Singapore during a flight layover on his way to India. They met for two hours, and connected. 
  They were engaged in January 2007 in India, their second meeting. They married there in 2008.
  Like first-generation immigrants throughout American history, Mr. Mavinkurve has deep ethnic ties but is quickly assimilating. His wife is no different. But visa rules preclude her from working in the United States unless her husband gets a green card.
  That process can take two years. So they live in Toronto, where she recently landed a job in finance. 
  Mr. Mavinkurve and his wife get little sympathy from Mr. Berry of the Programmers Guild, a nonprofit group with a volunteer staff that lobbies Congress on behalf of American-born high-tech workers. 
  To Mr. Berry, 50 -- who lives in Sacramento, where he was born -- it is unfathomable that Google, which receives one million resumes a year, cannot find enough qualified Americans. Further, he says immigrants depress wages. 
  By law, H-1B workers must be paid prevailing wages, but there are conflicting studies on whether some employers actually pay less when they control the fate of the sponsored workers. Even some of the supporters of allowing in more skilled immigrants say the H-1B system is flawed because it gives employers so much power over employees.
  As the recession deepens, many people, including members of Congress, have criticized companies like Microsoft and Intel for laying off Americans while retaining visa holders. Google says it will cut 350 workers this year.
  Mr. Berry says his skills and education -- a bachelor's degree in computer science from California State University, Sacramento -- are denigrated by an industry that asserts that the best talent comes from overseas, via Ivy League schools. He worries about the employability of his children, who are studying engineering at top colleges, the University of Southern California and California Polytechnic State University.
  Mr. Berry, for his part, works at a major technology company he declines to name because his employment agreement precludes him from talking about his employer when in his advocacy role.
  He does not believe that skilled immigrants are essential to innovation. In fact, he argues the opposite. ''In my experience,'' he said, ''foreign software programmers are less likely to step out of the box and present alternatives to management.''
  His arguments have caught the attention of some on Capitol Hill. ''Not all our own people are able to get good jobs right now,'' said Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama and one of the members of Congress who oppose temporary work visas.
  Mr. Sessions favors broad immigration reform that puts even greater emphasis on admitting people with skills. He even wants to ask visa applicants to take a scholastic aptitude test. 
  But he opposes temporary workers, whom he argues have incentive to work for less and return to their countries to share what they have learned. This puts him at odds with tech companies. 
  ''They need to step up and look at what's in the national interest,'' he said. 
  Google estimates that it spends about $20 million a year on its immigration efforts -- including lobbying, administration and fees to a law firm. Microsoft, while it would not disclose expenses, probably spends more. Its in-house immigration team numbers 20 lawyers and staff members.
  On the political front, the tech industry lobbies Congress through an organization called Compete America, which includes titans like Intel, Microsoft, Google and Oracle. 
  ''The next generation of Google engineers are being turned down,'' says Pablo Chavez, Google's senior policy counsel. ''If a foreign-born engineer doesn't come to Google, there is a very good chance that individual will return to India to compete against us.''
  At the rooftop pub, Mr. Mavinkurve and his wife both express some anger. He thinks America should embrace him, given his contributions and taxpaying potential. After Google went public, he paid more than $200,000 in federal taxes on his income from salary and, mostly, sales of his shares, just in one year.
  He misses interaction with colleagues. It hinders efficiency, slows work. He is physically drained from travel. He is frustrated that he cannot put down roots in America, and maybe start his own company, because he cannot leave Google, his visa sponsor.
  He says he feels, on one hand, great gratitude that America gave him extraordinary opportunity. But he says he fulfilled his side of the bargain by striving and succeeding. ''Dude, I love this country,'' he said. 
  But he doesn't feel loved back: ''My devotion is unrequited.''
  To Stay or to Go
  On each of Mr. Mavinkurve's twice-monthly visits to the United States (he keeps a room not far from Google), he meets with two friends at the Red Mango frozen yogurt shop on University Avenue in the heart of Palo Alto. Over scoops of green tea yogurt, they brainstorm for their next venture. 
  But he is not sure he can start a company -- at least in America. Unless he gets his green card and his wife can work, he would be the only breadwinner, risking his savings, and he says they would be unhappy. 
  ''Quitting Google means saying goodbye to my green card,'' he said.  
  If America will not have him, he might have to stay in Canada. The proof is on the wall of the two-bedroom high-rise apartment he shares with his wife -- who is pregnant -- and his parents, who have moved in with them. On the living room wall is a Canadian flag.
  ''Quality stitching,'' he said, fingering it.
  Mr. Mavinkurve, who once hung American flags in his dorm room and then in Google's hallway, still loves America. But the Internet-era immigrant, who moves so quickly between worlds, cannot decide where to land. 
  Where is Sanjay? Even he is not sure where he belongs.
  ''I'm not sure I want to go back,'' he said of the possibility of moving back to the United States. ''I'm not sure I can.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Correction


An article last Sunday about immigration policies that are hindering efforts by technology companies to hire foreign-born engineers misstated the birthplace of Jerry Yang, co-founder of Yahoo. He was born in Taiwan, not China. The article also misstated the Hungarian-born Andrew S. Grove's role in the start-up of the Intel Corporation. He was brought in by Robert N. Noyce and Gordon E. Moore to operate the company at its founding in 1968; he was not a co-founder.
An article on April 12 about immigration policies that are hindering efforts by technology companies to hire foreign-born engineers overstated the number of Google employees who were born abroad and work at the company on temporary visas. The number ranges from 1,200 to 1,800; it is not 2,000.
Correction-Date: April 23, 2009

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Sanjay Mavinkurve of Google lives in Canada because his wife can't get an American work visa. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A1)
Google's home base in Mountain View, Calif., is a corporate United Nations, where 1 in 10 employees is on a temporary visa and more are from overseas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
The Mountain View office celebrates Google's global ambition and work force. Work rooms are named for foreign cities, like Navrongo in Ghana. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Even though Google sponsored a work visa for Sanjay Mavinkurve, he lives in Toronto with his wife, Samvita Padukone, and his parents. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM ROSS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A20) CHARTS: BRAIN GAIN: A flood of skilled immigrants have moved into better-paying jobs in the United States. The high-tech industry says they are critical to keeping the nation competitive.
RELYING ON IMMIGRANTS: Jobs dominated by immigrants include many low-skilled categories. But the list has also come to include high-skilled jobs, and the number of high-paid immigrants is growing rapidly.
COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES
ROOM AT THE TOP (Sources: Census
''Higher Education, Innovation and Growth'' by Giovanni Peri, 2007
''American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Professionals on U.S. Comptetitiveness'' by Stuart Anderson and Michaela Platzer, 2006
''The Ethnic Composition of U.S. Inventors'' by William R. Kerr, 2006
''America's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs'' by Vivek Wadhwa, et al., 2007, Kaufman Foundation
 Foreign Labor Certification Data Center) (pg.A21)                                               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ENGINEERING (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); MOUNTAINS (79%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (75%); FOREIGN LABOR (75%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (75%); JOB CREATION (68%); PUBLIC POLICY (65%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (94%);  INTEL CORP (57%);  FACEBOOK INC (57%);  ORACLE AMERICA INC (52%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (57%); FB (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (94%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (52%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (52%); NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (52%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (52%); SIC5045 COMPUTERS & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE (52%); ENGINEERING (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (75%); RESTAURANTS (73%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (57%)

Person: SERGEY BRIN (79%); VINOD KHOSLA (55%); JERRY YANG (50%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (94%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (91%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (56%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); EARTH (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (56%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (92%); GERMANY (79%)

Load-Date: April 12, 2009


End of Document
Morning Agenda: Trump's Immigration Order, (Modest) Diversity Gains
The New York Times
February 7, 2017 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 
Length: 730 words
Byline: By AMIE TSANG
Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang .
Body


The confrontation over President Trump's ban on refugees and visitors from several predominantly Muslim countries reached the courts at the weekend, foreshadowing the years of legal battles that could lie ahead for the administration.
The ban was blocked at a Federal District Court in Seattle and an appeals court in California refused to reinstate it. The government was instead ordered to file a brief defending Mr. Trump's order. 
  That is not the only immigration issue that is in the headlines.
  Debate over the use of H-1B visas has also been simmering as employers prepare for Mr. Trump to sign an executive order to overhaul the program.
  H-1B visas are intended to bring in foreign professionals with college degrees and specialized skills to fill jobs when qualified Americans cannot be found. There could be as many as a million H-1B visa holders residing in the United States, accounting for up to 13 percent of jobs in the technology sector alone.
  A draft on an executive order leaked last week showed that options for modifying the program would be considered to ''ensure that the beneficiaries of the program are the best and the brightest.''
  Critics say that American companies are gaming the system to snap up visas so that they can replace American workers with cheaper, temporary staff members. But proponents of the H-1B say it is an important way to attract top talent to the country.
  The status of the immigrants protected by the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program is also a source of concern.
  Many of these people are worried that they will lose the protections that allowed hundreds of thousands of people taken to the United States as children to obtain jobs, pursue college degrees and live openly in the country where they were raised.
  They already face difficulties in completing their education. One of these people, Mitzie Perez, is trying to challenge policies that make it difficult for undocumented students to finance higher education with a lawsuit seeking class-action status.
  The subject of immigration even featured at the Super Bowl:
   Airbnb's advertisement said, ''We believe no matter who you are, where you're from, who you love or who you worship, we all belong. The world is more beautiful the more you accept.''
   Coca-Cola revived an ad from the 2014 Super Bowl, which featured people singing a multilingual version of ''America the Beautiful.''
  At the same time, the unwinding of government regulations put in place during the Obama administration continues apace.
  Ajit Pai, the chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, stopped nine companies from providing high-speed interest service at a discount to low-income individuals. He also withdrew an effort to keep prison phone rates down and scrapped a proposal to break open the cable box market, as part of a flurry of actions last week, many of which were not publicly announced.
  Consumer advocacy groups and telecoms analysts were stunned. The message was: the F.C.C., an independent agency, will mirror the Trump administration's rollback of government regulations.
  Modest Gains for Diversity
  The proportion of women and minorities on the board seats of Fortune 500 companies has increased (a little), but most of the positions are still held by white men, according to the Alliance for Board Diversity and Deloitte.
  Why aren't more women and minorities on these boards?
  Companies still turn to people with chief executive experience and these tend to be men. There is also little turnover in board seats, so change is unlikely to come quickly.
  One possible bright spot: many board members are in their 70s and likely to step down in the coming years, opening up seats to more diverse members.
  Coming Up
   The International Monetary Fund will hold a board meeting to discuss whether it will participate in Greece's current bailout program. It must reach an agreement with Greece's European creditors over debt calculations and austerity conditions by Feb. 20, when European finance ministers meet in Brussels to review the program.
   Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, will speak to members of the European Parliament. He is expected to face questions about what the Trump presidency means for the eurozone and whether rising inflation rates will prompt the central bank to begin withdrawing its economic stimulus measures.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/06/business/dealbook/trump-immigration-super-bowl-diversity.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (89%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (89%); APPEALS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENTS (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (74%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (74%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); CLASS ACTIONS (73%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (72%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (70%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); MULTILINGUALISM (61%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (60%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (50%)

Company:  COCA-COLA CO (51%)

Ticker: KO (NYSE) (51%)

Industry: NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (51%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (51%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENTS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); COMMUNICATIONS REGULATION & POLICY (66%); TELEPHONE RATES (65%); ENERGY & UTILITY LAW (60%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); BARACK OBAMA (58%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: February 7, 2017


End of Document
He Became a Hate Crime Victim. She Became a Widow.
The New York Times 
July 8, 2017 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 3465 words
Byline: AUDRA D.S. BURCH
Highlight: Srinivas Kuchibhotla’s death in an anti-immigrant attack at a Kansas bar made headlines the world over. Now his wife, Sunayana Dumala, tells her story.
Body


OLATHE, Kan. — Sunayana Dumala tried once again to enter the worship room she and her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, had created in their home for daily prayers. Mr. Kuchibhotla had built an intricate wooden shrine by hand two years ago, a small sacred edifice where they would kneel each morning. Months after his death, it became a place where she would honor him.
On a Wednesday night in February, a man with a semiautomatic pistol and a distorted notion of American pride turned ordinary people into shooting victims and survivors — and he turned Ms. Dumala into a widow.
Mr. Kuchibhotla, an Indian-born engineer, was confronted about his immigration status at a bar, then fatally shot. By the time the police arrived, Mr. Kuchibhotla was dying, and his close friend Alok Madasani was wounded. Another patron who tried to stop the attack was also struck by gunfire.
Three months to the day after her husband’s murder, Ms. Dumala stood at the entrance of the prayer room alone, looking toward a window that framed storm clouds. She turned away.
“Everything about this room, everything about this house,” she said later, “reminds me of my Srinu,” the nickname she gave him during their courtship.
It was in the quiet of the next morning that Ms. Dumala, 32, decided that would be the day she would step inside the worship room. What had been unbearable just the previous day seemed surmountable, if only because it was the next painful step.
So she willed herself up the stairs, inching past the framed collage of wedding photos, and into the room. She cleaned each of the deity figurines with warm water. Then she prayed for peace in a whisper just above the sound of children’s play at the elementary school next door.
‘Do We Belong Here?’
In some ways, what one man shouted in anger and one woman uttered in grief capture one of America’s most troubling intersections.
“Get out of my country!” the gunman would yell, before opening fire on the two Indian men he later said he believed were from Iran.
“Do we belong here?” the widow would ask in a Facebook post six days after the shooting.
The episode happened at dinnertime in a neighborhood bar, part of a spasm of hatred that seems to be uncoiling in small towns and big cities across the nation — and in rising numbers.
A month before the shooting, the Victoria Islamic Center in Texas was torched, destroying the mosque. A month after the shooting, a            white supremacist traveled from Baltimore to New York City on a mission to randomly kill a black man. He did just that. The reason: a deep hatred of black men, according to the New York Police Department.
“We’ve read many times in newspapers of some kind of shooting happening,” Ms. Dumala said at a news conference in February at the headquarters of Garmin, where Mr. Kuchibhotla worked as a senior aviation systems engineer.
“And we always wondered, how safe?”
Ms. Dumala had wondered how the couple fit into this new narrative, if they should move to a different country, and once even asked her husband, “Are we doing the right thing of staying in the United States of America?”
Ms. Dumala shared what is now the most dreadful chapter of her life seated at the foot of the king-size bed where they once slept. Much of their story was typical, abundant with promise: They were Indian immigrants who moved to the United States from Hyderabad for postgraduate degrees and jobs, a young couple in love, planning a family, making Kansas home.
Her night stand, closest to the window, offered unintended markers on that life: a 2007 college graduation photo of Mr. Kuchibhotla taken not long after they met, and a small box of Russell Stover assorted chocolates he gave her for Valentine’s Day, eight days before he was shot.
The realization that her husband was killed because of intolerance, because he was not born in America, is what forced her to emerge from this personal, private hell. She thought that if people were to know the aftermath of a hate crime, the crater-sized void and endless questions left behind, if the victims were rendered as three-dimensional, maybe there would be less fear, less hate.
“My story needs to be spread,” she said plainly. “Srinu’s story needs to be known. We have to do something to reduce the hate crimes. Even if we can save one other person, I think that would give peace to Srinu and give me the satisfaction that his sacrifice did not go in vain.”
A Prescient Dread
On the morning of his death, Mr. Kuchibhotla left for work before his wife. “Bye,” he said, hurrying past her, a casual farewell that would come to haunt Ms. Dumala for its brevity and finality.
Just before 6 p.m., Ms. Dumala texted and called Mr. Kuchibhotla to plan for the evening. His cellphone was off, which was not unusual, because of his habit of watching videos, draining the battery.
She had hoped they could spend time that evening in their backyard, sipping tea and watching the sun lower into the horizon. The view, a wide-open stretch with houses dotted in the distance, was one of the charms of their deep blue two-story house in Olathe, an orderly Kansas City suburb in Johnson County, Kan.
Ms. Dumala picked at her roti in between calls to their friends looking for her husband. Maybe he had gone to have drinks at Austins Bar & Grill, his favorite after-work spot, with Mr. Madasani, one of his best friends from work. But Mr. Madasani’s phone was off, too.
She began to scroll through Facebook. A news story popped into her feed: three people shot at Austins.
“I was getting scared, some kind of feeling was going through me. I was all alone,” she said, pausing to catch her breath, her face dampened by tears. “This is not my usual Srinu, I am saying to myself. He would have reached out to me somehow to let me know he is safe.”
Ms. Dumala’s instincts were right. The best friends, more like brothers, were at Austins. Typically the two went with another close friend from the office, Manju Nag, but he had been out of town on business. That night, it was just Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani at their regular table on the patio, the one closest to the door, discussing Bollywood movies and drinking a pair of Miller Lites.
The assailant approached the friends. Witnesses recall him wearing a white T-shirt with military-style pins, his head wrapped in a white scarf. He was intent on finding out one thing: Did the men at the table belong in the country?
Adam W. Purinton, a white Navy veteran, turned to the two brown-complexioned men, both living in the United States for years, and demanded to know their immigration status.
“Out of the blue comes this weird-looking gentleman, I say weird-looking because he had anger on his face,” said Mr. Madasani, 32, an aviation systems engineer at Garmin. “I did not hear what he was saying instantly, but I saw the look on Srinivas’s face change drastically. I looked at Adam and he walked towards me, he came to me and said, ‘Are you here legally?’”
Peppered with more questions and ethnic slurs, Mr. Madasani did not respond. Instead, he went inside to get the manager. Ian Grillot, 24, and another patron asked Mr. Purinton to leave and escorted him from the patio. As Mr. Madasani returned to the patio area, he said he heard more of the rant. “Oh, here comes the Arab,” Mr. Purinton said.
But he didn’t go far, pacing outside in the parking lot. Mr. Madasani said he and Mr. Kuchibhotla had decided to leave, but were stopped as other patrons apologized and assured them they were welcome. One guy paid their tab; the bar manager gave them another round of beer and fried pickles, a favorite of Mr. Kuchibhotla. “Everybody kept coming up to us saying this is not what we represent, you guys belong here,” he said.
Not long after, according to the authorities, Mr. Purinton returned to the bar with a handgun. He stood in the patio door, pointed his gun toward the two men, and fired.
Proposing to Him, Online
They had met online in 2006 after a mutual friend gave her a list of names of Indian students attending the University of Texas at El Paso. She was considering a master’s program there and wanted to get a feel for what to expect as an immigrant student. She sent a note to the first name on the list: Mr. Kuchibhotla.
They were both from Hyderabad, the riverside capital of Telangana State in southern India. He grew up the middle of three sons and loved cricket as a boy, playing on the rooftop of his family home. His father was a quality assurance officer for a pharmaceutical company and his mother was a teacher.
“He was the tallest of all of us brothers and cousins,” said Sai Kota, a cousin who grew up with Mr. Kuchibhotla and now lives in Edison, N.J. “We used to volunteer him to get the ball when it would go onto another rooftop. He could jump to the other rooftop. He was a brother and mentor to me.”
Ms. Dumala was immediately drawn to Mr. Kuchibhotla’s sharp focus, sense of humor and patience — she still likes to tell the story of the many weekends he took her to empty parking lots to teach her to drive. He liked the sound of her voice, melodic and sweet, and her caring nature — almost every day, she checked to make sure he had eaten breakfast.
Their casual phone conversations blossomed into the beginnings of a six-year courtship. After three months, Ms. Dumala proposed to him one night. No matter that she had never seen him in person.
They finally met months later at a temple when he went home to Hyderabad. “I did not know that he was going to be 6’2”, with me being 5 feet,” she said, chuckling.
She ended up attending St. Cloud State University in Minnesota, where she studied engineering management and graduated in 2010. After Mr. Kuchibhotla’s graduation in 2007, he accepted a job at Rockwell Collins, an avionics and information technology company in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, where he worked as a systems engineer in the flight control department. He loved everything about aviation, particularly the very idea that something so heavy could fly.
At Rockwell, he met Mr. Madasani, who would become one of his best friends and a roommate. Mr. Madasani moved to Kansas in 2014, joining his friend Mr. Kuchibhotla at Garmin.
Mr. Kuchibhotla persuaded his parents and his wife’s to bless their marriage, built upon love, rather than arranged. The couple married in 2012, in a ceremony in Hyderabad attended by more than 1,000 people.
In 2014, they moved to the Kansas City area, mostly to find opportunities for Ms. Dumala. She had stayed home much of their time in Iowa, unable to work with an H-4, for spouses of specialty workers who hold H-1B visas.
They found a home in Olathe, population 135,000, a city 20 minutes outside Kansas City and one of the fastest-growing in the nation.
Mr. Kuchibhotla continued his work as an engineer at Garmin. He helped companies that build airplanes and helicopters integrate Garmin technology and software into their aircraft. He was so well regarded that his boss routinely asked if the human resources division could “find more Srinivases.”
“This is not hyperbolic when I tell you he was almost the perfect employee,” said Dave Wysong, his supervisor. “He was a great engineer. Technically, very, very good. He was quiet and very, very friendly.”
Ms. Dumala started work as a database developer at a pharmaceutical marketing agency in May 2016. The couple became part of a circle of Indian friends who spent most every weekend together at dinner parties. The men played on a cricket team, where Mr. Kuchibhotla was the bowler, the pitcher’s position. Two years ago, they moved into a subdivision near Garmin. And last year, they began planning a family.
The End of the Day
It was 7:15 p.m. The work day had ended, and most people were home, headed there or winding down.
On this particular Wednesday, the winter sun had already set, but it was unseasonably warm, in the high 70s. It was just after halftime of the University of Kansas basketball game against Texas Christian University. Kansas was up a point and a win meant the team would clinch the Big 12 conference title for the 13th year in a row, which also meant Austins was packed with Jayhawks fans besides its usual cast of regulars, among them Mr. Kuchibhotla, Mr. Madasani and Mr. Grillot.
Ms. Dumala was at her Olathe home, three miles away, eating dinner and scrolling through Facebook.
Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani were back at their table talking. The crowd on the patio had thinned out during the halftime break, but the televisions were still blaring.
Suddenly, the sound of gunfire. “Pop, pause, then pop, pop, pop,” said Tim Hibbard, the owner of a software company who was sitting at the bar sipping a Blue Moon beer. “It wasn’t like the movies where the gunfire is large and demanding of attention. The sound was subdued, almost underwhelming. Low fidelity is how I would describe it.”
Mr. Kuchibhotla was hit first. Mr. Madasani, who had been sitting on the other side of the table, hit the ground, forced by a bullet, instinct or both. He crawled on his belly toward the opposite door. He thought the bullets were close by because the floor shook with each gunshot. “All I was thinking about at the time was about my baby, all I was thinking of was my wife’s belly,” said Mr. Madasani, whose wife was pregnant with their first child, a boy due in July. “In flashes, I was thinking, ‘I have to live.’”
Once outside, he realized he was shot in the left leg. “I saw Srivinas on the floor, not moving. I kept on yelling to everyone, ‘Leave me, go and attend to him.’”
Mr. Grillot, the bar patron who had intervened earlier, chased Mr. Purinton into the parking lot. Mr. Purinton turned and shot him in the chest and hand.
As people scattered, Vincent Baird, who was headed to the gas station across the street, ran toward the chaos to help. With four years of experience as an Army medic, he went straight to Mr. Kuchibhotla, whose breathing was shallow and labored.
Once on his knees, Mr. Baird could see a gunshot wound in his chest. With the help of two others, Mr. Baird said, he cut a four-inch square from an unused garbage bag and taped it over the wound. He then checked for other wounds and, seeing none, he turned him on his side.
Mr. Kuchibhotla stopped breathing at a couple of points, Mr. Baird said. Each time, he performed chest compressions until Mr. Kuchibhotla started breathing again and an ambulance arrived. He was pronounced dead at the University of Kansas Hospital.
Mr. Purinton had fled amid the chaos. He ended up 80 miles away at a bar in Clinton, Mo., where he told a bartender that he had shot “two Iranians.”
The Officers at the Door
Hours after the shooting, Ms. Dumala was an emotional wreck. Finally, she found the courage to search for more details on the shooting at Austins. The reports had not identified the victims, but included the name of the hospital in downtown Kansas City where they had been taken. What she didn’t know was that her husband of four years was already dead.
A car pulled into the driveway.
It was one of their friends, Shashi Bolaram. Ms. Dumala opened the door. Voice quivering, she asked him, “He was there, wasn’t he?”
Mr. Bolaram nodded.
Before Ms. Dumala could fully process what that might mean, there was a second knock at the door. She sat on the second stair as two Olathe police officers confirmed Mr. Kuchibhotla’s death.
On the half-hour ride to the hospital, Ms. Dumala sat in the back seat of a friend’s car, her mind cluttered and spinning. It came to rest on this incomprehensible notion of sudden loss: Her beloved Srinu was dead. She remembers hearing her own hollowed voice pose an endless loop of questions to herself, each more desperate than the last: “What should I do? What is this life? Is it true that I cannot see Srinu? Is it true that I can’t hear his voice? Is it true I lost the person who loves me the most?”
The next day, Ms. Dumala learned the horrific details of her husband’s murder. An Olathe police officer and an agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation told her who had killed him and why.
The police officer — who was stopped by Ms. Dumala from uttering Mr. Purinton’s name — also said that it appeared the shooting was premeditated.
“Hold on,” she said, stunned. “What do you mean?”
“Something planned,” he said.
“When? At that moment? In that night?” she pressed, the questions crashing into one another.
The reality of what had happened to her husband began to wash over her.
“At least until then, I was of the opinion that this was some random guy who came in and just shot three people, and my husband was unfortunate to be there,” she said. “That was a lot harder for me to hear.”
Mr. Purinton, 52, was formally charged with premeditated first-degree murder and two counts of premeditated attempted murder. Last month, he was also indicted on federal hate-crime charges.
The term “hate crime” was being used over and over and by the police, journalists and politicians to describe the death of her husband. All of a sudden, Mr. Kuchibhotla was a hate crime statistic, an example to bolster anti-hate legislation and now linked, fairly or not, to President Trump’s anti-immigrant rhetoric. Days after Mr. Kuchibhotla’s death, the president issued a statement condemning the shooting.
Ms. Dumala was aghast, baffled by the man who took her husband from her. “That guy, I think he was hurt, I don’t know what hurt him,” she said. “What is he doing by taking away this life? Did he serve his purpose? Did he lessen his anger? Even I have anger now, but that does not give me the right to go and take away his life.”
The funeral home made arrangements for Mr. Kuchibhotla to spend a final night in his Olathe home — a first for the company. His body was transported to the house in a discreet white van.
“We did everything to accommodate their requests. We also wanted to be culturally sensitive and show the family that our community was behind them,” said Christopher Holland, the funeral director. “We wanted them to heal from this tragedy.”
Mr. Kuchibhotla was in repose on a cot in an empty dining room that he had painted an elegant burgundy where family and friends paid their final respects. He remained with Ms. Dumala and her family until early that Saturday, when he was returned to the funeral home to be prepared for the trip to his homeland.
On a Tuesday afternoon in Hyderabad, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla was placed on a pyre of           logs. His funeral was held nine days before what would have been his 33rd birthday.
 Return to an Empty Home
Ms. Dumala returned to Kansas with her parents in April, staying with a friend until she could summon the strength to return to her home without Srinu. She spent her first few weeks back in Kansas trying to figure out the next chapter, difficult to define because her visa status is now in limbo. She is also looking for the best way to help reduce hate crimes.
Before her husband’s death, Ms. Dumala shopped at KC India Mart in Overland Park, where she could find foods imported from home. Over the years, she and her husband had become friendly with the owners, and when Mr. Kuchibhotla died, the store’s employees brought meals every day to friends and family gathered at the house.
One May evening, Ms. Dumala and her parents went to the grocery store to pick up ingredients for a traditional chickpea dish. Ms. Dumala pushed an empty cart down the first aisle toward the produce, unprepared for what would happen next. She stopped, almost involuntarily, in front of a crate of miniature eggplants. The sigh was audible, the sadness palpable.
“This was his favorite food,” she said out loud. “It didn’t matter how you cooked them, he loved any recipe made with eggplant.”
Ms. Dumala lingered, lost in the memory of the simple act of baking her late husband’s favorite dish.
John Eligon contributed reporting.Follow Audra Burch on Twitter @abscribe.
PHOTOS: Sunayana Dumala with her parents in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, below, was killed in a shooting. (A1); Some of Mr. Kuchibhotla’s personal effects in the couple’s bathroom, left, and a collage of wedding photos in the home. “Everything about this house reminds me of my Srinu,” Ms. Dumala said, using her nickname for him.; Ms. Dumala with her parents in her home in Olathe. It took her time to be able to face entering her own home again. (A12); Sunayana Dumala, left, at home in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, was killed in February in Austins Bar & Grill, above, by a gunman who targeted immigrants. She now works to reduce hate crimes. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12-A13)
Related Articles
    • An Eerie Similarity in 2 Kansas Hate Crimes, 3 Years Apart
    • Kansas Man Indicted on Hate Crime Charges in Shooting of Indian Immigrants
    • Indian-Americans Reward Man Who Intervened in Kansas Shooting
    • Spread of Hate Crimes Has Lawmakers Seeking Harsher Penalties
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); HATE CRIME (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); WEAPONS & ARMS (89%); DEATH & DYING (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); MURDER (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); RELIGION (78%); FIREARMS (76%); POLICE FORCES (74%); AUTOMATIC & SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARMS (73%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); RELIGIOUS FACILITIES (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (50%); WHITE NATIONALISTS (50%); Dumala, Sunayana (%); Murders, Attempted Murders and Homicides (%); Kuchibhotla, Srinivas (d 2017) (%); Purinton, Adam W (%); Hate Crimes (%); Olathe (Kan) (%); Indian-Americans (%)

Person: Dumala, Sunayana; Kuchibhotla, Srinivas (d 2017); Purinton, Adam W

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); KANSAS, USA (90%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: July 14, 2017


End of Document
ON NYTIMES.COM
The New York Times
April 12, 2009 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 224 words
Dateline: A slide show of work by Martha Cooper 
Body


-- known as Kodakgirl -- whose photographs have chronicled subway graffiti and urban art for decades.
  nytimes.com/thecity
  SLIDESHOW: PENTECOSTAL FIRE
  A visit to the Bronx parish of the Redeemed Christian Church of God, where Pastor Daniel Ajayi-Adeniran, at left, preaches a fiery form of Pentecostalism.
  nytimes.com/magazine
  AUDIO: AT THE AUTO SHOW
  At the 2009 New York International Auto Show, consumers have mixed views about the industry. 
  nytimes.com/autoshow
  Opinion
  100 Days
  How to End a War
  Bringing troops home from Iraq may require President Obama to be like Ike, writes Jean Edward Smith. The blog also features a new interactive timeline, with audio, documents and photos of the notable early moments of five presidencies.
  nytimes.com/100days
  VIDEO: SIGNS OF WEAR 
  In Palm Beach
  Palm Beach, Fla., may have lost more money per square mile than any other town because of the economy and Bernard L. Madoff's Ponzi scheme.
  nytimes.com/business
  AUDIO: IMMIGRANTS' VOICES
  Four skilled immigrants with H-1B visas -- a physicist, a designer, a doctor, and an architect -- share their experience of working in America.
  nytimes.com/immigration
  AUDIO: ART IN THE EVERYDAY
  Jean Shin, an artist who finds art in severed pant legs, castoff pill bottles and other recycled objects, discusses her body of work.
  nytimes.com/design

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARTHA COOPER
 FINLAY MACKAY)                                                          
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%); RELIGION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (76%); CHRONOLOGIES (73%); MATERIALS RECOVERY & RECYCLING (72%); US PRESIDENTS (70%); PONZI SCHEMES (67%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (76%); MATERIALS RECOVERY & RECYCLING (72%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (72%); BERNARD MADOFF (58%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); IRAQ (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: April 12, 2009


End of Document
Why Silicon Valley Wouldn’t Work Without Immigrants; State of the Art
The New York Times 
February 8, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1441 words
Byline: FARHAD MANJOO
Highlight: To get the very best people in the world, tech companies must look beyond American shores.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — The workers of Silicon Valley make unlikely revolutionaries. As a group, they are relatively wealthy, well educated and well connected.
While most here supported Hillary Clinton, tech workers are not the most obvious targets of President Trump’s policy ideas. Many who populate the world’s richest tech companies will be just fine if the Affordable Care Act is repealed. Most will not be personally inconvenienced by the proposed Mexican border wall.
Under Mr. Trump, tech workers could enjoy a windfall. They may get tax credits for child care costs, their companies may be allowed to repatriate foreign profits, and their coming income tax cuts might fund a luxury vacation or two.
This is all by way of saying: The protests that swept through Silicon Valley and Seattle in the last two weeks were not motivated by short-term financial gain. If you want to understand why tech employees went to the mat against Mr. Trump’s executive order barring immigrants from seven Muslim-majority countries, you need to first understand the crucial role that America’s relatively open immigration policies play in the tech business.
And you need to understand why people in tech see something cataclysmic in Mr. Trump’s executive order, and in the other immigration crackdowns waiting in the wings: the end of America’s standing as a beacon for the world’s best inventors.
“Silicon Valley is unlikely, as a phenomenon — it is not the default state of the world,” said John Collison, an immigrant from Ireland who is a co-founder of Stripe, a six-year-old payments start-up based in San Francisco.
One important reason Silicon Valley can exist at all, he said, is that it is welcoming to people from far outside its borders. “I go all across the world, and every other place is asking, ‘How do we replicate Silicon Valley where we are — in London, in Paris, in Singapore, in Australia?’”
The reason those places have so far failed to create their own indomitable tech hubs is that everyone there wants to come here.
“The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,” Mr. Collison said. “Look at all the leading technology companies globally, and look at how overrepresented the United States is. That’s not a normal state of affairs. That’s because we have managed to create this engine where the best and the brightest from around the world are coming to Silicon Valley.”
But, Mr. Collison added, “I think that’s kind of fragile.” Under Mr. Trump, the immigrant-friendly dynamic could change — and it could bring about the ruin of American tech.
To outsiders, this may sound alarmist, and perhaps more than a little self-righteous. Silicon Valley gets rightly rapped for talking a big game on its supposed meritocratic openness while failing on basic measures of diversity and inclusion. Women and non-Asian minorities make up a tiny fraction of the industry’s employees, and an even smaller portion of its executives and venture capitalists. In short, the tech industry is in thrall to white dudes as much as just about any other business.
And yet even a casual trip through most histories of the technology industry reveals an outsize role played by immigrants.
Last year, researchers at the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan think tank, studied the 87 privately held American start-ups that were then valued at $1 billion or more. They discovered something amazing: More than half of them were founded by one or more people from outside the United States. And 71 percent of them employed immigrants in crucial executive roles.
Collectively, these companies, which include householdish names like Uber, Tesla and Palantir, had created thousands of jobs and added billions of dollars to the American economy. Their founders came from all over the world — India, Britain, Canada, Israel and China, among lots and lots of other points around the globe.
In 2011, an immigration reform group, the Partnership for a New American Economy, found that more than 40 percent of companies in the Fortune 500 were founded by immigrants or the children of immigrants. For the newest members of the Fortune 500, many of them technology companies, the rate of immigrant founders was even higher, the organization said.
That should come as no surprise if you are familiar with the origins of the most iconic companies of the last few decades. One of Google’s founders is an immigrant from Russia, and its current chief executive is an immigrant from India. Microsoft’s chief executive is also from India. EBay and Yahoo were started by immigrants. Facebook’s largest subsidiaries, Instagram and WhatsApp, were both co-founded by immigrants. Apple was started by a child of immigrants.
There are many theories for why immigrants find so much success in tech. Many American-born tech workers point out that there is no shortage of American-born employees to fill the roles at many tech companies. Researchers have found that more than enough students graduate from American colleges to fill available tech jobs. Critics of the industry’s friendliness toward immigrants say it comes down to money — that technology companies            take advantage of visa programs, like the H-1B system, to get foreign workers at lower prices than they would pay American-born ones.
But if that criticism rings true in some parts of the tech industry, it misses the picture among Silicon Valley’s top companies. One common misperception of Silicon Valley is that it operates like a factory; in that view, tech companies can hire just about anyone from anywhere in the world to fill a particular role.
But today’s most ambitious tech companies are not like factories. They’re more like athletic teams. They’re looking for the LeBrons and Bradys — the best people in the world to come up with some brand-new, never-before-seen widget, to completely reimagine what widgets should do in the first place.
“It’s not about adding tens or hundreds of thousands of people into manufacturing plants,” said Aaron Levie, the co-founder and chief executive of the cloud-storage company Box. “It’s about the couple ideas that are going to be invented that are going to change everything.”
Why do tech honchos believe that immigrants are better at coming up with those inventions? It’s partly a numbers thing. As the tech venture capitalist Paul Graham has pointed out, the United States has only 5 percent of the world’s population; it stands to reason that most of the world’s best new ideas will be thought up by people who weren’t born here.
If you look at some of the most consequential ideas in tech, you find an unusual number that were developed by immigrants. For instance, Google’s entire advertising business — that is, the basis for the vast majority of its revenues and profits, the engine that allows it to hire thousands of people in the United States — was created by three immigrants: Salar Kamangar and Omid Kordestani, who came to the United States from Iran, and Eric Veach, from Canada.
But it’s not just a numbers thing. Another reason immigrants do so well in tech is that people from outside bring new perspectives that lead to new ideas.
Mike Krieger, an immigrant from Brazil who is a co-founder of Instagram, the photo-based social network app, said one reason it found instant, international success was that he purposely eliminated most text from the app. He knew from growing up in Brazil that English would hinder adoption in most parts of the world.
“Every step of the way while we were creating it,” he said, “we were thinking, can you create something with international appeal?”
Mr. Collison, of Stripe, said he could not imagine creating a company without immigrants. “In the early stages of a start-up you usually have a very specific set of things you need to do, and there’s a very short list of people who are able to do them,” he said.
In its early years, Stripe needed engineers and executives to build its system for moving money around the world; it needed to create a novel machine-learning system to detect fraud; and it had to convince regulators and other businesses that it was safe and legal to process payments through Stripe. The people it found for all these roles happened to be immigrants.
“The fact that we can do that in Silicon Valley — the fact that the talent is here or that we can bring the talent here, that’s what makes the whole thing work,” he said.
Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo
PHOTO: “The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,” said John Collison, an Irish immigrant and co-founder of Stripe. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUKE ATWOOD ABIOL FOR THE NEW YORK) (B6)
 DRAWING (DRAWING BY DOUG CHAYA)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (79%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (79%); MINORITY GROUPS (79%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); TAX LAW (76%); INCOME TAX (75%); TAX BREAKS (75%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%); TRUMP HEALTH CARE REFORM (71%); TAX CREDITS (70%); DIVERSITY & INCLUSION (60%); CHILD CARE (55%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (53%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Silicon Valley (Calif) (%); Inventions and Patents (%); Computers and the Internet (%)

Industry: TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%)

Person: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JOHN COLLISON (79%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (53%); PARIS, FRANCE (53%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (93%); AUSTRALIA (79%); MEXICO (79%); SINGAPORE (79%)

Load-Date: February 24, 2017


End of Document
Facing a Void Left by Hate
The New York Times
July 9, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 3336 words
Byline: By AUDRA D.S. BURCH; John Eligon contributed reporting.
Body


OLATHE, Kan. -- Sunayana Dumala tried once again to enter the worship room she and her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, had created in their home for daily prayers. Mr. Kuchibhotla had built an intricate wooden shrine by hand two years ago, a small sacred edifice where they would kneel each morning. Months after his death, it became a place where she would honor him.
On a Wednesday night in February, a man with a semiautomatic pistol and a distorted notion of American pride turned ordinary people into shooting victims and survivors -- and he turned Ms. Dumala into a widow. 
  Mr. Kuchibhotla, an Indian-born engineer, was confronted about his immigration status at a bar, then fatally shot. By the time the police arrived, Mr. Kuchibhotla was dying, and his close friend Alok Madasani was wounded. Another patron who tried to stop the attack was also struck by gunfire.
  Three months to the day after her husband's murder, Ms. Dumala stood at the entrance of the prayer room alone, looking toward a window that framed storm clouds. She turned away.
  ''Everything about this room, everything about this house,'' she said later, ''reminds me of my Srinu,'' the nickname she gave him during their courtship.
  It was in the quiet of the next morning that Ms. Dumala, 32, decided that would be the day she would step inside the worship room. What had been unbearable just the previous day seemed surmountable, if only because it was the next painful step.
  So she willed herself up the stairs, inching past the framed collage of wedding photos, and into the room. She cleaned each of the deity figurines with warm water. Then she prayed for peace in a whisper just above the sound of children's play at the elementary school next door.
  'Do We Belong Here?'
  In some ways, what one man shouted in anger and one woman uttered in grief capture one of America's most troubling intersections.
  ''Get out of my country!'' the gunman would yell, before opening fire on the two Indian men he later said he believed were from Iran.
  ''Do we belong here?'' the widow would ask in a Facebook post six days after the shooting.
  The episode happened at dinnertime in a neighborhood bar, part of a spasm of hatred that seems to be uncoiling in small towns and big cities across the nation -- and in rising numbers.
  A month before the shooting, the Victoria Islamic Center in Texas was torched, destroying the mosque. A month after the shooting, a white supremacist traveled from Baltimore to New York City on a mission to randomly kill a black man. He did just that. The reason: a deep hatred of black men, according to the New York Police Department.
  ''We've read many times in newspapers of some kind of shooting happening,'' Ms. Dumala said at a news conference in February at the headquarters of Garmin, where Mr. Kuchibhotla worked as a senior aviation systems engineer.
  ''And we always wondered, how safe?''
  Ms. Dumala had wondered how the couple fit into this new narrative, if they should move to a different country, and once even asked her husband, ''Are we doing the right thing of staying in the United States of America?''
  Ms. Dumala shared what is now the most dreadful chapter of her life seated at the foot of the king-size bed where they once slept. Much of their story was typical, abundant with promise: They were Indian immigrants who moved to the United States from Hyderabad for postgraduate degrees and jobs, a young couple in love, planning a family, making Kansas home.
  Her night stand, closest to the window, offered unintended markers on that life: a 2007 college graduation photo of Mr. Kuchibhotla taken not long after they met, and a small box of Russell Stover assorted chocolates he gave her for Valentine's Day, eight days before he was shot.
  The realization that her husband was killed because of intolerance, because he was not born in America, is what forced her to emerge from this personal, private hell. She thought that if people were to know the aftermath of a hate crime, the crater-sized void and endless questions left behind, if the victims were rendered as three-dimensional, maybe there would be less fear, less hate.
  ''My story needs to be spread,'' she said plainly. ''Srinu's story needs to be known. We have to do something to reduce the hate crimes. Even if we can save one other person, I think that would give peace to Srinu and give me the satisfaction that his sacrifice did not go in vain.''
  A Prescient Dread
  On the morning of his death, Mr. Kuchibhotla left for work before his wife. ''Bye,'' he said, hurrying past her, a casual farewell that would come to haunt Ms. Dumala for its brevity and finality.
  Just before 6 p.m., Ms. Dumala texted and called Mr. Kuchibhotla to plan for the evening. His cellphone was off, which was not unusual, because of his habit of watching videos, draining the battery.
  She had hoped they could spend time that evening in their backyard, sipping tea and watching the sun lower into the horizon. The view, a wide-open stretch with houses dotted in the distance, was one of the charms of their deep blue two-story house in Olathe, an orderly Kansas City suburb in Johnson County, Kan.
  Ms. Dumala picked at her roti in between calls to their friends looking for her husband. Maybe he had gone to have drinks at Austins Bar & Grill, his favorite after-work spot, with Mr. Madasani, one of his best friends from work. But Mr. Madasani's phone was off, too.
  She began to scroll through Facebook. A news story popped into her feed: three people shot at Austins.
  ''I was getting scared, some kind of feeling was going through me. I was all alone,'' she said, pausing to catch her breath, her face dampened by tears. ''This is not my usual Srinu, I am saying to myself. He would have reached out to me somehow to let me know he is safe.''
  Ms. Dumala's instincts were right. The best friends, more like brothers, were at Austins. Typically the two went with another close friend from the office, Manju Nag, but he had been out of town on business. That night, it was just Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani at their regular table on the patio, the one closest to the door, discussing Bollywood movies and drinking a pair of Miller Lites.
  The assailant approached the friends. Witnesses recall him wearing a white T-shirt with military-style pins, his head wrapped in a white scarf. He was intent on finding out one thing: Did the men at the table belong in the country?
  Adam W. Purinton, a white Navy veteran, turned to the two brown-complexioned men, both living in the United States for years, and demanded to know their immigration status.
  ''Out of the blue comes this weird-looking gentleman, I say weird-looking because he had anger on his face,'' said Mr. Madasani, 32, an aviation systems engineer at Garmin. ''I did not hear what he was saying instantly, but I saw the look on Srinivas's face change drastically. I looked at Adam and he walked towards me, he came to me and said, 'Are you here legally?'''
  Peppered with more questions and ethnic slurs, Mr. Madasani did not respond. Instead, he went inside to get the manager. Ian Grillot, 24, and another patron asked Mr. Purinton to leave and escorted him from the patio. As Mr. Madasani returned to the patio area, he said he heard more of the rant. ''Oh, here comes the Arab,'' Mr. Purinton said.
  But he didn't go far, pacing outside in the parking lot. Mr. Madasani said he and Mr. Kuchibhotla had decided to leave, but were stopped as other patrons apologized and assured them they were welcome. One guy paid their tab; the bar manager gave them another round of beer and fried pickles, a favorite of Mr. Kuchibhotla. ''Everybody kept coming up to us saying this is not what we represent, you guys belong here,'' he said.
  Not long after, according to the authorities, Mr. Purinton returned to the bar with a handgun. He stood in the patio door, pointed his gun toward the two men, and fired.
  Proposing to Him, Online
  They had met online in 2006 after a mutual friend gave her a list of names of Indian students attending the University of Texas at El Paso. She was considering a master's program there and wanted to get a feel for what to expect as an immigrant student. She sent a note to the first name on the list: Mr. Kuchibhotla.
  They were both from Hyderabad, the riverside capital of Telangana State in southern India. He grew up the middle of three sons and loved cricket as a boy, playing on the rooftop of his family home. His father was a quality assurance officer for a pharmaceutical company and his mother was a teacher.
  ''He was the tallest of all of us brothers and cousins,'' said Sai Kota, a cousin who grew up with Mr. Kuchibhotla and now lives in Edison, N.J. ''We used to volunteer him to get the ball when it would go onto another rooftop. He could jump to the other rooftop. He was a brother and mentor to me.''
  Ms. Dumala was immediately drawn to Mr. Kuchibhotla's sharp focus, sense of humor and patience -- she still likes to tell the story of the many weekends he took her to empty parking lots to teach her to drive. He liked the sound of her voice, melodic and sweet, and her caring nature -- almost every day, she checked to make sure he had eaten breakfast.
  Their casual phone conversations blossomed into the beginnings of a six-year courtship. After three months, Ms. Dumala proposed to him one night. No matter that she had never seen him in person.
  They finally met months later at a temple when he went home to Hyderabad. ''I did not know that he was going to be 6'2'', with me being 5 feet,'' she said, chuckling.
  She ended up attending St. Cloud State University in Minnesota, where she studied engineering management and graduated in 2010. After Mr. Kuchibhotla's graduation in 2007, he accepted a job at Rockwell Collins, an avionics and information technology company in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, where he worked as a systems engineer in the flight control department. He loved everything about aviation, particularly the very idea that something so heavy could fly.
  At Rockwell, he met Mr. Madasani, who would become one of his best friends and a roommate. Mr. Madasani moved to Kansas in 2014, joining his friend Mr. Kuchibhotla at Garmin.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla persuaded his parents and his wife's to bless their marriage, built upon love, rather than arranged. The couple married in 2012, in a ceremony in Hyderabad attended by more than 1,000 people.
  In 2014, they moved to the Kansas City area, mostly to find opportunities for Ms. Dumala. She had stayed home much of their time in Iowa, unable to work with an H-4, for spouses of specialty workers who hold H-1B visas.
  They found a home in Olathe, population 135,000, a city 20 minutes outside Kansas City and one of the fastest-growing in the nation.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla continued his work as an engineer at Garmin. He helped companies that build airplanes and helicopters integrate Garmin technology and software into their aircraft. He was so well regarded that his boss routinely asked if the human resources division could ''find more Srinivases.''
  ''This is not hyperbolic when I tell you he was almost the perfect employee,'' said Dave Wysong, his supervisor. ''He was a great engineer. Technically, very, very good. He was quiet and very, very friendly.''
  Ms. Dumala started work as a database developer at a pharmaceutical marketing agency in May 2016. The couple became part of a circle of Indian friends who spent most every weekend together at dinner parties. The men played on a cricket team, where Mr. Kuchibhotla was the bowler, the pitcher's position. Two years ago, they moved into a subdivision near Garmin. And last year, they began planning a family.
  The End of the Day
  It was 7:15 p.m. The work day had ended, and most people were home, headed there or winding down.
  On this particular Wednesday, the winter sun had already set, but it was unseasonably warm, in the high 70s. It was just after halftime of the University of Kansas basketball game against Texas Christian University. Kansas was up a point and a win meant the team would clinch the Big 12 conference title for the 13th year in a row, which also meant Austins was packed with Jayhawks fans besides its usual cast of regulars, among them Mr. Kuchibhotla, Mr. Madasani and Mr. Grillot.
  Ms. Dumala was at her Olathe home, three miles away, eating dinner and scrolling through Facebook.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla and Mr. Madasani were back at their table talking. The crowd on the patio had thinned out during the halftime break, but the televisions were still blaring.
  Suddenly, the sound of gunfire. ''Pop, pause, then pop, pop, pop,'' said Tim Hibbard, the owner of a software company who was sitting at the bar sipping a Blue Moon beer. ''It wasn't like the movies where the gunfire is large and demanding of attention. The sound was subdued, almost underwhelming. Low fidelity is how I would describe it.''
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was hit first. Mr. Madasani, who had been sitting on the other side of the table, hit the ground, forced by a bullet, instinct or both. He crawled on his belly toward the opposite door. He thought the bullets were close by because the floor shook with each gunshot. ''All I was thinking about at the time was about my baby, all I was thinking of was my wife's belly,'' said Mr. Madasani, whose wife was pregnant with their first child, a boy due in July. ''In flashes, I was thinking, 'I have to live.'''
  Once outside, he realized he was shot in the left leg. ''I saw Srivinas on the floor, not moving. I kept on yelling to everyone, 'Leave me, go and attend to him.'''
  Mr. Grillot, the bar patron who had intervened earlier, chased Mr. Purinton into the parking lot. Mr. Purinton turned and shot him in the chest and hand.
  As people scattered, Vincent Baird, who was headed to the gas station across the street, ran toward the chaos to help. With four years of experience as an Army medic, he went straight to Mr. Kuchibhotla, whose breathing was shallow and labored.
  Once on his knees, Mr. Baird could see a gunshot wound in his chest. With the help of two others, Mr. Baird said, he cut a four-inch square from an unused garbage bag and taped it over the wound. He then checked for other wounds and, seeing none, he turned him on his side.
  Mr. Kuchibhotla stopped breathing at a couple of points, Mr. Baird said. Each time, he performed chest compressions until Mr. Kuchibhotla started breathing again and an ambulance arrived. He was pronounced dead at the University of Kansas Hospital.
  Mr. Purinton had fled amid the chaos. He ended up 80 miles away at a bar in Clinton, Mo., where he told a bartender that he had shot ''two Iranians.''
  The Officers at the Door
  Hours after the shooting, Ms. Dumala was an emotional wreck. Finally, she found the courage to search for more details on the shooting at Austins. The reports had not identified the victims, but included the name of the hospital in downtown Kansas City where they had been taken. What she didn't know was that her husband of four years was already dead.
  A car pulled into the driveway.
  It was one of their friends, Shashi Bolaram. Ms. Dumala opened the door. Voice quivering, she asked him, ''He was there, wasn't he?''
  Mr. Bolaram nodded.
  Before Ms. Dumala could fully process what that might mean, there was a second knock at the door. She sat on the second stair as two Olathe police officers confirmed Mr. Kuchibhotla's death.
  On the half-hour ride to the hospital, Ms. Dumala sat in the back seat of a friend's car, her mind cluttered and spinning. It came to rest on this incomprehensible notion of sudden loss: Her beloved Srinu was dead. She remembers hearing her own hollowed voice pose an endless loop of questions to herself, each more desperate than the last: ''What should I do? What is this life? Is it true that I cannot see Srinu? Is it true that I can't hear his voice? Is it true I lost the person who loves me the most?''
  The next day, Ms. Dumala learned the horrific details of her husband's murder. An Olathe police officer and an agent from the Federal Bureau of Investigation told her who had killed him and why.
  The police officer -- who was stopped by Ms. Dumala from uttering Mr. Purinton's name -- also said that it appeared the shooting was premeditated.
  ''Hold on,'' she said, stunned. ''What do you mean?''
  ''Something planned,'' he said.
  ''When? At that moment? In that night?'' she pressed, the questions crashing into one another.
  The reality of what had happened to her husband began to wash over her.
  ''At least until then, I was of the opinion that this was some random guy who came in and just shot three people, and my husband was unfortunate to be there,'' she said. ''That was a lot harder for me to hear.''
  Mr. Purinton, 52, was formally charged with premeditated first-degree murder and two counts of premeditated attempted murder. Last month, he was also indicted on federal hate-crime charges.
  The term ''hate crime'' was being used over and over and by the police, journalists and politicians to describe the death of her husband. All of a sudden, Mr. Kuchibhotla was a hate crime statistic, an example to bolster anti-hate legislation and now linked, fairly or not, to President Trump's anti-immigrant rhetoric. Days after Mr. Kuchibhotla's death, the president issued a statement condemning the shooting.
  Ms. Dumala was aghast, baffled by the man who took her husband from her. ''That guy, I think he was hurt, I don't know what hurt him,'' she said. ''What is he doing by taking away this life? Did he serve his purpose? Did he lessen his anger? Even I have anger now, but that does not give me the right to go and take away his life.''
  The funeral home made arrangements for Mr. Kuchibhotla to spend a final night in his Olathe home -- a first for the company. His body was transported to the house in a discreet white van.
  ''We did everything to accommodate their requests. We also wanted to be culturally sensitive and show the family that our community was behind them,'' said Christopher Holland, the funeral director. ''We wanted them to heal from this tragedy.''
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was in repose on a cot in an empty dining room that he had painted an elegant burgundy where family and friends paid their final respects. He remained with Ms. Dumala and her family until early that Saturday, when he was returned to the funeral home to be prepared for the trip to his homeland.
  On a Tuesday afternoon in Hyderabad, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla was placed on a pyre of logs. His funeral was held nine days before what would have been his 33rd birthday.
   Return to an Empty Home
  Ms. Dumala returned to Kansas with her parents in April, staying with a friend until she could summon the strength to return to her home without Srinu. She spent her first few weeks back in Kansas trying to figure out the next chapter, difficult to define because her visa status is now in limbo. She is also looking for the best way to help reduce hate crimes.
  Before her husband's death, Ms. Dumala shopped at KC India Mart in Overland Park, where she could find foods imported from home. Over the years, she and her husband had become friendly with the owners, and when Mr. Kuchibhotla died, the store's employees brought meals every day to friends and family gathered at the house.
  One May evening, Ms. Dumala and her parents went to the grocery store to pick up ingredients for a traditional chickpea dish. Ms. Dumala pushed an empty cart down the first aisle toward the produce, unprepared for what would happen next. She stopped, almost involuntarily, in front of a crate of miniature eggplants. The sigh was audible, the sadness palpable.
  ''This was his favorite food,'' she said out loud. ''It didn't matter how you cooked them, he loved any recipe made with eggplant.''
  Ms. Dumala lingered, lost in the memory of the simple act of baking her late husband's favorite dish.
  Follow Audra Burch on Twitter @abscribe.        

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/08/us/he-became-a-hate-crime-victim-she-became-a-widow.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Sunayana Dumala with her parents in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, below, was killed in a shooting. (A1)
Some of Mr. Kuchibhotla's personal effects in the couple's bathroom, left, and a collage of wedding photos in the home. ''Everything about this house reminds me of my Srinu,'' Ms. Dumala said, using her nickname for him.
Ms. Dumala with her parents in her home in Olathe. It took her time to be able to face entering her own home again. (A12)
 Sunayana Dumala, left, at home in Olathe, Kan. Her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, was killed in February in Austins Bar & Grill, above, by a gunman who targeted immigrants. She now works to reduce hate crimes. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALYSSA SCHUKAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12-A13)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); WEAPONS & ARMS (89%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); RELIGION (78%); DEATH & DYING (77%); FIREARMS (76%); RACE & ETHNICITY (75%); POLICE FORCES (74%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (73%); RELIGIOUS FACILITIES (72%); AUTOMATIC & SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARMS (71%); MURDER (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); IMMIGRATION (54%); WHITE NATIONALISTS (50%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (52%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (52%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (52%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); KANSAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: July 9, 2017


End of Document
Judge Blocks President's Visa Ban for Foreign Workers
The New York Times
October 2, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 1015 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


The court overruled limits on visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers during the coronavirus pandemic.
LOS ANGELES -- A federal judge ruled on Thursday that President Trump overstepped his authority in suspending new visas for hundreds of thousands of foreign workers amid the coronavirus pandemic, enabling major companies like Microsoft, Goodyear Tire and Exxon Mobil to resume bringing employees from abroad. 
  Judge Jeffrey S. White of U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California temporarily blocked further implementation of the sweeping order, issued in June, as it applied to thousands of companies seeking to bring workers to the United States on a wide array of visas, including the H-1B for high-skilled workers, seasonal employees on guest-worker visas and others, such as au pairs, who enter the country on cultural exchange visas.
  ''Congress' delegation of authority in the immigration context does not afford the President unbridled authority to set domestic policy regarding employment of nonimmigrant foreigners,'' the judge wrote in his 25-page decision.
  ''Indeed, there must be some measure of constraint on Presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power in the immigration context, an area within clear legislative prerogative,'' said Judge White, who was appointed by President George W. Bush.
  The president had said that his proclamation, initially effective until Dec. 31, would protect Americans from foreign competition for jobs amid soaring unemployment caused by the coronavirus pandemic. In his proclamation, he described the entry of additional workers under work visas as an ''unusual threat to the employment of American workers.''
  The proclamation also restricted the ability of American companies with global operations and international companies with U.S. branches to transfer foreign executives and other employees to the United States for extended stints. And it blocked visas for the spouses of foreigners who are employed at companies in the United States.
  In a scathing opinion, Judge White said the proclamation did not address the problem it purported to tackle, namely to lift the economy by providing job opportunities for Americans.
  ''The proclamation completely disregards both economic reality and the pre-existing statutory framework,'' he wrote. ''Furthermore, without any consideration of the impact on American firms and their business planning, the proclamation changes the scope of immigration policy in the United States.''
  The judge's order is at odds with an earlier decision reached by a federal judge in Washington, D.C., which ensures that the ultimate determination will be made by an appeals court.
  Still, it immediately sets aside the visa ban for the plaintiffs who brought the case. They include the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers, the National Retail Federation and groups representing tech giants like Microsoft and Amazon; their members include hundreds of thousands of American businesses of all sizes from a cross-section of sectors.
  ''We are competing with the rest of the world to find and develop top talent to support innovation in our industry,'' said Linda Kelly, a senior vice president and general counsel at the manufacturers' association. ''Today's decision is a temporary win for manufacturers committed to building that innovation in the United States.''
  ''The restrictions both undermined our industry at a critical time and conflicted with the law,'' she said.
  The judge's ruling was a lifeline, said Marcie Schneider, the president of Intrax, a cultural-exchange company that brings au pairs to the United States.
  ''This decision means that our staff can continue to do the important work that they do to bring cultural exchange participants on our programs and to remain employed in this vital field,'' she said.
  The administration did not immediately comment on the ruling.
  Stephen Miller, the White House aide who is the architect of Mr. Trump's immigration policy, has pushed for years to limit or eliminate many foreign worker visas, arguing that they harm employment prospects for Americans. In recent months, Mr. Miller has argued that the economic distress caused by the virus has made it even more important to turn off the spigot.
  While the president's pledge to build a ''big, beautiful wall'' to prevent illegal immigrants from swarming the border has garnered the most attention, his moves to slow legal immigration have been ongoing and even more effective.
  And as the election nears, Mr. Trump has doubled down on his commitment to curb immigration of all kinds.
  This week, the federal government said it would admit 15,000 refugees, an all-time low, during the coming fiscal year. That number is even fewer than the 18,000 refugees authorized for resettlement last year and a sliver of the 110,000 slots approved by President Barack Obama in 2016.
  In April, Mr. Trump signed an executive order that suspended new permanent residence authorization, or green cards, to most foreigners looking to live in the United States.
  Under another policy that took effect early this year, known as the public-charge rule, immigrants applying for green cards can be disqualified based on their likelihood of using public benefits and their English proficiency.
  This week, Judge White issued a preliminary injunction blocking a series of fee hikes for visas and other immigration benefits that were to go into effect on Friday, saying they would irreparably harm poor immigrants.
  The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services had planned to increase the cost of naturalization applications to $1,170 from $725 for most applicants; it would have also charged asylum seekers, who have never paid for refuge, a $50 application fee. The cost of applying for a deportation suspension or expulsion cancellation would have jumped to $1,810 from $285.
  Most fee waivers for immigrants who are unable to afford paying the full cost would have been eliminated.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/01/us/foreign-workers-visas-h-1b-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The majority of H1-B visas are given out to Indians who work in information technology jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Atul Loke for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); CORONAVIRUSES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); JUDGES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); EPIDEMICS (89%); PANDEMICS (89%); VIRUSES (89%); APPEALS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (78%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (76%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (73%); FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES (73%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (73%); SEASONAL WORKERS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (60%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (58%);  GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER CO (58%);  EXXON MOBIL CORP (57%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (58%); GT (SWX) (58%); GT (NASDAQ) (58%); XOM (NYSE) (57%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); NAICS441320 TIRE DEALERS (58%); NAICS326220 RUBBER & PLASTICS HOSES & BELTING MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS326211 TIRE MANUFACTURING (EXCEPT RETREADING) (58%); SIC5531 AUTO & HOME SUPPLY STORES (58%); SIC3052 RUBBER & PLASTICS HOSE & BELTING (58%); SIC3011 TIRES & INNER TUBES (58%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (57%); NAICS211130 NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (57%); NAICS211120 CRUDE PETROLEUM EXTRACTION (57%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); MANUFACTURING (78%); BIG TECH (77%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON DC, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: October 2, 2020


End of Document
Import Fight in a Steel Town
The New York Times
April 16, 2009 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1158 words
Byline: By LOUIS UCHITELLE
Dateline: GRANITE CITY, Ill. 
Body


Jeff Rains, a retired steelworker   at the sprawling mill here, made the discovery. Out walking a month ago, he waited impatiently at a rail crossing while a freight train slowly passed, its flatbed cars stacked with steel pipes, each wide enough for a child to crawl through. Then he noticed ''Made in India'' stenciled on the pipes.
  That observation has made him a Paul Revere in the eyes of many townspeople. Hundreds of sections of imported steel pipe have been moving into Granite City for use in an oil pipeline. The steel mill, meanwhile, has been shut since December for lack of orders -- the first time in its 130-year history -- and nearly 2,000 workers are on furlough. 
  ''I was very mad when I saw they were imported; I wondered why this pipe had not been made in the United States,'' said Mr. Rains, who is 61. Once the train passed, Mr. Rains, still active in union affairs, hastened to the union hall to spread the word. 
  The United Steelworkers union has been trying ever since to galvanize the Granite City story into national outrage over steel imports, raising suggestions of protectionism in the process. The union and its workers want steel pipe for future projects to be made in the United States, creating domestic jobs. 
  With the economy in tatters, top corporate executives often state privately that they fear this downturn will fuel public sentiment against foreign-made products. Indeed, in February -- before Mr. Rains made his discovery -- 5,000 people marched through the streets of this steel town in support of a strong ''Buy America'' clause in the $787 billion stimulus bill then before Congress.
  The imported pipe has inflamed  that sentiment. The union filed an antidumping lawsuit in Washington last Wednesday against tubular and pipe steel imported from China. A day earlier, Local 1899 staged a rally here, drawing more than 500 people to the same field where the lengths of ''Indian pipe,'' as the people here call them, have been stacked. 
  ''The steel pipe behind us is a symbol of what has gone wrong in this country,'' one of the speakers declared, arguing in effect that a lax Congress and greedy businesspeople, as in Wall Street, had brought three months of layoff, so far, to more than 10 percent of Granite City's work force. The crowd cheered, and some chanted back, ''No more greed.''
  The union's hope is that the Indian pipe episode will provoke a broad outcry, and similar finger-pointing, forcing Congress to tighten trade rules and pressuring companies that import steel to buy more from domestic suppliers instead.
  The pressure on Congress is already evident. A provision in the stimulus package, signed into law in February, limits the hiring of foreign workers by any company receiving government bailout money. At least one institution, Bank of America, has rescinded job offers to foreign citizens otherwise eligible for H-1B visas.
  The United Steelworkers asserts that free trade is not the issue. The union's leaders endorse that, as do the chief executives of nearly every multinational company. What the Indian pipe represents, the union argues -- and it is joined in this by steel industry executives -- is a violation of fair trade. They contend that generous government subsidies allow Indian and Chinese manufacturers to ''dump'' steel in this country at prices below the fair market value. 
  ''Other countries point the finger at the U.S. and say we are protectionist,'' said Nancy Gravatt, a spokeswoman for the American Iron and Steel Institute, representing mill owners, ''and then you look at the details in the other countries, and they are not playing by the rules at all.'' 
  Such strong language aside, the episode here has not generated the broad public outcry of, say, the bonuses paid by the American International Group. That is perhaps because trade issues do not generate the same reaction as huge Wall Street bonuses, and perhaps because the steelworkers themselves, as they explained in interviews here, would not have objected to the Indian steel if they were still fully employed at U.S. Steel's Granite City Works. But the industry has been operating at less than 50 percent of capacity since last fall. 
  Imports have accounted for a steady 20 to 25 percent of the nation's steel consumption for a decade or more -- and neither the union nor the steel mill operators challenged that inroad.
  But now they are, partly through stepped-up antidumping actions, like the one filed against China last week. The union, in addition, is  pushing for policies that would increase manufacturing in the United States,  reversing a long decline. It favors, for example, tax credits that would encourage more domestic production of solar panels and wind turbines, replacing imports.
  ''I have seven children, and six of them need a job,'' said Ricky Jankowski, a laid-off steelworker here. ''If one of them gets a manufacturing job as a result of our protests, it will be worth it.''
  The shrinking of American manufacturing was indeed a handicap when TransCanada, a giant Canadian energy company, agreed to buy 560,000 tons of large-diameter pipe in 2006 for its 1,600-mile Keystone Pipeline, now being built from Alberta to Oklahoma to carry oil to American refineries from Canada's tar sand fields. A section of the pipeline will pass near this Mississippi River town, opposite St. Louis. 
  An American mill provided 30 percent of the pipe, Canadian mills 23 percent and a giant Indian company, Welspun, the remaining 47 percent, at a low enough price, TransCanada says, to compete with American-made pipe, even allowing for shipping.
  ''American and Canadian mills would have gotten more if they had had the available capacity to meet our requirements,'' said Robert Jones, a TransCanada vice president. 
  Neither union leaders nor industry executives dispute that assessment. Indeed, neither is trying to stop construction of the Keystone Pipeline, now that all the steel pipe has been purchased. But the union, at least, is putting pressure on TransCanada to buy American-made pipe for a  parallel pipeline soon to be built. In a letter filed with the Transportation Department last week, the union joined the Sierra Club in challenging, on environmental grounds, TransCanada's request for a permit -- one argument being that the walls of the pipe would be too thin. 
  Pipe made in America would ''meet all safety requirements,'' a union official declared, responding in part to the growing anger in Granite City, dominated as it is by a giant steel mill that has never, in 130 years, been so quiet and smokeless.
  ''People here use the word anger to describe their reaction to the Indian steel, but I'm not sure that is the right word,'' said the Rev. Gene Fowler, pastor of the First Presbyterian Church, who attended the rally with other clergy members. ''I think the right description is, 'slapped in the face.' It is like an offense to the community.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Indian-made steel pipes, top, in Granite City, Ill., a steel town whose big plant has been idle since December. The union has staged rallies in protest.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAN GILL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.B1)
 A United Steelworkers rally in Granite City on April 7. The union wants to marshal national outrage over steel imports.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAN GILL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. B4)                            
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BLUE COLLAR WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYEE LEAVE (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); IMPORT TRADE (89%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (89%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (86%); ANTIDUMPING LAWS (78%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (78%); PROTECTIONISM (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); LABOR FORCE (74%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (74%); TEMPORARY LAYOFFS (74%); CITIES (73%); CITY LIFE (73%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); JOB CREATION (69%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (69%)

Industry: FACTORY WORKERS (90%); IRON & STEEL INDUSTRY (90%); IRON & STEEL MILLS (90%); TRAINS (90%); RAIL CROSSINGS (78%); RAILROAD ROLLING STOCK (78%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (73%)

Geographic: ILLINOIS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 16, 2009


End of Document
Why Silicon Valley Booed Trump's Immigration Ban
The New York Times
February 9, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1; STATE OF THE ART
Length: 1410 words
Byline: By FARHAD MANJOO
Email: farhad.manjoo@nytimes.com; Twitter: @fmanjoo
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- The workers of Silicon Valley make unlikely revolutionaries. As a group, they are relatively wealthy, well educated and well connected.
While most here supported Hillary Clinton, tech workers are not the most obvious targets of President Trump's policy ideas. Many who populate the world's richest tech companies will be just fine if the Affordable Care Act is repealed. Most will not be personally inconvenienced by the proposed Mexican border wall. 
  Under Mr. Trump, tech workers could enjoy a windfall. They may get tax credits for child care costs, their companies may be allowed to repatriate foreign profits, and their coming income tax cuts might fund a luxury vacation or two.
  This is all by way of saying: The protests that swept through Silicon Valley and Seattle in the last two weeks were not motivated by short-term financial gain. If you want to understand why tech employees went to the mat against Mr. Trump's executive order barring immigrants from seven Muslim-majority countries, you need to first understand the crucial role that America's relatively open immigration policies play in the tech business.
  And you need to understand why people in tech see something cataclysmic in Mr. Trump's executive order, and in the other immigration crackdowns waiting in the wings: the end of America's standing as a beacon for the world's best inventors.
  ''Silicon Valley is unlikely, as a phenomenon -- it is not the default state of the world,'' said John Collison, an immigrant from Ireland who is a co-founder of Stripe, a six-year-old payments start-up based in San Francisco.
  One important reason Silicon Valley can exist at all, he said, is that it is welcoming to people from far outside its borders. ''I go all across the world, and every other place is asking, 'How do we replicate Silicon Valley where we are -- in London, in Paris, in Singapore, in Australia?'''
  The reason those places have so far failed to create their own indomitable tech hubs is that everyone there wants to come here.
  ''The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,'' Mr. Collison said. ''Look at all the leading technology companies globally, and look at how overrepresented the United States is. That's not a normal state of affairs. That's because we have managed to create this engine where the best and the brightest from around the world are coming to Silicon Valley.''
  But, Mr. Collison added, ''I think that's kind of fragile.'' Under Mr. Trump, the immigrant-friendly dynamic could change -- and it could bring about the ruin of American tech.
  To outsiders, this may sound alarmist, and perhaps more than a little self-righteous. Silicon Valley gets rightly rapped for talking a big game on its supposed meritocratic openness while failing on basic measures of diversity and inclusion. Women and non-Asian minorities make up a tiny fraction of the industry's employees, and an even smaller portion of its executives and venture capitalists. In short, the tech industry is in thrall to white dudes as much as just about any other business.
  And yet even a casual trip through most histories of the technology industry reveals an outsize role played by immigrants.
  Last year, researchers at the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan think tank, studied the 87 privately held American start-ups that were then valued at $1 billion or more. They discovered something amazing: More than half of them were founded by one or more people from outside the United States. And 71 percent of them employed immigrants in crucial executive roles.
  Collectively, these companies, which include householdish names like Uber, Tesla and Palantir, had created thousands of jobs and added billions of dollars to the American economy. Their founders came from all over the world -- India, Britain, Canada, Israel and China, among lots and lots of other points around the globe.
  In 2011, an immigration reform group, the  Partnership for a New American Economy, found that more than 40 percent of companies in the Fortune 500 were founded by immigrants or the children of immigrants. For the newest members of the Fortune 500, many of them technology companies, the rate of immigrant founders was even higher, the organization said.
  That should come as no surprise if you are familiar with the origins of the most iconic companies of the last few decades. One of Google's founders is an immigrant from Russia, and its current chief executive is an immigrant from India. Microsoft's chief executive is also from India. EBay and Yahoo were started by immigrants. Facebook's largest subsidiaries, Instagram and WhatsApp, were both co-founded by immigrants. Apple was started by a child of immigrants.
  There are many theories for why immigrants find so much success in tech. Many American-born tech workers point out that there is no shortage of American-born employees to fill the roles at many tech companies. Researchers have found that more than enough students graduate from American colleges to fill available tech jobs. Critics of the industry's friendliness toward immigrants say it comes down to money -- that technology companies take advantage of visa programs, like the H-1B system, to get foreign workers at lower prices than they would pay American-born ones.
  But if that criticism rings true in some parts of the tech industry, it misses the picture among Silicon Valley's top companies. One common misperception of Silicon Valley is that it operates like a factory; in that view, tech companies can hire just about anyone from anywhere in the world to fill a particular role.
  But today's most ambitious tech companies are not like factories. They're more like athletic teams. They're looking for the LeBrons and Bradys -- the best people in the world to come up with some brand-new, never-before-seen widget, to completely reimagine what widgets should do in the first place.
  ''It's not about adding tens or hundreds of thousands of people into manufacturing plants,'' said Aaron Levie, the co-founder and chief executive of the cloud-storage company Box. ''It's about the couple ideas that are going to be invented that are going to change everything.''
  Why do tech honchos believe that immigrants are better at coming up with those inventions? It's partly a numbers thing. As the tech venture capitalist Paul Graham has pointed out, the United States has only 5 percent of the world's population; it stands to reason that most of the world's best new ideas will be thought up by people who weren't born here.
  If you look at some of the most consequential ideas in tech, you find an unusual number that were developed by immigrants. For instance, Google's entire advertising business -- that is, the basis for the vast majority of its revenues and profits, the engine that allows it to hire thousands of people in the United States -- was created by three immigrants: Salar Kamangar and Omid Kordestani, who came to the United States from Iran, and Eric Veach, from Canada.
  But it's not just a numbers thing. Another reason immigrants do so well in tech is that people from outside bring new perspectives that lead to new ideas.
  Mike Krieger, an immigrant from Brazil who is a co-founder of Instagram, the photo-based social network app, said one reason it found instant, international success was that he purposely eliminated most text from the app. He knew from growing up in Brazil that English would hinder adoption in most parts of the world.
  ''Every step of the way while we were creating it,'' he said, ''we were thinking, can you create something with international appeal?''
  Mr. Collison, of Stripe, said he could not imagine creating a company without immigrants. ''In the early stages of a start-up you usually have a very specific set of things you need to do, and there's a very short list of people who are able to do them,'' he said.
  In its early years, Stripe needed engineers and executives to build its system for moving money around the world; it needed to create a novel machine-learning system to detect fraud; and it had to convince regulators and other businesses that it was safe and legal to process payments through Stripe. The people it found for all these roles happened to be immigrants.
  ''The fact that we can do that in Silicon Valley -- the fact that the talent is here or that we can bring the talent here, that's what makes the whole thing work,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/technology/personaltech/why-silicon-valley-wouldnt-work-without-immigrants.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: ''The U.S. is sucking up all the talent from all across the world,'' said John Collison, an Irish immigrant and co-founder of Stripe. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUKE ATWOOD ABIOL FOR THE NEW YORK) (B6) DRAWING (DRAWING BY DOUG CHAYA)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); TAX LAW (76%); INCOME TAX (75%); TAX BREAKS (75%); TRUMP HEALTH CARE REFORM (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%); TAX CREDITS (70%); CHILD CARE (55%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (52%)

Industry: TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (90%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JOHN COLLISON (79%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (91%); LONDON, ENGLAND (52%); PARIS, FRANCE (52%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); AUSTRALIA (79%); MEXICO (79%); SINGAPORE (79%)

Load-Date: February 9, 2017


End of Document
Can't Get Visa for Silicon Valley? Mexico Awaits
The New York Times
August 2, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1845 words
Byline: By KIRK SEMPLE and IAN AUSTEN; Kirk Semple reported from Guadalajara, and Ian Austen from Ottawa. Javier Hernandez contributed reporting from Beijing.
Body


GUADALAJARA, Mexico -- With his frequent refrains about Mexicans and the need for a wall to contain them, it's no surprise that President Trump has made few friends in Mexico.
Yet here in the capital of Jalisco State, sometimes referred to as Mexico's Silicon Valley, people are practically celebrating him. 
  ''He's helping us a lot!'' Gov. Aristóteles Sandoval exclaimed. ''He's put us on the world's agenda.''
  As part of Mr. Trump's efforts to push an America-first philosophy, he has vowed to restrict the availability of special visas that are widely used by technology companies to hire talent from around the world.
  Mr. Trump's plans, combined with an American political climate that has left many immigrants feeling less welcome, has cast a pall of uncertainty over the American tech industry, which relies heavily on highly skilled workers from abroad.
  But while entrepreneurs and executives in the United States are fretting, other countries -- including Mexico, Canada and China -- are salivating over the Trump administration's rumblings.
  Silicon Valley's loss, they say, could be their gain.
  In recent months, foreign governments and tech industry leaders have sought to capitalize on the uncertainty in Silicon Valley. They are stepping up their efforts to attract engineers and entrepreneurs who might rely on the special American visa program, known as H-1B, to work or to run businesses in the United States.
  ''It's an exciting time,'' said Brad Duguid, the minister of economic development in Ontario, where the capital, Toronto, is one of Canada's biggest tech hubs. ''And while it's unfortunate that the U.S. is looking more internally, far be it from us not to take advantage of that.''
  In June, Canada set up a new visa program that makes it easier for companies to recruit highly skilled foreign workers. Under the program, which was in development before Mr. Trump's election victory, the Canadian government has promised to approve two-year visas in less than two weeks -- blindingly fast, compared with the process in the United States.
  And unlike the H-1B visa in the United States, there is no limit to the number of Canadian visas available.
  Beyond that, Ontario is in the early stages of preparing a social media campaign for technology executives around the world to sell the province as a place for investment.
  ''Canada is seizing its moment,'' said Navdeep Singh Bains, the country's federal minister of innovation, science and economic development. ''We're open to trade and people.''
  In Mexico, states with growing regional tech hubs, like Jalisco, have been redoubling their efforts to attract talent and investment in recent months, peddling a philosophy of openness that departs from what Mr. Sandoval called Mr. Trump's ''xenophobia'' and ''lack of global vision.''
  The efforts have included visits by Jalisco officials to the San Francisco Bay Area and to Europe. The San Francisco Chronicle published an  op-ed piece by Mr. Sandoval pitching the advantages of doing business in his state.
  The officials herald Mexico's proximity to Silicon Valley, its alignment with time zones in the United States and its lower cost of living. They are also sweetening the invitation with enticements like tax incentives and promises of full government cooperation.
  ''We want you,'' says a new promotional website, Come2Jalisco.com. ''Innovation has no borders.''
  Even Mexico's ambassador to India has echoed the pitch.
  ''We will be more than happy to have Indians relocate to Mexico,'' the ambassador, Melba Pría, told The Indian Express newspaper earlier this year, emphasizing the ''visa ease'' that foreign talent will experience in Mexico.
  China's tech leaders have also been seizing on the opportunity created by Mr. Trump's immigration policies.
  Wang Huiyao, founder and president of the Center for China and Globalization, a research group in Beijing, said Mr. Trump's ''America First'' doctrine was a boon for China's efforts to attract foreign tech talent and persuade Chinese engineers now working abroad to return home.
  ''China is shifting from attracting foreign capital to foreign talent,'' Mr. Wang said. ''The U.S. is losing out.''
  Among the Chinese voices leading the push is that of Robin Li, the chief of Baidu, China's largest search engine.
  ''Many entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley have expressed their concern that this will hurt America's field of innovation,'' Mr. Li said recently at China's World Internet Conference. ''I really hope that talent from all over the world comes to China.''
  President Emmanuel Macron of France has sought to throw open a slightly different door. When Mr. Trump announced that he was pulling the United States out of the Paris climate accord, Mr. Macron extended an unusual offer to Americans: ''To all scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs, responsible citizens who were disappointed by the decision of the president of the United States, I want to say that they will find in France a second home.''
  These messages of welcome stand in contrast to the Trump administration's tough approach to immigration.
  In an executive order this spring, Mr. Trump directed federal agencies to review immigration laws with an eye toward ending what he called ''the theft of American prosperity.''
  The president has taken particular aim at the H-1B visa program, under which the government admits 85,000 highly skilled foreign workers every year, most of them in the tech field.
  Mr. Trump says businesses use the program to avoid hiring higher-paid Americans, and his executive order instructed the agencies to ensure that visas were awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers.
  Disney, Toys ''R'' Us, Southern California Edison and New York Life are among the companies that have laid off American tech workers who first were asked to train their replacements -- tech workers from low-wage countries like India brought in on temporary visas. In some cases,  the jobs themselves went back home with the new workers.
  Canada revised its temporary visa program partly because the Royal Bank of Canada, the country's largest financial institution, shuffled jobs overseas using that technique.
  Mr. Trump's executive order made no immediate changes, but it has sowed concern throughout the industry. Competition for H-1B visas was already intense. The government received 199,000 applications in the first five days of its lottery this year, then stopped accepting them. Many companies fear that Mr. Trump's efforts might put highly skilled immigrant workers even further out of their reach.
  A change could favor the biggest American tech companies, which tend to pay the highest wages. But it could hurt some of the biggest users of the H-1B program -- the outsourcing companies, including several from India -- that bring thousands of workers to the United States on lower wages to handle computing tasks for banks, health care companies and other firms.
  It could also hurt start-ups and smaller firms without the cash to compete on salaries.
  Adding to the uncertainty, the Trump administration said last month that it would delay, and perhaps eliminate, an Obama-era rule allowing thousands of foreign entrepreneurs to move to the United States every year to build start-ups.
  ''People here are extremely nervous,'' said Andreas Kraemer, managing partner of MITA Ventures, a San Francisco-based venture capital firm. ''This whole area is driven by immigration.''
  The White House referred questions about whether the uncertainty surrounding temporary visas could shift jobs to other countries to the Department of Homeland Security. The department declined to comment on Tuesday.
  León David Pérez, president of Propulsar, a Mexico City-based company that develops tech start-ups and has an office in San Francisco, argued that Mr. Trump's policies could jeopardize Silicon Valley's culture of creativity.
  ''When you want to spur innovation, the best way to generate it is to employ the greatest diversity of people,'' he said. ''That's what's being threatened with Trump's policies.''
  The uncertainty in Silicon Valley -- combined with the invitations from around the world -- have already begun to lead some tech companies and entrepreneurs to rethink the gravitational pull of Silicon Valley.
  Business interest in Jalisco has soared since Mr. Trump's election, leaders in the state's tech sector contend. Mr. Trump's immigration policies, said Jaime Reyes Robles, Jalisco's secretary of innovation, science and technology, have been ''our best marketing.''
  In 2003, Manuel R. Gutiérrez Novelo, a Mexican engineer, moved to Silicon Valley to develop TDVision Systems, a company specializing in 3D technology. He went on to develop a multipronged operation based in California, with offices in Europe and Asia.
  But in recent weeks, he uprooted his businesses and moved them back to Guadalajara, his hometown. Mr. Trump's efforts to restrict immigration were a big reason, he said, calling them anathema to his company's philosophy and a potential barrier to hiring foreign workers.
  ''If I saw Donald Trump, I'd tell him he has lost my business,'' he said.
  For decades, Jalisco was mainly a center for tech manufacturing. But as its talent pool has expanded, fed by highly regarded engineering programs at local universities, it has increasingly become a place for high-tech innovation.
  Andy Kieffer, an American entrepreneur who runs Agave Lab, a venture capital firm in Guadalajara, said that when he was seeking investors in Silicon Valley several years ago, he was waved off.
  ''I couldn't get anyone to look at Mexico,'' he recalled. ''They said, 'Look, I don't know anything about Mexico. It's off my radar.'''
  But in the past several months, he said, interest among investors has shot up.
  In Canada, officials expect their new visa to give their tech industry a big boost. Not only is there no limit on the number of visas, but government employees have been hired to act as visa concierges to make it easier for companies.
  ''It's a huge advantage when you contrast it to what's happening across the border,'' said Stephen Lake, whose company, Thalmic Labs, produces devices that enable users to control computers through gestures.
  Sharoon Thomas, an Indian entrepreneur, last year began shifting his start-up from Mountain View, Calif., to Toronto, and officially made the move in May. Seven of his engineers are still working in the United States and other countries, but he plans to use Canada's new visa program to bring them north.
  ''Canada's immigration policy makes you feel more welcome than the U.S.,'' said Mr. Thomas, whose company, fulfil.io, designs software to manage inventories.
  Evan J. Green, an immigration lawyer in Toronto, said he was helping companies in banking, insurance and retail seek visas for employees.
  ''These people have options,'' he said. ''This is the best and the brightest of the world. We want these people. This is good for Canada. Let's keep the door open while they're slamming it shut south of the border.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/02/world/trump-h1b-visa-silicon-valley-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Programmers in Guadalajara, Mexico. U.S. immigration policy is heartening foreign tech rivals. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ULISES RUIZ BASURTO/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A1)
Clockwise from top: a window used to organize activities at the Guadalajara, Mexico, office of Wizeline, a San Francisco-based start-up
a work area at Wizeline's office in Guadalajara
and employees of the start-up Musical.ly in Shanghai. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RODRIGO CRUZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 GILLES SABRIE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (89%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (74%); FACTORY WORKERS (73%); SOCIAL MEDIA (50%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (73%); SOCIAL MEDIA (50%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (93%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (87%); UNITED STATES (98%); CANADA (96%); MEXICO (96%)

Load-Date: August 2, 2017


End of Document
Trump Tests Positive. What Comes Next ...; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
October 2, 2020 Friday 16:57 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 2202 words
Highlight: Now, everything is in flux.
Body


Want this delivered to your inbox each day? Sign up here.
Now what?
President Trump announced overnight that he and his wife, Melania, had tested positive for the coronavirus. After months of playing down the severity of the pandemic, and with little over a month before the election, the news has thrown everything into flux.
Mr. Trump tested positive after a top adviser fell ill. The aide, Hope Hicks, began showing symptoms on Wednesday. The biggest question now is who else may have been infected, since White House officials largely eschew wearing face masks in meetings with Mr. Trump. The president has met with scores of staff members, donors and others in recent days — including Judge Amy Coney Barrett, his nominee for the Supreme Court, who is preparing for confirmation hearings.
 Also unknown: test results for Joe Biden, who faced off with Mr. Trump at Tuesday’s presidential debate, and Vice President Mike Pence, who attended a coronavirus briefing with the president on Monday. Google searches for “25th Amendment,” the part of the U.S. Constitution about the presidential line of succession, spiked shortly after Mr. Trump’s announcement. And legal experts have weighed in on what would happen if the president is incapacitated, or worse, come Election Day (it’s complicated).
 Mr. and Mrs. Trump will isolate at the White House. A busy schedule of rallies over the next several days has been cleared.
Markets are down. Futures for the S&amp;P 500, the Dow and the Nasdaq all fell, in choppy trading. Asian and European markets also lost ground. The dollar is up against a basket of other currencies, suggesting investors are moving money to traditional havens. The big tech stocks that have served as safe harbors, of sorts, are also down in premarket trading, suggesting a true “risk-off” shift among investors.
 Political betting markets moved on the news, giving Mr. Trump slightly worse odds for re-election: a 36 percent chance of winning, according to PredictIt. The sharpest move was in the odds for Mr. Pence: The vice-presidential debate scheduled for Oct. 7 has suddenly assumed much more importance. The remaining two debates between Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden may be canceled or altered, with the next set for Oct. 15.
What are the policy implications? Mr. Trump’s dismissals of the severity of the virus and cavalier attitude toward the pandemic have given cover for state and local officials as they reopen their economies. Now that the president has caught the virus, it could give more support for the leaders keeping things locked down, which would put pressure on the economy in the short term. On the other hand, Mr. Trump’s diagnosis could give new urgency to negotiations over additional federal stimulus, which would be a boost to markets that have been calling for more aid after many of the initial programs expired.
There is much, much more to come on this story: follow The Times’s live briefing for the latest developments, read about other world leaders who caught the virus and see photos from Mr. Trump’s travels this week.
____________________________
Today’s DealBook Briefing was written by Andrew Ross Sorkin and Lauren Hirsch in New York, Ephrat Livni in Washington, and Michael J. de la Merced and Jason Karaian in London.
____________________________
Here’s what’s happening
Banks say they won’t profit much from pandemic aid loans. Though the biggest banks collected at least $13 billion in fees from loans tied to the Paycheck Protection Program, they say expenses all but wiped out any profit.
Nearly 20,000 Amazon workers have had Covid-19. The e-commerce giant said that of its 1.4 million frontline workers in the U.S., including those in its warehouses and at Whole Foods stores, roughly 1.5 percent had contracted the coronavirus since the start of March. The company has faced criticism about its safety protocols.
U.S. tech giants scored a win in the fight over foreign worker visas. A federal judge temporarily blocked President Trump’s order suspending employment visas, including H-1B permits, for overseas workers during the pandemic. Companies like Apple, Google and Microsoft had argued against the restrictions.
BlackRock criticized Volkswagen over “Dieselgate” concerns. The money-management titan said it had voted against members of the German carmaker’s boards, saying that the company hadn’t sufficiently overhauled its corporate governance after the emissions-cheating scandal.
Corporate boards still have a long way to go on diversity. Only 10 percent of boards for S&amp;P 500 companies disclose directors’ ethnicities, and just 20 percent of those board members are nonwhite, according to a new study by the Conference Board. And the percentage of women directors of the 3,000 largest listed companies has risen very slowly, to 18.5 percent in the latest reading.
The job cuts are spreading
Companies announced tens of thousands of layoffs this week, in what seems like a new phase of the pandemic. Now, even profitable companies with lots of cash are assessing their longer-term prospects and making cuts — perhaps with the pandemic providing cover.
Layoffs  without an obvious link to the pandemic include 400 employees at Goldman Sachs, which recently reported its second-highest quarterly revenue ever. Allstate Insurance, which reported surging profits in August, is laying off 3,800, part of a broader overhaul the company first announced last year. These moves may be following an unspoken recession playbook in which long-planned actions are taken during a downturn, attracting less attention because so many other companies are restructuring, too.
Other job cuts suggest that companies are bracing for a long-term downturn. Companies more directly affected by the virus, like the airlines and Disney, recently announced tens of thousands of additional furloughs and cuts due to “the continued uncertainty regarding the duration of the pandemic,” as Disney’s Josh D’Amaro put it this week, calling it “the only feasible option.” Second-order effects of these sorts of troubles are also appearing: KPMG is reportedly cutting 1,400 employees as companies save costs by pulling back on outside consultants.
More trouble lurks behind the big-company headlines. The federal loan program for small businesses expired with $130 billion untapped, and a similar program for midsize companies imposes too many conditions to make it feasible, critics contend. Analysts at Pantheon Macroeconomics said in a note yesterday that gloomy data from small-business surveys have made them “even more nervous about October” than before, suggesting that overall U.S. payroll employment this month may decline.
 The September jobs report is out today, at 8:30 a.m. Eastern, and forecasters expect that the economy will have added 875,000 jobs last month, down from 1.4 million in August and nearly 5 million in June. Payrolls are still about 10 million jobs lower than their February level.
In the papers
Some of the academic research that caught our eye this week, summarized in one sentence:
 Conflict at work can be good for company culture — under the right conditions. (W. Bentley MacLeod, Victoria Valle Lara and Christian Zehnder)
 Investment in innovation tends to generate social returns greater than private returns, so public policy should encourage it despite the risk of failure, waste and other uncertainties (Benjamin Jones and Larry Summers)
 Car dealers who reveal the true cost of a car upfront build trust with buyers… who then end up spending more on extras. (Yashar Atefi et al)
Pfizer’s chief wants out of the ‘crucible’ of the election
Albert Bourla sent a memo to the drugmaker’s employees, later posted publicly, that lamented the “amplified political rhetoric” about a coronavirus vaccine during Tuesday’s presidential debate. Mr. Trump, as he has said previously, claimed at the debate that a vaccine was “weeks away.”
A vaccine will move “at the speed of science,” Mr. Bourla wrote. “Once more, I was disappointed that the prevention for a deadly disease was discussed in political terms rather than scientific facts. People, who are understandably confused, don’t know whom or what to believe.”
That means Pfizer won’t be rushed. The company said in March that it hoped to have enough trial data to submit for regulatory approval this month, with initial batches of a vaccine available for delivery by the end of the year. Mr. Bourla said that while the company is making good progress toward that goal, it won’t be pressured into expediting it:
Now, we are approaching our goal and despite not having any political considerations with our pre-announced date, we find ourselves in the crucible of the U.S. Presidential election. In this hyperpartisan year, there are some who would like us to move more quickly and others who argue for delay. Neither of those options are acceptable to me.
Nikola adopts a bit more modesty
For much of its history, like many start-ups, the electric truck maker has emphasized innovation as one of its calling cards. But a news release this week redefined Nikola as “an innovator and an integrator,” noting that it relies on others for significant parts of its designs, after reports raised questions about the originality of its technology and its operations.
By the numbers: Nikola has used some variant of “innovation” in 24 news releases and securities filings since it first announced plans in March to go public via a merger with a blank-check company, according to the data provider Sentieo. Some examples:
 Trevor Milton, the company’s founder and now-former executive chairman, was often described as a “visionary leader with passion for innovation and disruption.” (He has a history of pitching grand visions and then failing to deliver.)
 “Nikola is one of the most innovative companies in the world,” Mr. Milton said when announcing a partnership with General Motors last month.
 “Nikola intends to continue to attract top talent to further enhance Nikola’s talent pool and drive technological innovations,” is a phrase that has appeared in several documents.
The other I-word. By contrast, “integrator” appears in just one release: this week’s statement.
Nikola says its new description is more accurate. Its business model, the company now says, “combines our own intellectual property and proprietary technology with that of our strategic business partners and suppliers to design and manufacture innovative energy and transportation solutions.”
 In Nikola’s case, that means relying on a G.M. battery for its Badger pickup truck and a joint G.M.-Honda hydrogen fuel cell for its semi trucks — despite Nikola owning patents in both technologies. The G.M. pickup deal was originally meant to close on Tuesday, but talks are continuing.
 The company’s explanation: “If our partners have a less expensive, more efficient solution that works with and in our designs, we very intentionally want to go with that.”
Nikola has work to do, regardless of how it describes itself. The company postponed a December event where it was scheduled to show off its electric pickup truck. And it is still in talks to partner with an energy company — news reports had identified BP as one candidate — to build roadside hydrogen-refueling stations. Its share price jumped this week after it reaffirmed production targets, but remains some 70 percent lower than the highs it reached in June.
The speed read
Deals
 Goldman Sachs agreed to buy G.M.’s credit card business for $2.5 billion, adding to its consumer-lending portfolio. (FT)
 Nelson Peltz’s Trian has taken big stakes in Invesco and Janus Henderson, reportedly with an eye toward pushing the two asset managers to merge. (WSJ)
 Two British billionaires and the investment firm TDR Capital agreed to buy Walmart’s British subsidiary, Asda, for $8.8 billion. (Reuters)
SPAC corner
 Playboy will return to the public markets by merging with Mountain Crest Acquisition Corp. in a deal that values the publisher at $413 million, including debt. (Reuters)
 Hims, which sells prescription men’s care products directly to consumers, agreed to merge with an Oaktree-run SPAC at a $1.6 billion valuation. (Axios)
 A SPAC run by Charlie Ergen, the telecom billionaire, is seeking to raise $1 billion. (Reuters)
Politics and policy
 The Senate Commerce Committee voted to authorize subpoenas for the C.E.O.s of Facebook, Google and Twitter to testify about how they handle user content on their platforms. (NYT)
 How can President Trump repay the roughly $1 billion in debt he is thought to owe? (Vanity Fair)
Tech
 How Susquehanna International, a secretive options-trading firm, amassed a stake in TikTok worth billions. (WSJ)
 Google plans to pay news publishers $1 billion over three years to license their content for a new product. (TechCrunch)
Best of the rest
 Michael Lewis’s latest: “Inside a California Covid Revolt” (Bloomberg Opinion)
 “Saturday Night Live” is returning with a studio audience tomorrow. Last week, the show’s longtime producer, Lorne Michaels, worried that “We don’t know that we’re going to be able to pull it off.” (NYT)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Joshua Roberts/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CORONAVIRUSES (90%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); EPIDEMICS (89%); POLITICAL DEBATES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); VIRUSES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (79%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); JUDGES (77%); JUDICIAL APPOINTMENTS (74%); SUPREME COURTS (74%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); STOCK EXCHANGES (69%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (68%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (63%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); Nikola Motor Co (%); Pfizer Inc (%)

Company: GOOGLE LLC (55%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (55%); STOCK EXCHANGES (69%); BIG TECH (67%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (93%); AMY CONEY BARRETT (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); MIKE PENCE (79%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (79%)

Load-Date: October 27, 2020


End of Document
Invent, Invent, Invent
The New York Times
June 28, 2009 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 8; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 846 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Body


I was at a conference in St. Petersburg, Russia, a few weeks ago and interviewed Craig Barrett, the former chairman of Intel, about how America should get out of its current economic crisis. His first proposal was this: Any American kid who wants to get a driver's license has to finish high school. No diploma -- no license. Hey, why would we want to put a kid who can barely add, read or write behind the wheel of a car?
  Now what does that have to do with pulling us out of the Great Recession? A lot. Historically, recessions have been a time when new companies, like Microsoft, get born, and good companies separate themselves from their competition. It makes sense. When times are tight, people look for new, less expensive ways to do old things. Necessity breeds invention.
  Therefore, the country that uses this crisis to make its population smarter and more innovative  --  and endows its people with more tools and basic research to invent new goods and services  --  is the one that will not just survive but thrive down the road. 
  We might be able to stimulate our way back to stability, but we can only invent our way back to prosperity. We need everyone at every level to get smarter. 
  I still believe that America, with its unrivaled freedoms, venture capital industry, research universities and openness to new immigrants has the best assets to be taking advantage of this moment  --  to out-innovate our competition. But we should be pressing these advantages to the max right now.
  Russia, it seems to me, is clearly wasting this crisis. Oil prices rebounded from $30 to $70 a barrel too quickly, so the pressure for Russia to really reform and diversify its economy is off. The struggle for Russia's post-Communist economic soul  --  whether it is going to be more OPEC than O.E.C.D., a country that derives more of its wealth from drilling its mines than from tapping its minds  --  seems to be over for now.
  At the St. Petersburg exposition center, showing off the Russian economy, the two biggest display booths belonged to Gazprom, the state-controlled oil and gas company, and Sberbank, Russia's largest state-owned bank. Russian companies that actually made things that the world wanted were virtually nonexistent: Two-thirds of Russia's exports today are oil and gas. Gazprom makes the money, and Sberbank lends it out.
  As one Western banker put it, when oil is $35 a barrel, Russia ''has no choice'' but to reform, to diversify its economy and to put in place the rule of law and incentives that would really stimulate small business. But at $70 a barrel, it takes an act of enormous ''political will,'' which the petro-old K.G.B. alliance that dominates the Kremlin today is unlikely to summon. Too much rule of law and transparency would constrict the ruling clique's own freedom of maneuver.
  China is also courting trouble. Recently -- in the name of censoring pornography -- China blocked access to Google and demanded that computers sold in China come supplied with an Internet nanny filter called Green Dam Youth Escort, starting July 1. Green Dam can also be used to block politics, not just Playboy. Once you start censoring the Web, you restrict the ability to imagine and innovate. You are telling young Chinese that if they really want to explore, they need to go abroad.
  We should be taking advantage. Now is when we should be stapling a green card to the diploma of any foreign student who earns an advanced degree at any U.S. university, and we should be ending all H-1B visa restrictions on knowledge workers who want to come here. They would invent many more jobs than they would supplant. The world's best brains are on sale. Let's buy more!
  Barrett argues that we should also use this crisis to: 1) require every state to benchmark their education standards against the best in the world, not the state next door; 2) double the budgets for basic scientific research at the National Science Foundation, the Department of Energy and the National Institute of Standards and Technology; 3) lower the corporate tax rate; 4) revamp Sarbanes-Oxley so that it is easier to start a small business; 5) find a cost-effective way to extend health care to every American.
  We need to do all we can now to get more brains connected to more capital to spawn more new companies faster. As Jeff Immelt, the chief of General Electric, put it in a speech on Friday, this moment is ''an opportunity to turn financial adversity into national advantage,  to launch innovations of lasting value to our country.''
  Sometimes, I worry, though, that what oil money is to Russia, our ability to print money is to America. Look at the billions we just printed to bail out two dinosaurs: General Motors and Chrysler. 
  Lately, there has been way too much talk about minting dollars and too little about minting our next Thomas Edison, Bob Noyce, Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, Vint Cerf, Jerry Yang, Marc Andreessen, Sergey Brin, Bill Joy and Larry Page. Adding to that list is the only stimulus that matters. Otherwise, we're just Russia with a printing press. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ECONOMIC CRISIS (89%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); RECESSION (89%); COMMUNISM (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (78%); STATE OWNED BUSINESSES (78%); TRADE SHOWS (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (77%); PRICES (77%); CARTELS (74%); NEW BUSINESSES (73%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); DRIVERS LICENSES (72%); OIL & GAS PRICES (68%); RULE OF LAW (66%); VENTURE CAPITAL (65%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (50%)

Company:  SBERBANK ROSSII OAO (81%);  OAO GAZPROM (64%);  INTEL CORP (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (57%)

Ticker: SBER (RTS) (81%); SBER (LSE) (81%); OGZD (LSE) (64%); GAZP (RTS) (64%); INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS522293 INTERNATIONAL TRADE FINANCING (81%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (81%); SIC6082 FOREIGN TRADE & INTERNATIONAL BANKING INSTITUTIONS (81%); SIC6021 NATIONAL COMMERCIAL BANKS (81%); NAICS486210 PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS (64%); NAICS221210 NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION (64%); NAICS211130 NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (64%); NAICS211120 CRUDE PETROLEUM EXTRACTION (64%); SIC4923 NATURAL GAS TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (64%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (64%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (57%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (57%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (89%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (85%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (76%); BANKING & FINANCE (72%); DRIVERS LICENSES (72%); OIL & GAS PRICES (68%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (68%); VENTURE CAPITAL (65%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (50%)

Geographic: SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIA (88%); RUSSIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: June 28, 2009


End of Document
Showing Support for Trump, Intel Announces Plant
The New York Times
February 9, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1114 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Intel, the world's largest computer chip manufacturer, will invest $7 billion to finish a factory in Arizona, adding 3,000 jobs, the company's chief executive said on Wednesday after meeting with President Trump at the White House.
The completion of the factory, which will complement two other Intel semiconductor plants in Chandler, Ariz., had been under consideration for several years. 
  Standing beside Mr. Trump in the Oval Office, Brian Krzanich, Intel's chief executive, said the company had decided to proceed now because of ''the tax and regulatory policies we see the administration pushing forward.''
  Mr. Trump said: ''The people of Arizona will be very happy. It's a lot of jobs.''
  He said Intel called the White House several weeks ago to coordinate the announcement. That outreach illustrates the tightrope that Silicon Valley companies are walking as they deal with a president most of them did not want to see in office.
  Intel was one of nearly 130 companies that signed a legal brief challenging Mr. Trump's Jan. 27 executive order temporarily blocking the entry of all refugees and of immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim nations. Earlier, Mr. Krzanich criticized the order on Twitter, declaring, ''As a company co-founded by an immigrant, we support lawful immigration.'' (Intel's third employee and longtime chief executive, Andrew S. Grove, survived the Holocaust and arrived in the United States after fleeing the Soviet invasion of his native Hungary in 1956.)
  Yet Intel, like Apple and other large technology companies, also supports the Trump administration's plans to reduce corporate taxes and regulations. During the presidential campaign, Mr. Krzanich planned and then canceled a fund-raiser for Mr. Trump.
  Stacy J. Smith, the executive vice president who oversees manufacturing and sales, said Intel considered itself apolitical. ''Intel engages, whatever the administration,'' he said in an interview after Wednesday's announcement. ''We focus on the issues that we care about.''
  Intel said it agreed with Mr. Trump's desire to improve the investment climate for American manufacturers. ''In places where we believe the policies are in the best interest of the company, we lean in,'' Mr. Smith said.
  In other areas, such as Mr. Trump's desire to curb immigration and end free-trade agreements, Intel disagrees, and it is telling the White House so. ''We care about hiring the best and brightest people around the world,'' Mr. Smith said. ''We care about exporting our products all over the world.''
  Mr. Krzanich said in a message to employees that he had chosen to announce the expansion at the White House to signal his support for the administration's efforts to make American manufacturing more competitive.
  ''When we disagree, we don't walk away,'' he wrote. ''We believe that we must be part of the conversation to voice our views on key issues such as immigration, H1B visas and other policies that are essential to innovation.''
  Intel's strategy of engagement mirrors that of Elon Musk, the chief executive of Tesla Motors and SpaceX, who serves on a presidential advisory council. Other Silicon Valley leaders, such as Travis Kalanick of Uber, have distanced themselves from the administration under pressure from employees and customers.
  Intel's political action committee gave about equally to Democratic and Republican candidates during the last election cycle. Individual employees donated far more to Hillary Clinton's campaign than to Mr. Trump's. But over all, the company is not a major political donor.
  New chip plants are tremendously expensive, requiring large tracts of land, reliable electricity and water, and a skilled work force that includes people with doctorates in chemistry and technicians who can repair a malfunctioning robot. Sophisticated equipment is necessary to deposit and etch microscopic layers of material on silicon wafers, which are then cut and packaged into the microprocessors that run personal computers, servers, smartphones and, increasingly, other electronic devices.
  Countries compete to land such plants, especially modern factories that produce the most valuable chips and bring high-paying research and development jobs. Government subsidies are common, with China vowing to spend tens of billions of dollars to expand its domestic chip industry.
  While most technology manufacturing, such as computers and smartphones, has moved overseas, American factories still account for about one-seventh of global chip production and produce many of the most valuable computer chips, including Intel's flagship processors. Seventy-six chip plants are scattered across the United States, from South Portland, Me., to Newport Beach, Calif., according to the Semiconductor Industry Association.
  The industry is seeking corporate tax cuts and incentives for research and development. In addition, chip makers would like to see the United States government relax longstanding national security restrictions on the export of new chip technology. In Intel's case, the regulations forbid the company from making its high-end processors in China.
  Mr. Smith said Mr. Trump had offered Intel no financial incentives to complete the Arizona factory.
  The plant was conceived in 2011. President Barack Obama visited the site in 2012, when construction had just begun, and he praised the plant as an example of ''an America where we build stuff and make stuff and sell stuff all over the world.''
  But it was mothballed in 2014 after sales of personal computers -- and the Intel chips that go into them -- started to slide. Intel restructured its business and announced last year that it was laying off 12,000 people, including 560 in Chandler. The company now employs about 50,000 people in the United States and 106,000 worldwide.
  As Intel looks beyond servers and personal computers to new markets like other Internet-connected devices, cars and tablets, sales are growing again, and it will need the new factory when it is completed in a couple of years. ''We're building it for our own business reasons,'' Mr. Smith said.
  The plant will build ultradense chips that Intel refers to as seven nanometer, with transistors packed more closely together than in the chips the company now builds. The tighter spacing allows for faster, more energy-efficient chips. ''This factory will produce the most powerful computer chips on the planet,'' Mr. Krzanich said.
  Intel, one of the original chip companies, from which Silicon Valley gets its name, is based in Santa Clara, Calif. But most of its chip production is in Oregon and Arizona. It also has factories in China, Ireland and Israel.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/08/technology/trump-intel-chip-factory-arizona.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: After meeting with President Trump, Brian Krzanich, left, Intel's chief executive, said the company would invest $7 billion to finish a factory conceived in 2011. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EXECUTIVES (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); AGREEMENTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (76%); EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (75%); FREE TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (75%); FUNDRAISING (73%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (72%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); EXPORT TRADE (71%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); REFUGEES (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (51%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (98%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (98%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (98%); SEMICONDUCTOR MFG (91%); MANUFACTURING (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); MICROPROCESSORS (90%); BIG TECH (78%); COMPUTER CHIPS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); SEMICONDUCTORS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); BRIAN KRZANICH (79%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (59%); ARIZONA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: February 9, 2017


End of Document
America’s Competitors Angle for Silicon Valley’s Business
The New York Times 
August 2, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD
Length: 1950 words
Byline: KIRK SEMPLE and IAN AUSTEN
Highlight: As the Trump administration tightens immigration, governments around the world are stepping up their efforts to lure talent and capital away from the United States.
Body


GUADALAJARA, Mexico — With his frequent refrains about Mexicans and the need for a wall to contain them, it’s no surprise that President Trump has made few friends in Mexico.
Yet here in the capital of Jalisco State, sometimes referred to as Mexico’s Silicon Valley, people are practically celebrating him.
“He’s helping us a lot!” Gov. Aristóteles Sandoval exclaimed. “He’s put us on the world’s agenda.”
As part of Mr. Trump’s efforts to push an America-first philosophy, he has            vowed           to restrict the availability of special visas that are widely used by technology companies to hire talent from around the world.
Mr. Trump’s plans, combined with an American political climate that has left many immigrants feeling less welcome, has cast a pall of uncertainty over the American tech industry, which relies heavily on highly skilled workers from abroad.
But while entrepreneurs and executives in the United States are fretting, other countries — including Mexico, Canada and China — are salivating over the Trump administration’s rumblings.
Silicon Valley’s loss, they say, could be their gain.
In recent months, foreign governments and tech industry leaders have sought to capitalize on the uncertainty in Silicon Valley. They are stepping up their efforts to attract engineers and entrepreneurs who might rely on the special American visa program, known as H-1B, to work or to run businesses in the United States.
“It’s an exciting time,” said Brad Duguid, the minister of economic development in Ontario, where the capital, Toronto, is one of Canada’s biggest tech hubs. “And while it’s unfortunate that the U.S. is looking more internally, far be it from us not to take advantage of that.”
In June, Canada set up a new visa program that makes it easier for companies to recruit highly skilled foreign workers. Under the program, which was in development before Mr. Trump’s election victory, the Canadian government has promised to approve two-year visas in less than two weeks — blindingly fast, compared with the process in the United States.
And unlike the H-1B visa in the United States, there is no limit to the number of Canadian visas available.
Beyond that, Ontario is in the early stages of preparing a social media campaign for technology executives around the world to sell the province as a place for investment.
“Canada is seizing its moment,” said Navdeep Singh Bains, the country’s federal minister of innovation, science and economic development. “We’re open to trade and people.”
In Mexico, states with growing regional tech hubs, like Jalisco, have been redoubling their efforts to attract talent and investment in recent months, peddling a philosophy of openness that departs from what Mr. Sandoval called Mr. Trump’s “xenophobia” and “lack of global vision.”
The efforts have included visits by Jalisco officials to the San Francisco Bay Area and to Europe. The San Francisco Chronicle published an op-ed piece by Mr. Sandoval pitching the advantages of doing business in his state.
The officials herald Mexico’s proximity to Silicon Valley, its alignment with time zones in the United States and its lower cost of living. They are also sweetening the invitation with enticements like tax incentives and promises of full government cooperation.
“We want you,” says a new promotional website, Come2Jalisco.com. “Innovation has no borders.”
Even Mexico’s ambassador to India has echoed the pitch.
“We will be more than happy to have Indians relocate to Mexico,” the ambassador, Melba Pría, told The Indian Express newspaper earlier this year, emphasizing the “visa ease” that foreign talent will experience in Mexico.
China’s tech leaders have also been seizing on the opportunity created by Mr. Trump’s immigration policies.
Wang Huiyao, founder and president of the Center for China and Globalization, a research group in Beijing, said Mr. Trump’s “America First” doctrine was a boon for China’s efforts to attract foreign tech talent and persuade Chinese engineers now working abroad to return home.
“China is shifting from attracting foreign capital to foreign talent,” Mr. Wang said. “The U.S. is losing out.”
Among the Chinese voices leading the push is that of Robin Li, the chief of Baidu, China’s largest search engine.
“Many entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley have expressed their concern that this will hurt America’s field of innovation,” Mr. Li said recently at China’s World Internet Conference. “I really hope that talent from all over the world comes to China.”
President Emmanuel Macron of France has sought to throw open a slightly different door. When Mr. Trump announced that he was pulling the United States out of the Paris climate accord, Mr. Macron extended an unusual offer to Americans: “To all scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs, responsible citizens who were disappointed by the decision of the president of the United States, I want to say that they will find in France a second home.”
These messages of welcome stand in contrast to the Trump administration’s tough approach to immigration.
In an executive order this spring, Mr. Trump directed federal agencies to review immigration laws with an eye toward ending what he called “the theft of American prosperity.”
The president has taken particular aim at the            H-1B visa program, under which the government admits 85,000 highly skilled foreign workers every year, most of them in the tech field.
Mr. Trump says businesses use the program to avoid hiring higher-paid Americans, and his executive order instructed the agencies to ensure that visas were awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers.
Disney, Toys “R” Us, Southern California Edison and New York Life are among the companies that have laid off American tech workers who first were asked to train their replacements — tech workers from low-wage countries like India brought in on temporary visas. In some cases,            the jobs themselves went back home with the new workers.
Canada revised its temporary visa program partly because the Royal Bank of Canada, the country’s largest financial institution, shuffled jobs overseasusing that technique.
Mr. Trump’s executive order made no immediate changes, but it has sowed concern throughout the industry. Competition for H-1B visas was already intense. The government            received 199,000 applications in the first five days of its lottery this year, then stopped accepting them. Many companies fear that Mr. Trump’s efforts might put highly skilled immigrant workers even further out of their reach.
A change could favor the biggest American tech companies, which tend to pay the highest wages. But it could hurt some of the biggest users of the H-1B program — the outsourcing companies, including several from India — that bring thousands of workers to the United States on lower wages to handle computing tasks for banks, health care companies and other firms.
It could also hurt start-ups and smaller firms without the cash to compete on salaries.
Adding to the uncertainty, the Trump           administration           said last month that it would delay, and perhaps eliminate, an Obama-era rule allowing thousands of foreign entrepreneurs to move to the United States every year to build start-ups.
“People here are extremely nervous,” said Andreas Kraemer, managing partner of MITA Ventures, a San Francisco-based venture capital firm. “This whole area is driven by immigration.”
The White House referred questions about whether the uncertainty surrounding temporary visas could shift jobs to other countries to the Department of Homeland Security. The department declined to comment on Tuesday.
León David Pérez, president of Propulsar, a Mexico City-based company that develops tech start-ups and has an office in San Francisco, argued that Mr. Trump’s policies could jeopardize Silicon Valley’s culture of creativity.
“When you want to spur innovation, the best way to generate it is to employ the greatest diversity of people,” he said. “That’s what’s being threatened with Trump’s policies.”
The uncertainty in Silicon Valley — combined with the invitations from around the world — have already begun to lead some tech companies and entrepreneurs to rethink the gravitational pull of Silicon Valley.
Business interest in Jalisco has soared since Mr. Trump’s election, leaders in the state’s tech sector contend. Mr. Trump’s immigration policies, said Jaime Reyes Robles, Jalisco’s secretary of innovation, science and technology, have been “our best marketing.”
In 2003, Manuel R. Gutiérrez Novelo, a Mexican engineer, moved to Silicon Valley to develop TDVision Systems, a company specializing in 3D technology. He went on to develop a multipronged operation based in California, with offices in Europe and Asia.
But in recent weeks, he uprooted his businesses and moved them back to Guadalajara, his hometown. Mr. Trump’s efforts to restrict immigration were a big reason, he said, calling them anathema to his company’s philosophy and a potential barrier to hiring foreign workers.
“If I saw Donald Trump, I’d tell him he has lost my business,” he said.
For decades, Jalisco was mainly a center for tech manufacturing. But as its talent pool has expanded, fed by highly regarded engineering programs at local universities, it has increasingly become a place for high-tech innovation.
Andy Kieffer, an American entrepreneur who runs Agave Lab, a venture capital firm in Guadalajara, said that when he was seeking investors in Silicon Valley several years ago, he was waved off.
“I couldn’t get anyone to look at Mexico,” he recalled. “They said, ‘Look, I don’t know anything about Mexico. It’s off my radar.’”
But in the past several months, he said, interest among investors has shot up.
In Canada, officials expect their new visa to give their tech industry a big boost. Not only is there no limit on the number of visas, but government employees have been hired to act as visa concierges to make it easier for companies.
“It’s a huge advantage when you contrast it to what’s happening across the border,” said Stephen Lake, whose company, Thalmic Labs, produces devices that enable users to control computers through gestures.
Sharoon Thomas, an Indian entrepreneur, last year began shifting his start-up from Mountain View, Calif., to Toronto, and officially made the move in May. Seven of his engineers are still working in the United States and other countries, but he plans to use Canada’s new visa program to bring them north.
“Canada’s immigration policy makes you feel more welcome than the U.S.,” said Mr. Thomas, whose company, fulfil.io, designs software to manage inventories.
Evan J. Green, an immigration lawyer in Toronto, said he was helping companies in banking, insurance and retail seek visas for employees.
“These people have options,” he said. “This is the best and the brightest of the world. We want these people. This is good for Canada. Let’s keep the door open while they’re slamming it shut south of the border.”
Kirk Semple reported from Guadalajara, and Ian Austen from Ottawa. Javier Hernández contributed reporting from Beijing, and Yang Xiong contributed research from Beijing.
PHOTOS: Programmers in Guadalajara, Mexico. U.S. immigration policy is heartening foreign tech rivals. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ULISES RUIZ BASURTO/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY) (A1); Clockwise from top: a window used to organize activities at the Guadalajara, Mexico, office of Wizeline, a San Francisco-based start-up; a work area at Wizeline’s office in Guadalajara; and employees of the start-up Musical.ly in Shanghai. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RODRIGO CRUZ FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; GILLES SABRIE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A8)
Related Articles
    • A Trump Dividend for Canada? Maybe in Its A.I. Industry
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (89%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (75%); FACTORY WORKERS (74%); APPROVALS (61%); SOCIAL MEDIA (58%); Innovation (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Entrepreneurship (%); Canada (%); Silicon Valley (Calif) (%); United States (%); Mexico (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Computers and the Internet (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (74%); SOCIAL MEDIA (58%)

Person: Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (93%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (91%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); ONTARIO, CANADA (88%); UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (95%); MEXICO (95%)

Load-Date: August 3, 2017


End of Document
An Innovation Agenda
The New York Times
December 8, 2009 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 37; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 833 words
Byline: By DAVID BROOKS
Body


The economy seems to be stabilizing, and this has prompted a shift in the public mood. Raw fear has given way to anxiety that the recovery will be feeble and drab. Companies are hoarding cash. Banks aren't lending to small businesses. Private research spending is drifting downward.
  People are asking anxious questions about America's future. Will it take years before the animal spirits revive? Can the economy rebalance so that it relies less on consumption and debt and more on innovation and export? Have we entered a period of relative decline?
  The first thing to say is, let's not get carried away with the malaise. The U.S. remains the world's most competitive economy, the leader in information technology, biotechnology and nearly every cutting-edge sector.
  The American model remains an impressive growth engine, even allowing for the debt-fueled bubble. The U.S. economy grew by 63 percent between 1991 and 2009, compared with 35 percent for France, 22 percent for Germany and 16 percent for Japan over the same period. In 1975, the U.S. accounted for 26.3 percent of world G.D.P. Today, after the rise of the Asian tigers, the U.S. actually accounts for a slightly higher share of world output: 26.7 percent.
  The U.S. has its problems, but Americans would be crazy to trade their problems with those of any other large nation.
  Moreover, there's a straightforward way to revive innovation. In an unfairly neglected white paper on the subject, President Obama's National Economic Council argued that the U.S. should not be in the industrial policy business. Governments that try to pick winners ''too often end up wasting resources and stifling rather than promoting innovation.'' But there are several things the government can do to improve the economic ecology. If you begin with that framework, you can quickly come up with a bipartisan innovation agenda.
  First, push hard to fulfill the Obama administration's education reforms. Those reforms, embraced by Republicans and Democrats, encourage charter school innovation, improve teacher quality, support community colleges and simplify finances for college students and war veterans. That's the surest way to improve human capital.
  Second, pay for basic research. Federal research money has been astonishingly productive, leading to DNA sequencing, semiconductors, lasers and many other technologies. Yet this financing has slipped, especially in physics, math and engineering. Overall research-and-development funding has slipped, too. The U.S. should aim to spend 3 percent of G.D.P. on research, as it did in the 1960s.
  Third, rebuild the nation's infrastructure. Abraham Lincoln spent the first half of his career promoting canals and railroads. Today, the updated needs are just as great, and there's widespread agreement that decisions should be made by a National Infrastructure Bank, not pork-seeking politicians.
  Fourth, find a fiscal exit strategy. If the deficits continue to surge, interest payments on the debt will be stifling. More important, the mounting deficits destroy confidence by sending the message that the American government is dysfunctional. The only way to realistically fix this problem is to appoint a binding commission, already supported by Republicans and Democrats, which would create a roadmap toward fiscal responsibility and then allow the Congress to vote on it, up or down.
  Fifth, gradually address global imbalances. American consumers are now spending less and saving more. But the world economy will be out of whack if the Chinese continue to consume too little. The only solution is slow diplomacy to rebalance exchange rates and other distorting policies.
  Sixth, loosen the so-called H-1B visa quotas to attract skilled immigrants.
  Seventh, encourage regional innovation clusters. Innovation doesn't happen at the national level. It happens within hot spots -- places where hordes of entrepreneurs gather to compete, meet face to face, pollinate ideas. Regional authorities can't innovate themselves, but they can encourage those who do to cluster.
  Eighth, lower the corporate tax rate so it matches international norms.
  Ninth, don't be stupid. Don't make labor markets rigid. Don't pick trade fights with the Chinese. Don't get infatuated with research tax credits and other gimmicks, which don't increase overall research-and-development  spending but just increase the salaries of the people who would be doing it anyway.
  This sort of agenda doesn't rely on politicians who think they can predict the next new thing. Nor does it mean merely letting the market go its own way. (The market seems to have a preference for useless financial instruments and insane compensation packages.)
  Instead, it's an agenda that would steer and spark innovation without controlling it, which is what government has done since the days of Alexander Hamilton. It's the sort of thing the country does periodically, each time we need to recover from one of our binges of national stupidity. 

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); SCIENCE FUNDING (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EDUCATION REFORM (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT SPENDING (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC SCIENCE (77%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (77%); GOVERNMENT RESEARCH FUNDING (77%); MAMMALS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); GENOMICS (72%); SMALL BUSINESS LENDING (72%); AGREEMENTS (70%); BIPARTISANSHIP (69%); DNA (69%); ECONOMIC POLICY (68%); COMMUNITY COLLEGES (65%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (65%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (64%); HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT (60%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (60%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (60%); CHARTER SCHOOLS (50%); VETERANS (50%)

Industry: COLLEGE STUDENTS (77%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); SMALL BUSINESS LENDING (72%); COMMUNITY COLLEGES (65%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (65%); CHARTER SCHOOLS (50%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (50%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE (73%)

Load-Date: December 8, 2009


End of Document
After Kansas Shootings, Indians Are Wary of Coming to U.S.
The New York Times 
February 26, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 840 words
Byline: ELLEN BARRY and NIDA NAJAR
Highlight: Indians were relatively welcoming of President Trump’s victory, but the killing of an Indian man in Kansas and serious worries about an immigration crackdown were starting to sour that view.
Body


NEW DELHI — Jeena Sharma, 25, was applying for a work visa to the United States when news came that two Indian engineers had been shot in a Kansas bar by a man who drunkenly questioned their immigration status.
News of the shootings, which took place last Wednesday, was quickly eclipsed by other developments in Washington, and even in Kansas, but the same cannot be said of the Sharma household of Mumbai, where Ms. Sharma has received emphatic maternal lectures about her plans to move, starting first thing in the morning.
“She asked me: ‘Why do you even need to go to the States? Why do you need to go to a country that doesn’t want you? I’m going to be scared for your life every day,’” Ms. Sharma said.
Even as she endeavored, patiently, to convey to her mother the difference between Kansas and New York City, where she hopes to move, Ms. Sharma felt her own apprehensions growing, as the days passed and President Trump made no statement on the crime.
“It’s definitely very scary for me at the moment,” she said. “It’s almost as if a brown person is dead, like it doesn’t matter.”
The body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, the 32-year-old software engineer fatally shot in the Olathe, Kan., bar, was expected to arrive by Monday in Hyderabad, a technology hub where immigration to the United States has long been viewed as the surest path to success.
Indians were relatively welcoming of Mr. Trump’s victory, and many here express admiration for his business empire and promised crackdown on terrorism. But even before Wednesday’s shootings, that optimism had been diluted by fears that America might no longer welcome immigrants.
India is second only to China as a feeder to American colleges, with around 165,000 students enrolled in the 2015-16 school year, according to the Institute of International Education. Indians are the largest recipients of temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which the Trump administration intends to cut back. And close to half a million Indians, who mostly went to the United States legally as students or tourists or on work visas,            have stayed on after their visas expired, the Pew Research Center estimates.
Reports of rising American hostility toward immigrants have stunned many Indians, said Alyssa Ayres, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who visited Hyderabad recently.
“I had a guy on a plane sitting next to me, who turned to me and said, ‘Is it true, what they say about America under Trump?’” she said. “There is a kind of confusion: What is happening to the United States? People can’t believe what they’re reading.”
Ill treatment of Indian immigrants has, in the past, caused serious damage to bilateral relationships. In 2009 and 2010, reports of racially motivated crimes against Indian students in Australia set off demonstrations outside the Australian Embassy in New Delhi, where Australia’s prime minister was burned in effigy. After that, the number of Indians applying for            student visas plunged by nearly half, with severe costs to Australian educational institutions.
The diplomatic effect of the shootings in Kansas has been muted so far. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has not commented on them, though the subject will certainly be raised this week, along with the thorny issue of curtailing H-1B visas, when Foreign Secretary Subrahmanyam Jaishankar visits Washington.
Some Indians who had planned to go to the United States said they were hesitating. Manavi Das, who is considering several universities, said she was “constantly looking to see if the school is in a red state, or has witnessed a shooting in recent times.
“After a certain event in November,” she said, “I have found my apprehensions turned up a notch.”
Sunny Choudhary, 23, said he had decided not to apply to graduate engineering programs in the United States, because “recent conditions, they are turning into, I think, hostile conditions.” After Mr. Trump was elected, he added, “my parents said: ‘No, you should not go there. Now we won’t let you go there.’ ”
He said that, like many of his friends, he had narrowed his search to Europe.
And some Indian parents could use their persuasive talents to encourage their children to return home. “For this four-year period, after the transfer of regimes, I think Indians can come back and serve their country,” said Suguna Kadiyala, 73, whose daughter has been in the United States for 20 years.
Nageswara Rao, 71, whose son and daughter work in the software sector in the United States, said he was “not much worried,” though he does dispense regular advice on safety measures.
“It is always better to keep away from bars,” he said. His children are safe, he added, “because they don’t go to these bars where white people are more.”
He continued, “I give them advice to be a little bit careful and don’t get into a wrangle with anybody. Just have your own peaceful life.”
PHOTO: A church service in Olathe, Kan., in honor of two immigrants from India who were shot in a bar, one of whom was killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMY STROTH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (79%); ENGINEERING (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); HATE CRIME (73%); TERRORISM (73%); STUDY ABROAD PROGRAMS (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (68%); FOREIGN POLICY (60%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%); Olathe (Kan) (%); Murders, Attempted Murders and Homicides (%); Kuchibhotla, Srinivas (d 2017) (%); Hate Crimes (%); India (%); Indian-Americans (%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Purinton, Adam W (%); Madasani, Alok (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); Kuchibhotla, Srinivas (d 2017); Trump, Donald J; Purinton, Adam W; Madasani, Alok

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (89%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (89%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (74%); KANSAS, USA (95%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (94%); AUSTRALIA (92%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: March 1, 2017


End of Document
Fewer Immigrants Mean More Jobs? Not So, Economists Say
The New York Times 
August 3, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1252 words
Byline: BINYAMIN APPELBAUM
Highlight: Highly educated immigrants are good for the economy, but so are less skilled workers, economists say.
Body


WASHINGTON — When the federal government banned the use of farmworkers from Mexico in 1964, California’s tomato growers did not enlist Americans to harvest the fragile crop. They replaced the lost workers with tomato-picking machines.
The Trump administration on Wednesday embraced a proposal to sharply reduce legal immigration, which it said would preserve jobs and lead to higher wages — the same argument advanced by the Kennedy and Johnson administrations half a century ago.
But economists say the tomato story and a host of related evidence show that there is no clear connection between less immigration and more jobs for Americans. Rather, the prevailing view among economists is that immigration increases economic growth, improving the lives of the immigrants and the lives of the people who are already here.
“The average American worker is more likely to lose than to gain from immigration restrictions,” said Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis.
The Trump administration is proposing sharp reductions in the number of skilled and unskilled workers who are allowed to become permanent residents, halving annual immigration from the current level of roughly one million people a year.
“This legislation demonstrates our compassion for struggling American families who deserve an immigration system that puts their needs first,” President Trump said.
The proposal revives elements of President George W. Bush’s effort to rewrite federal immigration law in 2007, and it appears no more likely to succeed. It already has drawn sharp opposition from Democrats and from some Senate Republicans.
Economists say that skilled immigrant workers are clearly good for the American economy. The United States could import computers; if it instead imports computer engineers, the money they earn is taxed and spent in the United States. Moreover, some of those engineers invent new products — or even entirely new technologies.
The administration says it still wants high-skilled workers, and it has described the cuts as targeted at low-skilled immigrants. It would still issue roughly 140,000 merit-based green cards each year, while sharply reducing the number of people admitted as family members of current residents.
But about one-third of those family members who received green cards since 2000 had college degrees, Mr. Peri said. “People have an outdated image” of legal immigration, he said. “It’s mostly Asian, Indian, Chinese people who are coming to do mid- and high-level professional jobs.”
George J. Borjas, the Harvard immigration economist whose work is the only evidence that the administration has cited as justifying its proposals, said in an interview on Wednesday that there was no economic justification for reducing skilled immigration.
“That is a political decision,” he said. “That is not an economic decision.”
The economic impact of low-skilled immigration is more hotly debated. Mr. Borjas is the foremost proponent of the view that low-skilled immigration reduced the incomes of American workers without high school degrees. He estimates the total impact at 3 percent to 5 percent of income over the last two decades.
Economists agree that other factors, notably technological improvements, are primarily responsible for the broader deterioration in the fortunes of the American working class.
Mr. Borjas also argues that low-skilled immigration does not produce clear benefits for the economy as a whole. He said that the benefit of low-cost labor was offset, or even slightly outweighed, by the cost of providing government services to immigrants.
The primary beneficiary of immigration is the immigrant, Mr. Borjas said.
“If all you care about is economics, then it’s really clear,” he said. “But do you want to live in a country that only cares about money, or do you want to live in a country that has a legacy of being generous to immigrants? Maybe you want a compromise.”
Other economists, however, have sharply disputed Mr. Borjas’s research. Most studies put the negative impact on low-skilled wages closer to zero, Mr. Peri said.
One key reason is that immigrants often work in jobs that exist only because of the availability of cheap labor. Picking tomatoes is a good example. California farmers in the 1950s and early ’60s relied on Mexican workers even though machines were already available. In 1964, 97 percent of California tomatoes were picked by hand.
The United States let farmers hire Mexican workers on seasonal permits, a program that began as a response to labor shortages during World War II. By the early 1960s, the program was politically untenable. “It is adversely affecting the wages, working conditions, and employment opportunities of our own agricultural workers,” President John F. Kennedy declared in 1962. President Lyndon B. Johnson ended the program in 1964.
By 1966, 90 percent of California tomatoes were being picked by machines.
“The story that ‘when labor supplies go down, wages go up’ is a cartoon,” said Michael A. Clemens, an economist at the Center for Global Development who has studied the end of the Mexican guest-worker program, which was known as the Bracero program.
Similarly, in the present day, some American dairy farmers warn that the nation needs to continue importing farm workers or it will end up importing milk.
Low-skilled immigration can also provide a boost to the rest of the economy.
A 2011 study found that high-skilled women were more likely to work in cities with high levels of immigrants, because families could pay for child care or elder care.
The National Academy of Sciences made an ambitious effort to assess the bottom line in 2016. It concluded that the average immigrant cost state and local governments about $1,600 a year from 2011 to 2013 — but the children and grandchildren of immigrants paid far more in taxes than they consumed in public services.
More broadly, the report concluded that immigration benefited the economy.
A recent analysis by economists at JPMorgan Chase concluded that halting immigration completely would reduce annual economic growth by 0.3 percent.
The Trump administration’s immigration proposal would also change the rules for merit-based immigration. It wants to create a point system that would give higher priority to applicants based on factors including age, job skills and the ability to speak English.
Canada and Australia use similar points-based systems to pick immigrants.
Some economists argue that it would be better to just let the market make decisions, for example, by using a system like the H-1B visa program that allows companies to request permission for workers to come to the United States on a temporary basis.
Also, Mr. Clemens said that points-based systems tended to prioritize education. That might not be advantageous to the economy when in fact employers also need workers with fewer skills. He noted that the Commerce Department has projected that demand for workers without a college education will significantly outstrip the growth of the working-age population.
“It’s a political myth that the principal need is for high-skilled workers,” he said.
Follow Binyamin Appelbaum on Twitter @bcappelbaum.
PHOTO: Farm workers in a field in Stratford, Calif., in 2014. Economists say highly educated immigrants are good for the economy, but so are less skilled workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATT BLACK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A14)
Related Articles
    • Trump Supports Plan to Cut Legal Immigration by Half
    • Lack of Workers, Not Work, Weighs on the Nation’s Economy
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); FARM LABOR (91%); ECONOMICS (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MERIT PAY (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (68%); ENGINEERING (68%); TAXES & TAXATION (68%); NEW PRODUCTS (62%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States Economy (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: FARM LABOR (91%); AGRICULTURE (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%); MISC VEGETABLE FARMING (90%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (68%); ENGINEERING (68%); NEW PRODUCTS (62%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); JOHN F KENNEDY (75%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: August 6, 2017


End of Document
Start-Ups, Not Bailouts
The New York Times
April 4, 2010 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 9; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 849 words
Byline: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Body


Here's my fun fact for the day, provided courtesy of Robert Litan, who directs research at the Kauffman Foundation, which specializes in promoting innovation in America: ''Between 1980 and 2005, virtually all net new jobs created in the U.S. were created by firms that were 5 years old or less,'' said Litan. ''That is about 40 million jobs. That means the established firms created no new net jobs during that period.''
  Message: If we want to bring down unemployment in a sustainable way, neither rescuing General Motors nor funding more road construction will do it. We need to create a big bushel of new companies  --  fast. We've got to get more Americans working again for their own dignity -- and to generate the rising incomes and wealth we need to pay for existing entitlements, as well as all the new investments we'll need to make. It was just reported that Social Security this year will pay out more in benefits than it receives in payroll taxes  --  a red line we were not expected to cross until at least 2016.
  But you cannot say this often enough: Good-paying jobs don't come from bailouts. They come from start-ups. And where do start-ups come from? They come from smart, creative, inspired risk-takers. How do we get more of those? There are only two ways: grow more by improving our schools or import more by recruiting talented immigrants. Surely, we need to do both, and we need to start by breaking the deadlock in Congress over immigration, so we can develop a much more strategic approach to attracting more of the world's creative risk-takers. ''Roughly 25 percent of successful high-tech start-ups over the last decade were founded or co-founded by immigrants,'' said Litan. Think Sergey Brin, the Russian-born co-founder of Google, or Vinod Khosla, the India-born co-founder of Sun Microsystems. 
  That is no surprise. After all, Craig Mundie, the chief research and strategy officer of Microsoft, asks: What made America this incredible engine of prosperity? It was immigration, plus free markets. Because we were so open to immigration  --  and immigrants are by definition high-aspiring risk-takers, ready to leave their native lands in search of greater opportunities -- ''we as a country accumulated a disproportionate share of the world's high-I.Q. risk-takers.''
  In addition, because of our vibrant and meritocratic university system, the best foreign students who wanted the best education also came here, and many of them also stayed. In its heyday, our unique system also attracted a disproportionate share of high-I.Q. risk-takers to high government service. So when you put all this together, with our free markets and democracy, it made it easy here for creative, high-I.Q. risk-takers to raise capital for their ideas and commercialize them. In short, America had a very powerful, self-reinforcing engine for growing innovative new companies.
  ''When you get this happy coincidence of high-I.Q. risk-takers in government and a society that is biased toward high-I.Q. risk-takers, you get these above-average returns as a country,'' argued Mundie. ''What is common to Singapore, Israel and America? They were all built by high-I.Q. risk-takers and all thrived  --  but only in the U.S. did it happen at a large scale and with global diversity, so you had this really rich cross-section.'' 
  What is worrisome about America today is the combination of cutbacks in higher education, restrictions on immigration and a toxic public space that dissuades talented people from going into government. Together, all of these trends are slowly eating away at our differentiated edge in attracting and enabling the world's biggest mass of smart, creative risk-takers.
  It isn't drastic, but it is a decline  --  at a time when technology is allowing other countries to leverage and empower more of their own high-I.Q. risk-takers. If we don't reverse this trend, over time, ''we could lose our most important competitive edge  --  the only edge from which sustainable advantage accrues''  --  having the world's biggest and most diverse pool of high-I.Q. risk-takers, said Mundie. ''If we don't have that competitive edge, our standard of living will eventually revert to the global mean.''
  Right now we have thousands of foreign students in America and one million engineers, scientists and other highly skilled workers here on H-1B temporary visas, which require them to return home when the visas expire. That's nuts. ''We ought to have a 'job-creators visa' for people already here,'' said Litan. ''And once you've hired, say, 5 or 10 American nonfamily members, you should get a green card.''
  We need health care, financial reform and education reform. But we also need to be thinking just as seriously and urgently about what are the ingredients that foster entrepreneurship -- how new businesses are catalyzed, inspired and enabled and how we enlist more people to do that  --  so no one ever says about America what that officer says to Tom Cruise in ''Top Gun'': ''Son, your ego's writing checks your body can't cash.'' 
  Nicholas D. Kristof is off today.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); COMPANY STRATEGY (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); NEW BUSINESSES (78%); STARTUPS (78%); JOB CREATION (77%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (77%); SOCIAL SECURITY (75%); TAXES & TAXATION (71%); INTELLIGENCE & COGNITION (70%); IMPORT TRADE (69%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (64%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (64%)

Company:  GENERAL MOTORS CO (57%);  GOOGLE INC (52%);  ORACLE AMERICA INC (52%);  MICROSOFT CORP (52%)

Ticker: GM (NYSE) (57%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (52%)

Industry: NAICS336112 LIGHT TRUCK & UTILITY VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS336111 AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURING (57%); SIC3714 MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS & ACCESSORIES (57%); SIC3711 MOTOR VEHICLES & PASSENGER CAR BODIES (57%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (52%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (52%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (52%); NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (52%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (52%); SIC5045 COMPUTERS & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE (52%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (52%); CONSTRUCTION (70%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS (55%); ROAD & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (55%)

Person: SERGEY BRIN (78%); VINOD KHOSLA (50%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 4, 2010


End of Document
After the Shootings of Two Engineers, Indians Are Wary of Moving to the U.S.
The New York Times
February 27, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 821 words
Byline: By ELLEN BARRY and NIDA NAJAR
Body


NEW DELHI -- Jeena Sharma, 25, was applying for a work visa to the United States when news came that two Indian engineers had been shot in a Kansas bar by a man who drunkenly questioned their immigration status.
News of the shootings, which took place last Wednesday, was quickly eclipsed by other developments in Washington, and even in Kansas, but the same cannot be said of the Sharma household of Mumbai, where Ms. Sharma has received emphatic maternal lectures about her plans to move, starting first thing in the morning. 
  ''She asked me: 'Why do you even need to go to the States? Why do you need to go to a country that doesn't want you? I'm going to be scared for your life every day,''' Ms. Sharma said.
  Even as she endeavored, patiently, to convey to her mother the difference between Kansas and New York City, where she hopes to move, Ms. Sharma felt her own apprehensions growing, as the days passed and President Trump made no statement on the crime.
  ''It's definitely very scary for me at the moment,'' she said. ''It's almost as if a brown person is dead, like it doesn't matter.''
  The body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, the 32-year-old software engineer fatally shot in the Olathe, Kan., bar, was expected to arrive by Monday in Hyderabad, a technology hub where immigration to the United States has long been viewed as the surest path to success.
  Indians were relatively welcoming of Mr. Trump's victory, and many here express admiration for his business empire and promised crackdown on terrorism. But even before Wednesday's shootings, that optimism had been diluted by fears that America might no longer welcome immigrants.
  India is second only to China as a feeder to American colleges, with around 165,000 students enrolled in the 2015-16 school year, according to the Institute of International Education. Indians are the largest recipients of temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which the Trump administration intends to cut back. And close to half a million Indians, who mostly went to the United States legally as students or tourists or on work visas, have stayed on after their visas expired, the Pew Research Center estimates.
  Reports of rising American hostility toward immigrants have stunned many Indians, said Alyssa Ayres, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who visited Hyderabad recently.
  ''I had a guy on a plane sitting next to me, who turned to me and said, 'Is it true, what they say about America under Trump?''' she said. ''There is a kind of confusion: What is happening to the United States? People can't believe what they're reading.''
  Ill treatment of Indian immigrants has, in the past, caused serious damage to bilateral relationships. In 2009 and 2010, reports of racially motivated crimes against Indian students in Australia set off demonstrations outside the Australian Embassy in New Delhi, where Australia's prime minister was burned in effigy. After that, the number of Indians applying for student visas plunged by nearly half, with severe costs to Australian educational institutions.
  The diplomatic effect of the shootings in Kansas has been muted so far. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has not commented on them, though the subject will certainly be raised this week, along with the thorny issue of curtailing H-1B visas, when Foreign Secretary Subrahmanyam Jaishankar visits Washington.
  Some Indians who had planned to go to the United States said they were hesitating. Manavi Das, who is considering several universities, said she was ''constantly looking to see if the school is in a red state, or has witnessed a shooting in recent times.
  ''After a certain event in November,'' she said, ''I have found my apprehensions turned up a notch.''
  Sunny Choudhary, 23, said he had decided not to apply to graduate engineering programs in the United States, because ''recent conditions, they are turning into, I think, hostile conditions.'' After Mr. Trump was elected, he added, ''my parents said: 'No, you should not go there. Now we won't let you go there.' ''
  He said that, like many of his friends, he had narrowed his search to Europe.
  And some Indian parents could use their persuasive talents to encourage their children to return home. ''For this four-year period, after the transfer of regimes, I think Indians can come back and serve their country,'' said Suguna Kadiyala, 73, whose daughter has been in the United States for 20 years.
  Nageswara Rao, 71, whose son and daughter work in the software sector in the United States, said he was ''not much worried,'' though he does dispense regular advice on safety measures.
  ''It is always better to keep away from bars,'' he said. His children are safe, he added, ''because they don't go to these bars where white people are more.''
  He continued, ''I give them advice to be a little bit careful and don't get into a wrangle with anybody. Just have your own peaceful life.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/26/world/asia/after-shootings-indians-are-wary-of-move-to-us-in-age-of-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: A church service in Olathe, Kan., in honor of two immigrants from India who were shot in a bar, one of whom was killed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AMY STROTH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: SHOOTINGS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (72%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (63%); STUDY ABROAD PROGRAMS (61%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%); TERRORISM (50%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (73%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%)

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (88%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (74%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (73%); KANSAS, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (92%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: February 27, 2017


End of Document
With Fewer Immigrants, More Jobs? Not So, Economists Say
The New York Times
August 4, 2017 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1210 words
Byline: By BINYAMIN APPELBAUM
Body


WASHINGTON -- When the federal government banned the use of farmworkers from Mexico in 1964, California's tomato growers did not enlist Americans to harvest the fragile crop. They replaced the lost workers with tomato-picking machines.
The Trump administration on Wednesday embraced a proposal to sharply reduce legal immigration, which it said would preserve jobs and lead to higher wages -- the same argument advanced by the Kennedy and Johnson administrations half a century ago. 
  But economists say the tomato story and a host of related evidence show that there is no clear connection between less immigration and more jobs for Americans. Rather, the prevailing view among economists is that immigration increases economic growth, improving the lives of the immigrants and the lives of the people who are already here.
  ''The average American worker is more likely to lose than to gain from immigration restrictions,'' said Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis.
  The Trump administration is proposing sharp reductions in the number of skilled and unskilled workers who are allowed to become permanent residents, halving annual immigration from the current level of roughly one million people a year.
  ''This legislation demonstrates our compassion for struggling American families who deserve an immigration system that puts their needs first,'' President Trump said.
  The proposal revives elements of President George W. Bush's effort to rewrite federal immigration law in 2007, and it appears no more likely to succeed. It already has drawn sharp opposition from Democrats and from some Senate Republicans.
  Economists say that skilled immigrant workers are clearly good for the American economy. The United States could import computers; if it instead imports computer engineers, the money they earn is taxed and spent in the United States. Moreover, some of those engineers invent new products -- or even entirely new technologies.
  The administration says it still wants high-skilled workers, and it has described the cuts as targeted at low-skilled immigrants. It would still issue roughly 140,000 merit-based green cards each year, while sharply reducing the number of people admitted as family members of current residents.
  But about one-third of those family members who received green cards since 2000 had college degrees, Mr. Peri said. ''People have an outdated image'' of legal immigration, he said. ''It's mostly Asian, Indian, Chinese people who are coming to do mid- and high-level professional jobs.''
  George J. Borjas, the Harvard immigration economist whose work is the only evidence that the administration has cited as justifying its proposals, said in an interview on Wednesday that there was no economic justification for reducing skilled immigration.
  ''That is a political decision,'' he said. ''That is not an economic decision.''
  The economic impact of low-skilled immigration is more hotly debated. Mr. Borjas is the foremost proponent of the view that low-skilled immigration reduced the incomes of American workers without high school degrees. He estimates the total impact at 3 percent to 5 percent of income over the last two decades.
  Economists agree that other factors, notably technological improvements, are primarily responsible for the broader deterioration in the fortunes of the American working class.
  Mr. Borjas also argues that low-skilled immigration does not produce clear benefits for the economy as a whole. He said that the benefit of low-cost labor was offset, or even slightly outweighed, by the cost of providing government services to immigrants.
  The primary beneficiary of immigration is the immigrant, Mr. Borjas said.
  ''If all you care about is economics, then it's really clear,'' he said. ''But do you want to live in a country that only cares about money, or do you want to live in a country that has a legacy of being generous to immigrants? Maybe you want a compromise.''
  Other economists, however, have sharply disputed Mr. Borjas's research. Most studies put the negative impact on low-skilled wages closer to zero, Mr. Peri said.
  One key reason is that immigrants often work in jobs that exist only because of the availability of cheap labor. Picking tomatoes is a good example. California farmers in the 1950s and early '60s relied on Mexican workers even though machines were already available. In 1964, 97 percent of California tomatoes were picked by hand.
  The United States let farmers hire Mexican workers on seasonal permits, a program that began as a response to labor shortages during World War II. By the early 1960s, the program was politically untenable. ''It is adversely affecting the wages, working conditions, and employment opportunities of our own agricultural workers,'' President John F. Kennedy declared in 1962. President Lyndon B. Johnson ended the program in 1964.
  By 1966, 90 percent of California tomatoes were being picked by machines.
  ''The story that 'when labor supplies go down, wages go up' is a cartoon,'' said Michael A. Clemens, an economist at the Center for Global Development who has studied the end of the Mexican guest-worker program, which was known as the Bracero program.
  Similarly, in the present day, some American dairy farmers warn that the nation needs to continue importing farm workers or it will end up importing milk.
  Low-skilled immigration can also provide a boost to the rest of the economy.
  A 2011 study found that high-skilled women were more likely to work in cities with high levels of immigrants, because families could pay for child care or elder care.
  The National Academy of Sciences made an ambitious effort to assess the bottom line in 2016. It concluded that the average immigrant cost state and local governments about $1,600 a year from 2011 to 2013 -- but the children and grandchildren of immigrants paid far more in taxes than they consumed in public services.
  More broadly, the report concluded that immigration benefited the economy.
  A recent analysis by economists at JPMorgan Chase concluded that halting immigration completely would reduce annual economic growth by 0.3 percent.
  The Trump administration's immigration proposal would also change the rules for merit-based immigration. It wants to create a point system that would give higher priority to applicants based on factors including age, job skills and the ability to speak English.
  Canada and Australia use similar points-based systems to pick immigrants.
  Some economists argue that it would be better to just let the market make decisions, for example, by using a system like the H-1B visa program that allows companies to request permission for workers to come to the United States on a temporary basis.
  Also, Mr. Clemens said that points-based systems tended to prioritize education. That might not be advantageous to the economy when in fact employers also need workers with fewer skills. He noted that the Commerce Department has projected that demand for workers without a college education will significantly outstrip the growth of the working-age population.
  ''It's a political myth that the principal need is for high-skilled workers,'' he said.
  Follow Binyamin Appelbaum on Twitter @bcappelbaum.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/03/us/politics/legal-immigration-jobs-economy.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Farm workers in a field in Stratford, Calif., in 2014. Economists say highly educated immigrants are good for the economy, but so are less skilled workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATT BLACK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A14)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); FARM LABOR (91%); ECONOMICS (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); MERIT PAY (77%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (74%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); US PRESIDENTS (70%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (68%); ENGINEERING (68%); TAXES & TAXATION (68%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (67%); NEW PRODUCTS (62%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (56%)

Industry: FARM LABOR (91%); AGRICULTURE (90%); MISC VEGETABLE FARMING (90%); COMPUTER EQUIPMENT (77%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (68%); ENGINEERING (68%); NEW PRODUCTS (62%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: August 4, 2017


End of Document
Major Changes Would Tighten Eligibility Rules For H-1B Visas
The New York Times
October 7, 2020 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 1056 words
Byline: By Zolan Kanno-Youngs and Miriam Jordan
Body


Four weeks before the election, the Trump administration has announced stricter rules for the H-1B visa program, which U.S. companies have long valued.
WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration announced significant changes on Tuesday to the H-1B visa program for high-skilled workers, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants. 
  Top administration officials framed the changes as a way to protect American jobs during the coronavirus pandemic, even though the Trump administration first committed to overhauling the program in 2017 as part of its efforts to reduce the number of foreign citizens employed in the United States.
  ''With millions of Americans looking for work, and as the economy continues its recovery, immediate action is needed to guard against the risk lower-cost foreign labor can pose to the well-being of U.S. workers,'' Patrick Pizzella, the deputy secretary of labor, told reporters on Tuesday.
  The rules will directly affect foreign workers and employers, especially tech companies that have long supported the H-1B program and pushed hard for its expansion.
  Kenneth T. Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, said he expected the changes to cut by one-third the number of petitions filed annually for the coveted visas.
  The changes will be published this week as interim final rules, meaning that the agency believes it has ''good cause'' to claim exemption from the normal requirement to obtain feedback from the public before completing them.
  Immigration lawyers and experts predicted that the changes would be swiftly challenged in court because they bypassed the normal regulatory process.
  ''The public hasn't even seen these regulations yet and won't have the usual opportunity to provide comments, as required by Congress,'' said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship. ''Given the inevitability of court challenges, it seems like slim odds that these policies are built to last.''
  The government issues 85,000 H-1B visas each year, often using a lottery to award them because the number of workers sought by companies almost always surpasses the number of available visas. Many workers are eventually sponsored by their employers for green cards to remain permanently in the United States.
  Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the election, were politically motivated.
  ''Why this, why now, and why is it an interim final rule?'' said Theresa Cardinal Brown, the director of immigration and cross-border policy at the Bipartisan Policy Center. ''There's no estimate of the amount of jobs this would actually free up for U.S. workers. It's a bank shot at best.''
  The Labor Department rule, which takes effect upon publication, would increase wages across the board for foreign workers, based on surveys of salaries in each profession. Companies would have to pay entry-level workers in the program in the 45th percentile of their profession's salary rather than the 17th percentile. Wages for higher-skilled workers would rise to the 95th percentile from the 67th percentile.
  ''It will also likely result in higher personnel costs for some employers,'' according to the Labor Department rule. ''The purpose of protecting U.S. workers outweighs such interests and justifies such increased costs,'' the agency added.
  But Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor of immigration law at Cornell Law School, said the rule would have the opposite effect.
  ''By increasing the required wages, the new rules will harm all employers trying to hire foreign workers, but especially start-up companies and smaller firms who may not be able to meet the increased wage requirements,'' he said.
  The Department of Homeland Security's rule, which takes effect in 60 days, would also tighten the eligibility for visa applicants. The rule would require the foreign workers to have a degree in the ''specialty occupation'' they apply for, rather than any college degree. Some would also need to show how their studies provided ''a body of highly specialized knowledge'' for a potential job in the United States.
  The largest share of H-1B visa holders are employed by the tech sector, where they work as computer engineers and software developers. The visas are also issued to architects, accountants and physicians, among other professionals.
  The rule will almost certainly have an adverse effect on rural hospitals and other health care providers that depend on a steady pipeline of physicians from abroad because they cannot attract enough American doctors, who generally prefer to practice in urban areas.
  For example, instead of offering a minimum starting salary of $120,000 to $130,000, a clinic in northeastern Pennsylvania, which is considered an underserved area, would have to pay a foreign physician around $195,000 or $200,000.
  ''Entry-level doctors in rural areas will have to be offered experienced-level wages, which may be more than their supervisor is being paid,'' said William A. Stock, an employment immigration lawyer in Philadelphia. ''This will further restrict the supply of doctors willing to move to parts of rural America. It will put providers in a jam that they can't afford to hire foreign-born doctors.''
  The H-1B rule comes on the heels of a proclamation signed by President Trump in June that suspended an array of worker visas until at least Dec. 31. Groups representing thousands of businesses challenged that proclamation, which affected H-1Bs, H-2B seasonal work visas, L-1 visas for executives being transferred by companies and cultural-exchange J-1 visas, including au pairs.
  The groups won a reprieve last week, when a federal judge ruled that Mr. Trump had overstepped his authority in banning the visas.
  ''There must be some measure of constraint on presidential authority in the domestic sphere in order not to render the executive an entirely monarchical power,'' the judge said.
  His order was at odds with an earlier decision by a federal judge in Washington, which ensured that an appeals court would make the ultimate determination.
  But it immediately set aside the ban for companies that employed large numbers of foreign workers.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/06/us/politics/h1b-visas-foreign-workers-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Some critics suggested that the changes, which came less than a month before the presidential election, were politically motivated. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Scott Olson/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); GOVERNMENT PROCEDURE & LAWMAKING (78%); REGULATORY ACTIONS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (76%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (76%); PETITIONS (73%); CORONAVIRUSES (70%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (70%); IMMIGRATION LAW (68%); NATIONAL SECURITY (68%); LAWYERS (65%); EPIDEMICS (55%); PANDEMICS (55%); VIRUSES (55%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); LAWYERS (65%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: October 7, 2020


End of Document
A Suburban Father Who Gave No Warning Sign
The New York Times
May 5, 2010 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1709 words
Byline: By JAMES BARRON and MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT; Reporting was contributed by Alison Leigh Cowan from New York, and Ray Rivera, Michael S. Schmidt and Karen Zraick from Connecticut.
Body


They took their places in the wood-paneled courtroom, 58 people from 32 countries. They listened as a federal magistrate banged the gavel and said it was ''a wonderful day for the United States''-- the day they would become Americans.
  The magistrate talked about Thomas Jefferson and told the group that they could run for office -- only the presidency and the vice presidency were off limits, according to a tape recording of the proceedings in a Bridgeport, Conn., courtroom last year, on April 17. On her instructions, they raised their right hands and repeated the oath of citizenship.
  One man in the group was the Pakistani-born Faisal Shahzad, whose father or grandfather was a Pakistani military official and who, at 29, had spent a decade in the United States, collecting a bachelor's degree and a master's degree and landing a job with a Connecticut financial marketing company.
  He had obtained citizenship through marriage to a woman who was born in Colorado -- the authorities say she and their two young children are still in Pakistan, where they believe he was trained in making bombs last year in Waziristan, a tribal area that is a haven for militants.
  On Saturday, the authorities said, Mr. Shahzad drove a Nissan Pathfinder packed with explosives and detonators, leaving it in Times Square.
  About 7 p.m., as a robot from the bomb squad was being summoned to the S.U.V., Mr. Shahzad called his landlord from the train to Connecticut and said he had lost his keys; in a criminal complaint filed on Tuesday, the authorities said the keys had been locked inside the Pathfinder.
  The landlord met him at the apartment that night to let him in. ''He looked nervous,'' said the landlord, Stanislaw Chomiak, who had rented him a two-bedroom apartment in Bridgeport since Feb. 15. ''But I thought, of course he's nervous, he just lost his keys.''
  In nearly a dozen years in this country, Mr. Shahzad had gone to school, held steady jobs, bought and sold real estate, and kept his immigration status in good order, giving no sign to those he interacted with that he had connections to terrorists in Pakistan. Nor was there any indication that he would try to wreak havoc in one of the world's most crowded places, Times Square. 
  His neighbors in Connecticut said the things neighbors always say about someone who suddenly turns up in the headlines -- he was quiet, he was polite, he went jogging late at night. Like so many others, he lost a house to foreclosure -- a real estate broker who helped him buy the house, in Shelton, Conn., in 2004 remembered that Mr. Shahzad did not like President George W. Bush or the Iraq war.
  ''I didn't take it for much,'' said the broker, Igor Djuric, ''because around that time not many people did.''
  George LaMonica, a 35-year-old computer consultant, said he bought his two-bedroom condominium in Norwalk, Conn., from Mr. Shahzad for $261,000 in May 2004. A few weeks after he moved in, Mr. LaMonica said, investigators from the national Joint Terrorism Task Force interviewed him, asking for details of the transaction and for information about Mr. Shahzad. It struck Mr. LaMonica as unusual, but he said detectives told him they were simply ''checking everything out.'' 
  Mr. Shahzad was born in Pakistan in 1979, though there is some confusion over where. Officials in Pakistan said it was in Nowshera, an area in northern Pakistan known for its Afghan refugee camps. But on a university application that Mr. Shahzad had filled out and that was found in the maggot-covered garbage outside the Shelton house on Tuesday, he listed Karachi. 
  Pakistani officials said Mr. Shahzad was either a son or a grandson of Baharul Haq, who retired as a vice air marshal in 1992 and then joined the Civil Aviation Authority.
  A Pakistani official said Mr. Shahzad might have had affiliations with Ilyas Kashmiri, a militant linked to Al Qaeda who was formerly associated with Lashkar-e-Taiba, an anti-India militant group once nurtured by the Pakistani state. But friends said the family was well respected and nonpolitical. 
  ''Neither Faisal nor his family has ever had any links with any jihadist or religious organization,'' one friend said. Another, a lawyer, said that ''the family is in a state of shock,'' adding, ''They believe that their son has been implicated in a fake case.''
  Mr. Shahzad apparently went back and forth to Pakistan often, returning most recently in February after what he said was five months visiting his family, prosecutors said. A Pakistani intelligence official who spoke on condition of anonymity said Mr. Shahzad had traveled with three passports, two from Pakistan and one from the United States; he last secured a Pakistani passport in 2000, describing his nationality as ''Kashmiri.''  
  Mr. Shahzad's generation grew up in a Pakistan where alcohol had been banned and Islam had been forced into schools and communities as a doctrine and a national glue. 
  ''It's not that they don't speak English or aren't skilled,'' a Pakistani official explained. ''But in their hearts and in their minds they reject the West. They can't see a world where they live together; there's only one way, one right way.''
  According to immigration officials, Mr. Shahzad arrived in the United States on Jan. 16, 1999, less than a month after he had been granted a student visa, which requires a criminal background check. 
  He had previously attended a program in Karachi affiliated with the now-defunct Southeastern University in Washington; a transcript from the spring of 1998, found in the garbage outside the Shelton house, showed that he got D's in English composition and microeconomics, B's in Introduction to Accounting and Introduction to Humanities, and a C in statistics. 
  He enrolled at the University of Bridgeport, where he received a bachelor's degree in computer science and engineering in 2000, followed by a master's in business administration in 2005. 
  ''If this hadn't happened I would have long forgotten him,'' said William Greenspan, Mr. Shahzad's adviser as an undergraduate. ''There are a lot of students you get to know; they call you up once in awhile to say hello, they got a nice job. After he left U.B., I never heard anything from him.''
  In January 2002 Mr. Shahzad obtained an H1B visa, a coveted status meant for highly skilled workers and good for three years, with a possible extension. Records show that Elizabeth Arden, the cosmetics giant, applied for a visa around that time for a job similar to the one he had there in 2001, arranged through a temporary employment agency called Accountants Inc., according to a timecard found in his trash. Officials at the cosmetics company refused to comment.
  In 2006, Mr. Shahzad took a job as a junior financial analyst at Affinion Group in Norwalk, a financial marketing services company. Michael Bush, the company's director of public relations, said Mr. Shahzad resigned in mid-2009; government officials said he was unemployed and bankrupt by the time of his arrest.
  After his marriage, to Huma Mian, he petitioned the immigration agency in 2004 to change his status; he wanted to become a permanent resident, another step on the path to citizenship.
  Ms. Mian had just graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder with a business degree, according to Bronson Hilliard, a university spokesman. She lived in dormitories and in family housing, sharing her quarters with a sister or a cousin, Mr. Hilliard said. 
  Her parents lived in the Denver suburb of Aurora. A neighbor in their condominium complex, Johnny Wright, remembered that her new husband had visited the family only once before she joined him.
  ''He seemed educated,'' Mr. Wright said. ''Didn't make a lot of conversation.''
  The Mians moved out in 2008, leaving a post office box overseas as a forwarding address. Meanwhile, Mr. Shahzad applied for citizenship that October.
  Shortly after his naturalization ceremony in the Bridgeport courthouse, his name appeared on a case in another Connecticut court, a foreclosure action by Chase bank. 
  He and his wife had bought a newly built single-family house on Long Hill Avenue in Shelton in 2004 for $273,000, with a $218,400 mortgage, according to court papers. 
  They tried to cash in on the real estate boom, listing it for sale for $329,000 in 2006. It did not sell, said Frank DelVecchio, an agent who picked up the listing in 2008. The price then was $299,000. Later it was marked down to $285,000, and finally, $284,500.
  In Shelton, neighbors remembered Mr. Shahzad's walking early in the morning in sandals and loose-fitting shirts, and jogging late at night in black athletic clothes; his wife wore a long dress and a shawl covering her hair. They had toys in their garage and a little swimming pool in the back; last summer, friends went over for barbecues.
  ''He wasn't unfriendly,'' said Debbie Bussolari, a 55-year-old dental technician who lives across the street. ''He seemed a little different.''
  The family had several tag sales last summer, offering knickknacks and kid stuff, ''things that you would give to Goodwill,'' said Mary Ann Galich, 55, who lives behind the house. 
  ''She was outside dealing with the people, and he was dealing with the money,'' Ms. Galich recalled. 
  Davon Reid, 17, who lives next door, said the family moved in December: ''It seemed like they picked up everything very quickly.'' A few months later, a real estate broker let him in to check the place out, and it was a wreck.
  ''There was spoiled food and milk everywhere,'' he said. ''They just left everything. They left clothes in closets, the kids' shoes, the woman's shoes. And the kids' toys.''
  Three months ago, Mr. Shahzad signed a one-year lease on the two-bedroom apartment in Bridgeport. Mr. Chomiak, the landlord, said he usually saw Mr. Shahzad only when the rent was due, but he described him as a nice guy who furnished the apartment sparsely, and said he made a living selling jewelry in New Haven.
  Other details took on significance in light of the arrest. When Mr. Chomiak went looking for Mr. Shahzad on Monday, he noticed a distributor cap and two small bags of fertilizer in the garage.
  Mr. Shahzad, Mr. Chomiak said, mentioned that he wanted to grow tomatoes.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A copy of Faisal Shahzad's student visa. He obtained citizenship through marriage to a woman who was born in Colorado. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1)
Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. at a news conference in Washington on Tuesday. Federal authorities said that Faisal Shahzad had trained in a tribal area of Pakistan that is a haven for militants. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LUKE SHARRETT/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
A reporter outside the family home of Mr. Shahzad in the Hayatabad area of Peshawar, Pakistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMMAD SAJJAD/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY THE NEW YORK TIMES
SHELTON HOME PHOTO BY DOUGLAS HEALEY/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 BRIDGEPORT HOME PHOTO BY MIKE SEGAR/REUTERS) (A27) MAPS (A27)                                                                     
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); MAGISTRATES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); CITIZENSHIP (76%); IRAQ WAR (74%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (74%); WEAPONS & ARMS (74%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); NEGATIVE NEWS (71%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (66%); TERRORISM (66%); FORECLOSURE (60%); IMMIGRATION (50%)

Industry: REAL ESTATE (88%); RENTAL PROPERTY (86%); FORECLOSURE (60%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (60%)

Person: GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

Geographic: BRIDGEPORT, CT, USA (72%); CONNECTICUT, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); IRAQ (79%)

Load-Date: May 5, 2010


End of Document
The Immigration Debate We Need
The New York Times
February 27, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Length: 1620 words
Byline: By GEORGE BORJAS
George Borjas is a professor of economics and social policy at the Harvard Kennedy School and the author of, most recently, ''We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative.''
Body


The first month of the Trump administration has already changed the direction of the immigration debate, with many more changes coming soon. So far, executive orders and deportations dominate the discussion. But the fight over how many refugees to admit or how best to vet those refugees obscures what the debate is really about.
Changes in social policy do not make everyone better off, and immigration policy is no exception. I am a refugee, having fled Cuba as a child in 1962. Not only do I have great sympathy for the immigrant's desire to build a better life, I am also living proof that immigration policy can benefit some people enormously. 
  But I am also an economist, and am very much aware of the many trade-offs involved. Inevitably, immigration does not improve everyone's well-being. There are winners and losers, and we will need to choose among difficult options. The improved lives of the immigrants come at a price. How much of a price are the American people willing to pay, and exactly who will pay it?
  This tension permeates the debate over immigration's effect on the labor market. Those who want more immigration claim that immigrants do jobs that native-born Americans do not want to do. But we all know that the price of gas goes down when the supply of oil goes up. The laws of supply and demand do not evaporate when we talk about the price of labor rather than the price of gas. By now, the well-documented abuses of the H-1B program, such as the Disney workers who had to train their foreign-born replacements, should have obliterated the notion that immigration does not harm competing native workers.
  Over the past 30 years, a large fraction of immigrants, nearly a third, were high school dropouts, so the incumbent low-skill work force formed the core group of Americans who paid the price for the influx of millions of workers. Their wages fell as much as 6 percent. Those low-skill Americans included many native-born blacks and Hispanics, as well as earlier waves of immigrants.
  But somebody's lower wage is somebody else's higher profit. The increase in the profitability of many employers enlarged the economic pie accruing to the entire native population by about $50 billion. So, as proponents of more immigration point out, immigration can increase the aggregate wealth of Americans. But they don't point out the trade-off involved: Workers in jobs sought by immigrants lose out.
  They also don't point out that low-skill immigration has a side effect that reduces that $50 billion increase in wealth. The National Academy of Sciences recently estimated the impact of immigration on government budgets. On a year-to-year basis, immigrant families, mostly because of their relatively low incomes and higher frequency of participating in government programs like subsidized health care, are a fiscal burden. A comparison of taxes paid and government spending on these families showed that immigrants created an annual fiscal shortfall of $43 billion to $299 billion.
  Even the most conservative estimate of the fiscal shortfall wipes out much of the $50 billion increase in native wealth. Remarkably, the size of the native economic pie did not change much after immigration increased the number of workers by more than 15 percent. But the split of the pie certainly changed, giving far less to workers and much more to employers.
  The immigration debate will also have to address the long-term impact on American society, raising the freighted issue of immigrant assimilation. In recent decades, there has been a noticeable slowdown in the rate at which the economic status of immigrants improves over time. In the 1970s, the typical immigrant could expect a substantial improvement relative to natives over his or her lifetime. Today, the economic progress of the typical immigrant is much more stagnant.
  Part of the slowdown is related to the growth of ethnic enclaves. New immigrants who find few ethnic compatriots get value from acquiring skills that allow more social and economic exchanges, such as becoming proficient in English. But new immigrants who find a large and welcoming community of their countrymen have less need to acquire those skills; they already have a large audience that values whatever they brought with them. Put bluntly, mass migration discourages assimilation.
  The trade-offs become even more difficult when we think about the long-term integration of the children and grandchildren of today's immigrants. Many look back at the melting pot in 20th-century America and assume that history will repeat itself. That's probably wishful thinking. That melting pot operated in a particular economic, social and political context, and it is doubtful that those conditions can be reproduced today.
  Many of the Ellis Island-era immigrants got jobs in manufacturing; Ford's work force was 75 percent foreign-born in 1914. Those manufacturing jobs evolved into well-paid union jobs, creating a private-sector safety net for the immigrants and their descendants. Does anyone seriously believe that the jobs employing low-skill immigrants today will offer the same economic mobility that unionized manufacturing jobs provided?
  Similarly, the ideological climate that encouraged assimilation back then, neatly encapsulated by our motto ''E pluribus unum'' (Out of many, one), is dead and gone. A recent University of California directive shows the radical shift. The university's employees were advised to avoid using phrases that can lead to ''microaggressions'' toward students and one another. One example is the statement ''America is a melting pot,'' which apparently sends a message to the recipient that they have to ''assimilate to the dominant culture.''
  Europe is already confronting the difficulties produced by the presence of unassimilated populations. If nothing else, the European experience shows that there is no universal law that guarantees integration even after a few generations. We, too, will need to confront the trade-off between short-term economic gains and the long-term costs of a large, unassimilated minority.
  Identifying the trade-offs is only a first step toward a more sensible immigration policy. We also need some general principles, combining common sense and compassion.
  First and foremost, we must reduce illegal immigration. It has had a corrosive impact, paralyzing discussion on all aspects of immigration reform. A wall along the Mexican border may signal that we are getting serious, but many undocumented immigrants enter the country legally and then overstay their visas. A national electronic system (such as E-Verify) mandating that employers certify new hires, along with fines and criminal penalties for lawbreaking businesses, might go a long way toward stemming the flow.
  But what about the 11-million-plus undocumented immigrants already here? A vast majority have led peaceful lives and established deep roots in our communities. Their sudden deportation would not represent the compassionate America that many of us envision.
  Perhaps it's time for some benign neglect. Many will eventually qualify for visas because they have married American citizens or have native-born children. Rather than fight over a politically impossible amnesty, we could accelerate the granting of family-preference visas to that population.
  We will also need to decide how many immigrants to admit. Economists seldom confess their ignorance, but we truly have no clue about what that number should be. About one million legal immigrants a year entered the country in the past two decades. The political climate suggests that many Americans view that number as too high. History shows that when voters get fed up with immigration, there is no reluctance to cut off the flow altogether. Back in the 1990s, Barbara Jordan's immigration commission recommended an annual target of about 550,000 immigrants. Such a cut would be significant, but it may be preferable to the alternative, which, in this political climate, could mean shutting off the flow.
  Finally, we need to choose between highly skilled and less-skilled applicants. High-skill immigrants, who pay higher taxes and receive fewer services and can potentially expand the frontier of knowledge, are more profitable for us. But giving an opportunity to the huddled masses is part of what makes our country exceptional.
  Regardless of the allocation, employers should not walk away with all the gains, and workers should not suffer all the losses. We need to ensure a more equitable sharing of the gains and losses among the American people.
  No matter where one stands in the ideological divide, President Trump has already answered the fundamental question guiding the design of a more rational policy. In his speech at the Republican National Convention, he described how he would pick among the available choices: ''We are going to be considerate and compassionate to everyone,'' he said. ''But my greatest compassion will be for our own struggling citizens.''
  He added, ''We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.''
  Many of my colleagues in the academic community -- and many of the elite opinion-makers in the news media -- recoil when they hear that immigration should serve the interests of Americans. Their reaction is to label such thinking as racist and xenophobic, and to marginalize anyone who agrees.
  But those accusations of racism reflect their effort to avoid a serious discussion of the trade-offs. The coming debate would be far more honest and politically transparent if we demanded a simple answer from those who disagree with ''America First'' proposals: Who are you rooting for?

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/27/opinion/the-immigration-debate-we-need.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY LOGAN FITZPATRICK)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); REFUGEES (90%); OIL & GAS PRICES (88%); WAGES & SALARIES (87%); DEPORTATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (77%); FAMILY (76%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (74%); ECONOMICS (74%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (74%); LABOR MARKET (74%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); LABOR FORCE (72%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (71%); HIGH SCHOOLS (67%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (66%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (50%); SCHOOL DROP OUTS (50%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (50%)

Industry: OIL & GAS PRICES (88%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); BUDGETS (74%); HIGH SCHOOLS (67%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (50%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (50%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: February 27, 2017


End of Document
The Very Bad Economics of Killing DACA; Paul Krugman
The New York Times 
(Paul Krugman)
September 5, 2017 Tuesday 12:16 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 435 words
Highlight: Bad fiscal impact, higher chance of depressions. What&#8217;s not to like? 
Body


Trump’s decision to kill DACA — never mind the attempt to obscure things with that meaningless delay — is, first and foremost, a moral obscenity: throwing out 800,000 young people who are Americans in every way that matters, who have done nothing wrong, basically for racial reasons. But it’s also worth noting that Jeff Sessions just tried to sell it with junk economics, claiming that the Dreamers are taking American jobs. No, they aren’t, even if we leave aside the question of who’s an American. DACA is very much a boon to the rest of the U.S. population, and killing it will make everyone worse off.
To see why, first note that whatever you think about the economics of less-educated immigrants — most of the evidence suggests that they don’t depress wages, but that’s another discussion — none of it applies to DREAMers. Their educational and behavioral profile, as Cato notes, doesn’t resemble the average immigrant, let alone the average undocumented immigrant; they look like H-1B visa holders, that is, skilled immigrants we have specifically allowed in because they help the economy.
Beyond that, DREAMers are young — which means that they help the economy in not one but two big ways, because they mitigate the economic problems caused by an aging population.
One of those problems is fiscal: as the population ages, there are fewer working-age members contributing taxes to pay for Social Security and Medicare. A cohort of relatively high-wage, highly motivated people mostly in their 20s, likely to pay lots of taxes for decades, is exactly what the doctor ordered to make that issue less severe.
Meanwhile, I’m one of those who worries about secular stagnation — persistently weak spending, making episodes in which monetary policy can’t achieve full employment even with zero interest rates much more likely. Several factors contribute to this risk, but probably the most important is demography: a sharp slowdown in the growth of the working-age population, which means less incentive to invest in structures, factories, and more. (The demographic issue is why Japan, with low fertility and great hostility to immigration, entered a zero-rate regime a decade before the rest of us.) 
And what would make secular stagnation more of a problem? Hey, let’s expel hundreds of thousands of young people from the current and future work force.
So this is a double blow to the U.S. economy; it will make everyone worse off. There is no upside whatever to this cruelty, unless you just want to have fewer people with brown skin and Hispanic surnames around. Which is, of course, what this is really all about.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (89%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (89%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); FULL EMPLOYMENT (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (77%); SOCIAL SECURITY (77%); FOREIGN LABOR (76%); LABOR FORCE (76%); AGING TRENDS (75%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (74%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); ECONOMIC POLICY (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); AGING (70%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (69%); INTEREST RATES (62%); MONETARY POLICY (62%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (74%); BANKING & FINANCE (62%); INTEREST RATES (62%); MONETARY POLICY (62%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (50%)

Person: PAUL KRUGMAN (88%); JEFF SESSIONS (56%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: September 6, 2017


End of Document
No Relief in Sight; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
October 7, 2020 Wednesday 13:50 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1867 words
Highlight: President Trump cut off stimulus talks. What’s the strategy?
Body


Want this delivered to your inbox each day? Sign up here.
Let’s call the whole thing off?
Hours after the Fed chairman, Jay Powell, warned that the U.S. economy would face “tragic” consequences without more government spending, President Trump cut off stimulus talks. In a series of tweets that rattled the markets yesterday afternoon, Mr. Trump ordered negotiations over another trillion-dollar package to halt until after the election.
What’s the strategy? Mr. Trump said that Republicans should instead focus on confirming Judge Amy Coney Barrett to the Supreme Court. More than 70 percent of voters supported more stimulus in a recent poll, making the political rationale for his move unclear. Although Democrats and Republicans were edging closer to an agreement to spend around $1.6 trillion, they remain far apart on the details, with Democrats pushing for significant aid for state governments and Republicans worrying about the effect on the national debt.
 Mr. Trump later appeared to backtrack somewhat, calling for specific measures to fund airlines, extend more rescue loans for small business and send another batch of stimulus checks to taxpayers. Democrats previously resisted this “skinny” approach to stimulus, insisting on a more comprehensive bill.
Mr. Trump’s back and forth may be a negotiating tactic. The market drop after his rejection of talks could be a gambit to focus minds on what’s at stake. (His comments supporting specific stimulus measures came after the markets closed.) Until a deal is reached, here is who is left in limbo:
 Airlines and hotels. An estimated 948,000 workers in the travel and tourism industry will lose their jobs without more stimulus, according to data from Tourism Economics for the U.S. Travel Association. That’s on top of the 3.5 million jobs the industry has already lost.
 Restaurants. A poll last month found that 40 percent of restaurant owners expected to close their establishments within six months in the absence of government aid. Three million restaurant employees have already lost their jobs.
 State and local governments. More than four million public-sector jobs could be lost as state houses and municipalities make cuts to compensate for drops in tax revenues, according to Moody’s.
 Unemployed people. Temporary layoffs are becoming permanent job losses, the latest data shows, with more than seven million people out of work for at least 15 weeks. A large share have relied on stimulus and extra unemployment insurance to pay mortgages and rent, according to Deloitte, risking wider financial reverberations as savings dwindle. “We had a bridge which took us till about September” said Raghuram Rajan, a former chief economist of the I.M.F. Without more help, he said, “anybody who was on that bridge falls off a cliff.”
 The U.S. economy. “It’s simple: Less fiscal stimulus means more economic pain,” Gregory Daco of Oxford Economics wrote in a research note. The absence of additional fiscal aid could reduce economic output 1.5 percent over the next year, he estimated.
What they’re saying:
 “We need to concentrate on what’s achievable,” said Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader.
 “Today, once again, President Trump showed his true colors: putting himself first at the expense of the country, with the full complicity of the G.O.P. members of Congress,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said.
 “Washington’s failure to enact additional Covid relief will be felt on Main Streets and at kitchen tables across the United States,” said a representative for the Chamber of Commerce. “Failure to reach a deal on additional relief would worsen and prolong the crisis for our country,” added the Business Roundtable.
The markets are … up? Stock futures suggest that markets today will regain some of yesterday’s losses. That suggests that investors and analysts still believe a deal is in the offing, either under Mr. Trump or Joe Biden, however unclear the path to an agreement.
____________________________
Today’s DealBook Briefing was written by Andrew Ross Sorkin and Lauren Hirsch in New York, Ephrat Livni in Washington and Michael J. de la Merced and Jason Karaian in London.
____________________________
Here’s what’s happening
The White House approved stricter Covid-19 vaccine guidelines after all. The F.D.A. released new requirements for drug makers working on coronavirus vaccines, after White House officials blocked the move for two weeks. That means such treatments probably won’t be available until after the November election.
G.E. faced regulatory scrutiny over its accounting practices. The company said it had received a so-called Wells notice, a letter from the S.E.C. warning of potential civil enforcement action, over the accounting in an insurance division, the latest legal headache tied to the division.
Trump officials tightened requirements for H-1B visas. The administration proposed rules that would make the work permits for highly skilled foreign workers harder to obtain, including by requiring higher pay and narrowing eligibility requirements. Experts expect legal challenges to the new rules.
Facebook widened its crackdown on QAnon. The company said it was removing any account, group or page from its platforms that openly associates with the conspiracy theory, after previous steps to clamp down on the movement failed to do much. Separately, Citigroup fired an employee who was revealed as the operator of a major QAnon website.
The U.S. trade deficit hit a 14-year high. The gap between what America sells abroad and what it imports went up 6 percent in August from the previous month, to $67 billion. That runs counter to President Trump’s goal of closing the gap, although the deficit with China shrank 6.7 percent, to $26.4 billion.
A plan to tame the tech giants
House lawmakers released a 449-page report on the dominance of Silicon Valley’s titans, outlining how the companies have become “the kinds of monopolies we last saw in the era of oil barons and railroad tycoons.” Among the findings from the House Judiciary Committee’s report:
 Amazon uses its power as a dominant third-party marketplace to harvest sales data from independent retailers and give its own products an advantage.
 Apple uses its monopoly over the iOS App Store to take huge cuts from app developers’ sales and “generate supra-normal profits,” a charge leveled by Epic Games and others. It also privileges its own apps, including by pre-installing them on devices.
 Facebook, which reduced competition by buying or copying rivals, has become so large that its biggest competition comes from within (as when Instagram threatened to overtake Facebook’s own app). That also led to an erosion of user privacy and a spread of misinformation by users of the platform.
 Google’s overwhelming dominance of search, maps and more gives it “near-perfect market intelligence” on what products and services people want, giving it a leg up on competitors. It also goes to great lengths to lock out other search engines.
The key quote: “This pattern of behavior raises questions about whether these firms view themselves as above the law, or whether they simply treat lawbreaking as a cost of business.”
How the companies responded: A common refrain was that the committee’s recommendations would hurt customers and independent businesses that use their platforms for free. Facebook added that it faced plenty of competition (including from TikTok, whose popularity among teenagers is still soaring).
There’s bipartisan agreement that there’s a problem … and not much else. The report was put out by the committee’s Democrats, after most of its Republican members took issue with its findings. Representative Jim Jordan of Ohio wanted to address accusations of bias against conservative viewpoints; Representative Ken Buck of Colorado disagreed with the committee’s calls to embolden consumer lawsuits and break up tech giants.
 Based on the number of pages devoted to each company, the committee’s main focus was on Google and Amazon, followed by Apple and Facebook.
What happens next:
 The Trump administration is continuing inquiries into the four companies, with an antitrust case against Google potentially coming soon.
 House Democrats have briefed Joe Biden on their findings, aiming to persuade a potential Biden administration to take up the issue.
 Seizing the moment, Microsoft’s C.E.O., Satya Nadella, urged lawmakers yesterday to tighten regulations on social media companies.
Meanwhile, Google will spar with Oracle over a $9 billion software copyright dispute before the Supreme Court this morning. Listen to oral arguments here at 10 a.m. Eastern.
JPMorgan takes on climate change
America’s biggest bank plans to push clients to adopt the guidelines of the Paris climate accords, the latest example of a U.S. company making the environment a priority.
JPMorgan will urge clients to drastically reduce emissions over the next several decades, while investing billions in new green-energy projects. The goal is to help reduce global net emissions to zero by 2050, a key target in the Paris agreement.
 The bank won’t cut ties with fossil-fuel clients like Exxon Mobil, nor will it sever relationships with customers who do not reduce emissions. And it’s unclear how JPMorgan will measure clients’ carbon outputs, with the bank saying it will help devise new metrics and create an advisory group.
Climate advocates gave the initiative a mixed grade, after pushing the bank for years to take action. The Rainforest Action Network, which accuses JPMorgan of being the biggest financier of fossil fuels, called the announcement “a welcome step forward.” But it and other groups noted big holes in the policy. “2050 vision is all well and good, but we need 2020 actions,” said an official with the Stop the Money Pipeline Coalition.
The speed read
Deals
 Britain is investing heavily in satellites and other space businesses as part of its post-Brexit transformation. (NYT)
 Retail investors in South Korea bid more than $50 billion for newly public shares in Big Hit Entertainment, the music label of the pop group BTS. (Reuters)
 Quartz, the business news site, is reportedly back on the block two years after being sold to a Japanese financial data company. (WSJ)
Politics and policy
 President Trump’s $70,000 in tax deductions for hair care may have broken the law. (NYT)
Tech
 Apple is expected to unveil the next generation of iPhones, including a 5G model, at an online event next Tuesday. (The Verge)
 Facebook deleted a post by President Trump that falsely asserted the flu was deadlier than Covid-19. (Vox)
 “Ad Tech Could Be the Next Internet Bubble” (Wired)
Best of the rest
 Goldman Sachs plans to limit promotions to partners, but add more lucrative perks. (WSJ)
 Honeywell predicts that private-jet flights will return to pre-pandemic levels next year. (Bloomberg)
 Cole Haan is teaming up with Slack to create a shoe inspired by pandemic-driven remote working, because … well, just because. (Business Insider)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Sorry, Jay Powell, but President Trump has other ideas on economic stimulus. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Pool photo by Toni L. Sandys FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); ECONOMICS (89%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); LAYOFFS (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (89%); PUBLIC FINANCE (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (88%); UNEMPLOYED PERSONS (86%); BUSINESS NEWS (79%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (79%); AGREEMENTS (78%); ECONOMIC POLICY (78%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); PUBLIC DEBT (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); SMALL BUSINESS (74%); NATIONAL DEBT (73%); SMALL BUSINESS ASSISTANCE (73%); TRAVEL & HOSPITALITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); DISMISSALS (69%); TOURISM EMPLOYMENT (69%); TOURISM OUTPUT (69%); SERVICE WORKERS (64%); TEMPORARY LAYOFFS (64%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (64%); SMALL BUSINESS LENDING (52%); United States Economy (%); Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (2020) (%); Stimulus (Economic) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Powell, Jerome H (%); Pelosi, Nancy (%)

Company:  DELOITTE LLP (51%)

Industry: NAICS541211 OFFICES OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS (51%); SIC8721 ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING SERVICES (51%); TRAVEL INDUSTRY (89%); RESTAURANTS (86%); LODGING (77%); TRAVEL & HOSPITALITY SECTOR PERFORMANCE (72%); TOURISM EMPLOYMENT (69%); TOURISM OUTPUT (69%); TOURISM (65%); HOTELS & MOTELS (64%); UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE (64%); SMALL BUSINESS LENDING (52%)

Person: JEROME POWELL (89%); AMY CONEY BARRETT (79%); NANCY PELOSI (73%); Trump, Donald J; Powell, Jerome H; Pelosi, Nancy

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: October 7, 2020


End of Document
Money Woes, Long Silences and Islamic Zeal
The New York Times
May 6, 2010 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1778 words
Byline: By JAMES BARRON and SABRINA TAVERNISE
Body


Theirs was an arranged marriage: two well-educated children of prominent Pakistani families set up through a mutual friend. He was the quiet one; she was the one who laughed at parties. 
  At their wedding in Peshawar six years ago, men and women danced separately but also together, ''a rarity at that time,'' recalled one guest. ''It was such a huge gathering that even their family friends from Qatar came.''
  When they returned to the United States, his colleagues at the cosmetics maker Elizabeth Arden celebrated with a small office party. 
  The husband, Faisal Shahzad, put photographs of his wife, Huma Mian, on his desk at the Arden office in Stamford, Conn. They bought a brand-new house for $273,000, 35 miles away on Long Hill Avenue in Shelton. By the time they moved in, she was pregnant, the neighbors recalled.
  As another day passed with Mr. Shahzad talking to investigators about the car bomb he had admitted driving into Times Square on Saturday, details emerged on Wednesday about the couple and their life together, along with speculation about his radicalization. People who knew them, both in Connecticut and in Pakistan, said he had changed in the past year or so, becoming more reserved and more religious as he faced what someone who knows the family well called ''their financial troubles.'' 
  Last year, one Pakistani friend said, he even asked his father, Bahar ul-Haq, a retired high-ranking air force pilot in Pakistan, for permission to fight in Afghanistan.
  Mr. Haq, now in his 70s, adamantly refused, according to a person familiar with the conversation, saying that he disapproved of the mission and reminding his son that Islam does not permit a man to abandon his wife or children. 
  As a newlywed, the wedding guest said of Mr. Shahzad by e-mail from Pakistan, ''there was no sign of him being extremist or, for that matter, he wasn't a bit religious.'' But in the past couple of years, after changing jobs and fathering two children, Mr. Shahzad ''started talking more of Islam.'' The guest spoke on the condition he not be identified because of concerns about his safety in the wake of the attempted car bombing.
  ''The recession had taken a toll on them, I guess,'' he wrote in an e-mail message from Pakistan. He said that their money worries became apparent in 2008 or 2009 and that Mr. Shahzad ''lost his way during the financial problems.''  JPMorgan Chase has since moved to foreclose on the Shelton house, which the couple had abandoned in a hurry, leaving behind clothes and toys.
  In February, Mr. Shahzad leased a two-bedroom apartment in Bridgeport, Conn. His landlord said he never saw Mr. Shahzad's wife. Faiz Ahmad, a friend from the Shahzad family's ancestral village, Mohib Banda, said that when he last saw Mr. Shahzad, at a wedding a year and a half ago, he was sure that something was wrong. Mr. Shahzad seemed changed, he said, sitting by himself and not talking very much. 
  He was ''completely quiet on the sofa, like someone who has some worries, and undergoing some internal change,'' Mr. Ahmad said. ''So he was sitting silent, silent. And silence in itself is a question.'' 
  A Pakistani man said that an acquaintance of his who was a friend of the Shahzad family told him that within the past year, Mr. Shahzad had peered critically at a glass of whiskey the friend was holding, indicating a judgmental stance typical for rigid jihadis. 
  Mr. Shahzad, now 30, appeared to be tracing a familiar arc of frustration, increasing religiosity and, finally, violence. He was born and raised in Pakistan, with a privileged upbringing in a moderate family that lived in at least three places -- Karachi, Rawalpindi and Mohib Banda. Mr. Haq, according to Mr. Ahmad, ''was a man of modern thinking and of the modern age.''
  Family friends interviewed on Wednesday said they believed that Mr. Haq was in hiding in the city of Dera Ghazi Khan in western Pakistan, where the family has wheat fields. Mr. Shahzad's wife was also believed to be in Pakistan, though her whereabouts was unknown. Dawn, a Pakistani daily, reported that her father had been arrested in Karachi, but Pakistani authorities would not confirm that.
  Mr. Shahzad, the youngest of four, was born into a new generation in the years after a military autocrat, Zia ul-Haq, began to inject a rigid version of Islam into Pakistan's education system. At the same time, hard-line mosques were given money and land, elevating a narrow, often sectarian world view that cast a pall over young Pakistanis.
  Ms. Mian, the oldest of four, was born in Colorado, though she spent summer vacations in Pakistan and lived with her family in Qatar for a while as a child, according to the wedding guest. Her father, Mohammad Asif Mian, earned two master's degrees at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden, Colo., in the 1980s, and has written four books.
  In the best-selling ''Project Economics and Decision Analysis,'' published in 2002, Mr. Mian thanked  family members for their patience and support, adding, ''Special thanks to my daughters at the University of Colorado for being on the dean's list; this has contributed a lot to my enthusiasm.''
  Ms. Mian and her sisters, Saba and Hina, all studied at Denver-area colleges and shared a house just off the campus of the University of Colorado in Boulder in 2003 and 2004. 
  Huma Mian married Mr. Shahzad soon after earning an accounting degree in 2004, and moved to Connecticut, where he was pursuing an M.B.A. at the University of Bridgeport and, on an H-1B visa for highly skilled workers, was working as an operation analyst at Elizabeth Arden, managing and analyzing accounts receivable, according to a resume obtained by MSNBC.
  ''I was always surprised, with her having to buy milk for the baby and everything else, how they afforded this on one income,'' recalled Brenda J. Thurman, a neighbor in Shelton. 
  The couple did not socialize much with people on their block. ''It was three years before I knew she spoke English,'' Ms. Thurman said. 
  Ms. Thurman said that Ms. Mian left for a couple of months in late 2008 or early 2009, and that Mr. Shahzad told her she was going to Pakistan to have their second child. Within a few months of her return, they packed up and left again last summer. Mr. Shahzad, who had left Elizabeth Arden in 2006 to become a client reporting analyst at Affinion, a financial marketing services company in Norwalk, Conn., quit his job there. 
  Piles of garbage remained outside the home in Shelton this week, filled with clues about their lives. There were packets of Nair, moisturizer with Arabic writing on the back, a makeup brush, a Japanese cherry blossom scent body spritzer, wrapping paper and gift bags that appeared to be for baby gifts.
  There was an envelope addressed to ''Faisal, Huma and Alishaba,'' which contained a card proclaiming, ''Congratulations on your new little girl!''
  How, why or where Mr. Shahzad became radicalized remains unclear. Dr. Saud Anwar, the founder of a Pakistani-American association in Connecticut, said that as soon as Mr. Shahzad's name surfaced in connection with the car bomb, he canvassed Connecticut Muslim and Pakistani groups and found he was not involved with any of them. 
  But Dr. Anwar said he had been in touch with a university classmate of Mr. Shahzad's, a man of Pakistani descent who told Dr. Anwar he did not want to be interviewed by reporters. The classmate said he had remained friends with the couple and had noticed something different about Mr. Shahzad about a year ago. 
  ''His personality had changed -- he had become more introverted,'' Dr. Anwarsaid the classmate told him. ''He had a stronger religious identity, where he felt more strongly and more opinionated about things.'' Dr. Anwar said he had asked the classmate whether this change had come through association with a group, and the friend said it seemed to be ''on his own that he was learning all these things.'' 
  Mr. Ahmad, the friend from Mohib Banda, speculated that the transformation was rooted in Karachi. An associate of Mr. Shahzad's was arrested in a mosque believed to have ties with a militant group in Karachi early Tuesday, Pakistani intelligence officials said. 
  ''The question is who has put Faisal in this path?'' Mr. Ahmad asked. ''The Faisal with the beard that you see, he was not the old Faisal. He was like you, like me, handsome, liberal and an active person.''
  According to Pakistan's information minister, Mr. Shahzad traveled to Pakistan 13 times in the past seven years. One Pakistani official who knew the family said it was unlikely that Mr. Shahzad would have been radicalized in Pakistan if he was only on short trips, which tend to be dominated by family commitments like weddings; the criminal complaint against him filed on Tuesday says that he returned in February from a five-month stint. It also said Mr. Shahzad had been trained in bomb-making in Waziristan.
  Another family friend in Pakistan, Kifayat Ali, called Mr. Shahzad ''emotional'' and said that he used to carry a dagger around with him as a boy. He speculated that Mr. Shahzad had become enraged by the United States' military actions, fueled by the Pakistani press blaring conspiracy theories and anti-American vitriol.
  ''A person sees the brutality of Afghanistan and Iraq,'' Mr. Ali noted. ''These scenes affect people.''
  The resume posted Wednesday on msnbc.com said Mr. Shahzad held three different positions at Elizabeth Arden over five years starting in mid-2001, and then spent three years at Affinion. At Arden, he said he had ''decreased bad debt write-offs by 47 percent'' and ''recovered over $2.5 mil in 'lost' revenue.'' At Affinion, he said he prepared ''monthly commission forecasting for high-profile Affinion clients such as Citibank, Bank of America, Royal Bank of Scotland, Peoples Bank, US Bank, Wells Fargo and a couple of smaller clients.''
  But James Hart, an Affinion spokesman, said ''there's a lot of resume puffery in there'' and that Mr. Shahzad had been ''one rung up from entry level'' when he left. 
  A former manager at Elizabeth Arden said that he was the only Pakistani working for the company at the time, but never asked for special accommodation for prayer. And she remembered that on Sept. 11, Mr. Shahzad, like everyone else, huddled around the one radio in the office, listening to bulletins about the attacks on the World Trade Center.
  ''I think he was just normal,'' she recalled. ''Isn't it always the case, though? It's always the normal ones that you don't really think they're going to do something like this.''
  James Barron reported from New York and Sabrina Tavernise from Peshawar.  

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The couple in this Web photo are identified as Faisal Shahzad and Huma Mian. Ms. Mian is thought to be in Pakistan. (A30)                            
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FAMILY (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ARRANGED MARRIAGES (89%); BUSINESS FINANCIAL TROUBLE (89%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (89%); RELIGION (89%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (89%); TRENDS & EVENTS (77%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (73%); BOMBINGS (72%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (72%); WEAPONS & ARMS (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (67%); AIR FORCES (64%)

Company:  JPMORGAN CHASE & CO (82%)

Ticker: JPM (NYSE) (82%); JPM (LSE) (82%)

Industry: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (82%); NAICS523999 MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES (82%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (82%); SIC6022 STATE COMMERCIAL BANKS (82%); COSMETICS (70%); AIR FORCES (64%); RENTAL PROPERTY (60%); TOILETRIES MFG (55%)

Geographic: BRIDGEPORT, CT, USA (56%); CONNECTICUT, USA (90%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (77%); AFGHANISTAN (58%)

Load-Date: May 6, 2010


End of Document
The Immigration Debate We Need; Op-Ed Contributor
The New York Times 
February 27, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1645 words
Byline: GEORGE BORJAS
Highlight: How much of a price are the American people willing to pay, and who will pay it?
Body


The first month of the Trump administration has already changed the direction of the immigration debate, with many more changes coming soon. So far, executive orders and deportations dominate the discussion. But the fight over how many refugees to admit or how best to vet those refugees obscures what the debate is really about.
Changes in social policy do not make everyone better off, and immigration policy is no exception. I am a refugee, having fled Cuba as a child in 1962. Not only do I have great sympathy for the immigrant’s desire to build a better life, I am also living proof that immigration policy can benefit some people enormously.
But I am also an economist, and am very much aware of the many trade-offs involved. Inevitably, immigration does not improve everyone’s well-being. There are winners and losers, and we will need to choose among difficult options. The improved lives of the immigrants come at a price. How much of a price are the American people willing to pay, and exactly who will pay it?
This tension permeates the debate over immigration’s effect on the labor market. Those who want more immigration claim that immigrants do jobs that native-born Americans do not want to do. But we all know that the price of gas goes down when the supply of oil goes up. The laws of supply and demand do not evaporate when we talk about the price of labor rather than the price of gas. By now, the well-documented abuses of the H-1B program, such as the Disney workers who had to train their foreign-born replacements, should have obliterated the notion that immigration does not harm competing native workers.
Over the past 30 years, a large fraction of immigrants, nearly a third, were high school dropouts, so the incumbent low-skill work force formed the core group of Americans who paid the price for the influx of millions of workers. Their wages fell as much as 6 percent. Those low-skill Americans included many native-born blacks and Hispanics, as well as earlier waves of immigrants.
But somebody’s lower wage is somebody else’s higher profit. The increase in the profitability of many employers enlarged the economic pie accruing to the entire native population by about $50 billion. So, as proponents of more immigration point out, immigration can increase the aggregate wealth of Americans. But they don’t point out the trade-off involved: Workers in jobs sought by immigrants lose out.
They also don’t point out that low-skill immigration has a side effect that reduces that $50 billion increase in wealth. The National Academy of Sciences recently estimated the impact of immigration on government budgets. On a year-to-year basis, immigrant families, mostly because of their relatively low incomes and higher frequency of participating in government programs like subsidized health care, are a fiscal burden. A comparison of taxes paid and government spending on these families showed that immigrants created an annual fiscal shortfall of $43 billion to $299 billion.
Even the most conservative estimate of the fiscal shortfall wipes out much of the $50 billion increase in native wealth. Remarkably, the size of the native economic pie did not change much after immigration increased the number of workers by more than 15 percent. But the split of the pie certainly changed, giving far less to workers and much more to employers.
The immigration debate will also have to address the long-term impact on American society, raising the freighted issue of immigrant assimilation. In recent decades, there has been a noticeable slowdown in the rate at which the economic status of immigrants improves over time. In the 1970s, the typical immigrant could expect a substantial improvement relative to natives over his or her lifetime. Today, the economic progress of the typical immigrant is much more stagnant.
Part of the slowdown is related to the growth of ethnic enclaves. New immigrants who find few ethnic compatriots get value from acquiring skills that allow more social and economic exchanges, such as becoming proficient in English. But new immigrants who find a large and welcoming community of their countrymen have less need to acquire those skills; they already have a large audience that values whatever they brought with them. Put bluntly, mass migration discourages assimilation.
The trade-offs become even more difficult when we think about the long-term integration of the children and grandchildren of today’s immigrants. Many look back at the melting pot in 20th-century America and assume that history will repeat itself. That’s probably wishful thinking. That melting pot operated in a particular economic, social and political context, and it is doubtful that those conditions can be reproduced today.
Many of the Ellis Island-era immigrants got jobs in manufacturing; Ford’s work force was 75 percent foreign-born in 1914. Those manufacturing jobs evolved into well-paid union jobs, creating a private-sector safety net for the immigrants and their descendants. Does anyone seriously believe that the jobs employing low-skill immigrants today will offer the same economic mobility that unionized manufacturing jobs provided?
Similarly, the ideological climate that encouraged assimilation back then, neatly encapsulated by our motto “E pluribus unum” (Out of many, one), is dead and gone. A recent University of California directive shows the radical shift. The university’s employees were advised to avoid using phrases that can lead to “microaggressions” toward students and one another. One example is the statement “America is a melting pot,” which apparently sends a message to the recipient that they have to “assimilate to the dominant culture.”
Europe is already confronting the difficulties produced by the presence of unassimilated populations. If nothing else, the European experience shows that there is no universal law that guarantees integration even after a few generations. We, too, will need to confront the trade-off between short-term economic gains and the long-term costs of a large, unassimilated minority.
Identifying the trade-offs is only a first step toward a more sensible immigration policy. We also need some general principles, combining common sense and compassion.
First and foremost, we must reduce illegal immigration. It has had a corrosive impact, paralyzing discussion on all aspects of immigration reform. A wall along the Mexican border may signal that we are getting serious, but many undocumented immigrants enter the country legally and then overstay their visas. A national electronic system (such as E-Verify) mandating that employers certify new hires, along with fines and criminal penalties for lawbreaking businesses, might go a long way toward stemming the flow.
But what about the 11-million-plus undocumented immigrants already here? A vast majority have led peaceful lives and established deep roots in our communities. Their sudden deportation would not represent the compassionate America that many of us envision.
Perhaps it’s time for some benign neglect. Many will eventually qualify for visas because they have married American citizens or have native-born children. Rather than fight over a politically impossible amnesty, we could accelerate the granting of family-preference visas to that population.
We will also need to decide how many immigrants to admit. Economists seldom confess their ignorance, but we truly have no clue about what that number should be. About one million legal immigrants a year entered the country in the past two decades. The political climate suggests that many Americans view that number as too high. History shows that when voters get fed up with immigration, there is no reluctance to cut off the flow altogether. Back in the 1990s, Barbara Jordan’s immigration commission recommended an annual target of about 550,000 immigrants. Such a cut would be significant, but it may be preferable to the alternative, which, in this political climate, could mean shutting off the flow.
Finally, we need to choose between highly skilled and less-skilled applicants. High-skill immigrants, who pay higher taxes and receive fewer services and can potentially expand the frontier of knowledge, are more profitable for us. But giving an opportunity to the huddled masses is part of what makes our country exceptional.
Regardless of the allocation, employers should not walk away with all the gains, and workers should not suffer all the losses. We need to ensure a more equitable sharing of the gains and losses among the American people.
No matter where one stands in the ideological divide, President Trump has already answered the fundamental question guiding the design of a more rational policy. In his speech at the Republican National Convention, he described how he would pick among the available choices: “We are going to be considerate and compassionate to everyone,” he said. “But my greatest compassion will be for our own struggling citizens.”
He added, “We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.”
Many of my colleagues in the academic community — and many of the elite opinion-makers in the news media — recoil when they hear that immigration should serve the interests of Americans. Their reaction is to label such thinking as racist and xenophobic, and to marginalize anyone who agrees.
But those accusations of racism reflect their effort to avoid a serious discussion of the trade-offs. The coming debate would be far more honest and politically transparent if we demanded a simple answer from those who disagree with “America First” proposals: Who are you rooting for?
George Borjas is a professor of economics and social policy at the Harvard Kennedy School and the author of, most recently, “We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative.”
DRAWING (DRAWING BY LOGAN FITZPATRICK)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); OIL & GAS PRICES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); REFUGEES (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); DEPORTATION (78%); ECONOMICS (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FAMILY (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (67%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (66%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (61%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (59%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (51%); SCHOOL DROP OUTS (50%); Foreign Workers (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Refugees and Displaced Persons (%)

Industry: OIL & GAS PRICES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); BUDGETS (74%); HIGH SCHOOLS (67%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (61%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (51%)

Person: Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: February 28, 2017


End of Document
Florida, Bernie Sanders, Aung San Suu Kyi: Your Wednesday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
September 13, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1022 words
Byline: KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. They survived Irma, but perished in sweltering temperatures days later.
Three people were discovered dead at a nursing home in Hollywood, Fla., whose air-conditioning had been knocked out. That number grew to eight after other residents were evacuated to hospitals.
“It felt like 110 degrees,” said the daughter of a 96-year-old resident.
The police and state authorities are conducting a criminal investigation, and fanning out to check other nursing homes. Roughly 160 nursing homes in Florida — a state where one in five residents is over 65 — remain without commercial power amid high temperatures.
_____
2. On Capitol Hill, liberals and conservatives are planning to set forth two radically different proposals for health care: a huge expansion of Medicare, and a rollback of the Affordable Care Act.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, above, proposed what he called “a Medicare-for-all, single-payer health care system,” and said 15 Democratic senators supported it.
The White House and Republican leaders of Congress said they will release the framework of their plan to overhaul the tax code the week of Sept. 25.
And President Trump got an earful about his Charlottesville response from Tim Scott, the Senate’s only black Republican. The White House misidentified him as Tom Scott in a handout.
_____
3. The Trump administration is considering reducing the number of refugees admitted to the U.S. over the next year, to below 50,000. That would be the lowest number since at least 1980. Above, Syrian families at a U.N. refugee office in Beirut.
The Supreme Court will hear challenges to the administration’s barring of refugees next month, but in the meantime, is allowing the administration to bar many refugees.
Separately, when undocumented immigrants finish their sentences, local sheriffs face a problem: Should they keep them locked up pending deportation or honor federal court decisions that the practice is unconstitutional?
_____
4. In other immigration news: The widow of the Indian engineer killed by a gunman in a Kansas bar in February lost her visa.
Sunayana Dumala’s husband, one of two Indian men shot that day, was here on an H-1B visa, and upon his death, her residency status was terminated. She was scared she wouldn’t be able to come back to the U.S. after his funeral in India. Above, the couple in a family photo.
Her congressman, Kevin Yoder, is helping her get her own visa — and argues that the law should be changed to protect spouses of hate crime victims.
_____
5. “It was a frat house.” Our tech reporters went inside the events that led to the exit of the C.E.O., Mike Cagney, from SoFi, a prominent San Francisco start-up.
“You would find people having sex in their cars and in the parking lot,” said one former employee at the online lending start-up. “It was a free-for-all.”’
_____
6. Fires are now raging across the West, from Southern California to Glacier National Park, with experts predicting that 2017 will go down as one of the worst wildfire seasons in decades.
A crew of scientists at Yellowstone National Park has been studying how forests regrow after fires, and their findings will guide forest management and firefighting policy in the years to come. Global warming is expected to contribute to more frequent fires. Above, two forests whose paths diverged after a succession of wildfires.
_____
7. Russia and Belarus are about to attack Veishnoriya. Luckily, that’s a fictional state.
It’s the focus of a six-day joint military exercise that is expected to be the biggest display of Russian military power since the end of the Cold War. NATO is wary.
Today on our podcast “The Daily,” we talk to our reporter Jim Rutenberg about a parallel effort — the information war that the Kremlin is waging against the West. Read his full story            in this week’s Times Magazine.
And U.S. agencies are dropping antivirus software made by a Russian technology company, Kaspersky Lab, whose executives are suspected of having ties to Russian intelligence.
_____
8. Myanmar’s national leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, will not attend the coming U.N. General Assembly because of the crisis that has forced about 400,000 Rohingya Muslims to flee to Bangladesh in just weeks.
International leaders and rights groups have denounced Myanmar for ethnic cleansing — some have called it genocide — and castigated her inaction. Here are the basics on the roots and history of the strife.
_____
9. We talked to Angelina Jolie about her latest movie, “First They Killed My Father,” based on the true story of Loung Ung, who as a young girl survived the Cambodian genocide.
While Ms. Jolie’s earlier work as a director has garnered tepid reviews, several critics have anointed “First They Killed My Father” her best yet. It’ll be on Netflix as of Friday, when it will also open in a small number of theaters.
In an interview at her $25 million estate in Los Angeles, Ms. Jolie said that making the film affected her view of her family — and intimated that it might have informed her decision to leave Brad Pitt.
_____
10. Finally, after Senator Ted Cruz’s Twitter account liked a pornographic video, you knew he would be prime fodder for the late-night comics.            From James Corden: “When asked to comment on this story, Ted Cruz said, ‘Don’t come in here!’”
On TV tonight, Abbi Jacobson and Ilana Glazer are back for Season 4 of “Broad City,” starring as feminist slackers (above and at 10:30 p.m. on Comedy Central). And Samantha Bee is back with new episodes of “Full Frontal” (10:30 p.m. on TBS).
And a word to the wise: Do not read our story on the fatberg menacing London’s sewer system over dinner.
Have a great night.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or            Google Play.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); REFUGEES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); MEDICARE (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); IMMIGRATION (86%); LIBERALISM (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); DEATH & DYING (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%); HEALTH CARE REFORM (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); LITIGATION (75%); SHERIFFS (75%); CONSERVATISM (74%); US CONGRESS (74%); FAMILY (73%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (73%); LEGISLATION (73%); DEPORTATION (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (69%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (68%); NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE (68%); SUPREME COURTS (68%); TAX LAW (68%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (67%); SUITS & CLAIMS (64%); UNITED NATIONS (64%); FOREIGN LABOR (62%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (62%); TAXES & TAXATION (53%); TAX REFORM (52%)

Industry: HEALTH CARE (90%); LONG TERM HEALTH CARE (90%); NURSING & RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES (90%); NURSING HOMES (90%); MEDICARE (89%); HEALTH CARE REFORM (76%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (69%); NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE (68%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (67%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (60%)

Person: BERNIE SANDERS (89%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); TIM SCOTT (76%); AUNG SAN SUU KYI (57%); KEVIN YODER (51%)

Geographic: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); FLORIDA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

Load-Date: September 14, 2017


End of Document
Trump’s Overhaul of Immigration Is Worse Than You Think
The New York Times 
October 10, 2020 Saturday 15:29 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION; sunday
Length: 1752 words
Byline: The Editorial Board
Highlight: This administration has attacked every aspect of the immigration system — and it won’t be easy to undo.
Body


This administration has attacked every aspect of the immigration system — and it won’t be easy to undo.
It was a kind gesture to some 6,000 Filipinos who, in their youth, had fought with American armed forces in World War II and had been granted U.S. citizenship decades later. In 2016, when the veterans were in their 80s and 90s, the Obama administration agreed to allow some of their relatives in the Philippines to come to the United States before they completed the long wait for formal admission.
Last August, the Trump administration announced it was ending the program.
This gratuitous swipe at a group of old veterans is a measure of how meticulously the Trump administration has pursued the destruction of immigration in America. Through administrative orders, strict enforcement and mere threat, the White House has attacked virtually every aspect of immigration, legal and illegal.
This transformation of the American immigration system has been perhaps the administration’s boldest accomplishment, overseen with single-minded focus by Stephen Miller, a top adviser to President Trump with an affinity for white nationalism.
A report this summer from the Migration Policy Institute outlined over 400 actions on immigration that had been enacted by a sprawling array of federal departments in the Trump era.
The effects are clear. Between 2016 and 2019, annual net immigration into the United States fell by almost half, to about 600,000 people per year — a level not seen since the 1980s — according to an analysis by William H. Frey of the Brookings Institution. (Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, that number has certainly decreased even more.)
The 2016-19 drop “is clearly a result of Trump’s restrictive immigration measures,” Mr. Frey told the editorial board, “including immigrant bans from selected countries, greater limits on refugees, and generating fear among other potential immigrant groups over this administration’s unwelcoming policies.”
Along with more obscure actions, like ending that Filipino veterans program, the administration has been methodical in ensuring that its most widely criticized efforts succeed.
In the spring of 2018, as thousands of Central American families crossed the southern U.S. border to seek asylum, the Justice Department ordered the arrest of anyone entering the country without authorization. This forced the separation of hundreds of families, even the removal of infants from nursing mothers.
To scare people from bringing their families over the border, Jeff Sessions, the attorney general at the time, said, “We need to take away children.” It made no difference how young they were.
National and international outrage over this cruelty led the administration to rescind that family separation policy. So it changed tack, shutting out asylum seekers through minute attention to administrative detail, bare knuckle diplomacy and ignoring legality.
Border control officials said they would accept asylum applications only from people who arrived at approved border crossings, even though the law says anyone can apply for asylum once in the United States. At those crossings, asylum seekers were forced to wait for days, even weeks, in long lines just for a chance to approach the border to ask for protection. The White House packed the immigration appeals board with Trump appointees, with predictable results: Rejections increased.
Mr. Trump also used the threat of tariffs to get Mexico to crack down on undocumented Central American immigrants and to allow frustrated asylum seekers to wait on the Mexican side of the border while their cases meandered through U.S. immigration courts.
After Mr. Trump suspended aid to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras in March, Guatemala and Honduras agreed to accept asylum seekers who had passed through those countries on their way north, so they could either apply for asylum there or go home. (A federal appeals court blocked this arrangement, but that’s effectively moot during the pandemic, since the administration has all but shut down the border under a 1944 public health law.)
The scope of the administration’s actions has been far broader than Mr. Trump implied it would be when he campaigned. He promised to bar “rapists” from Mexico, create “a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States” and save America from homicidal undocumented immigrants.
Once in office, it was not just criminals and terrorists who drew his attention. It was also people seeking protection from the horrors of their home countries, undocumented immigrants trying to support their families and foreigners striving for a better life in the United States.
Mr. Trump eventually achieved a version of his Muslim ban when the Supreme Court approved of severe restrictions on entry for residents of 13 countries, the majority of them with mostly Muslim populations. While the White House said one reason the ban was needed was lax security in those countries, it also has drastically scaled back the refugee program, which involves stringent vetting by American and United Nations officials. In Barack Obama’s last year as president, the ceiling for refugee admissions was 110,000. For the current fiscal year, it’s 15,000. Mr. Trump has made these desperate people campaign punching bags. “Are you having a good time with your refugees?” he said with smirk to a roaring crowd in Minnesota recently. (In fact, when a poll asked Minnesotans whether they approved of having refugees resettled in their community, 59 percent said yes, and 29 percent said no.)
Despite Mr. Trump’s promises to protect Americans from killer immigrants, Immigration and Customs Enforcement is now more than twice as likely to pick up immigrants with no criminal record beyond immigration violations, compared with the number before he took office. After being labeled the “deporter in chief,” Mr. Obama ordered ICE to concentrate enforcement on unauthorized immigrants who had committed crimes. Within weeks of his own inauguration, Mr. Trump eliminated any deportation priorities and made all undocumented immigrants fair game for ICE. With many cities resisting ICE’s more stringent demands for cooperation, the agency has also found it easier to just pick up anyone with an existing deportation warrant.
“I understand when you’re a criminal and you do bad things, you shouldn’t be in the country,” Helen Beristain, who voted for Mr. Trump, said when her husband, Roberto, owner of a restaurant in Granger, Ind., was ordered to be deported to Mexico in March 2017 after 20 years in the United States. But, she said, when “you support and you help and you pay taxes and you give jobs to people, you should be able to stay.”
Not anymore.
While Mr. Trump promised a crackdown on illegal immigration during his presidency, he has also eagerly pursued reductions in authorized immigration.
The administration had threatened to furlough 70 percent of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services employees, blaming the pandemic, but some of those employees said the real problem was restrictive policies and delays in visa applications that have sharply reduced revenue from the processing fees that fund the agency. At the same time, applications for permanent residency have declined since the administration announced it would adopt a rule that would prevent those considered likely to receive public benefits from becoming permanent residents. Among recent green-card recipients, 69 percent had at least one of the characteristics that would be weighed, according to the Migration Policy Institute.
Ken Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, recently announced that the number of H-1B visas for skilled workers would be cut by one-third because of tighter criteria for who can get them. Critics said this would make American companies shift more work abroad.
Mr. Trump also has ended “temporary protected status” for 400,000 people from El Salvador, Haiti, Sudan and elsewhere who have legally lived and worked in the United States for decades after being provided a haven from war or natural disaster.
If Democrats were to take control of Congress and the White House next year, it would be fairly simple to undo some of the damage Mr. Trump has done to the nation’s immigration system. The protections that Mr. Trump overturned for the Dreamers — the thousands of people who were brought to the United States without authorization when they were young — could be written into law, with public support. The travel ban could be overturned, and more refugees could be admitted. ICE could be directed to once again concentrate on deporting criminals. Resources could be shifted to smarter border security measures that don’t rely on a physical wall.
But rolling back other measures will be difficult.
“There’s so much change that has happened in the last four years, there’s no way a new administration could reverse things in four or even eight years,” said Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute who was a co-author of the group’s July report.
Beyond that, there could be political challenges to undoing President Trump’s clamps on the border if that would invite new caravans of asylum seekers. Would Democrats reverse the public charge rule and leave themselves open to accusations of coddling newcomers?
After undoing the cruelest and most pointless of the president’s changes to the immigration system, a new administration would need to make difficult decisions about controlling the border, assessing the role that skills and family ties should play in admitting immigrants, enforcing employment laws for unauthorized immigrants and creating a pathway to citizenship for millions of those workers and their families.
But rejecting, by law and action, the Trump administration’s racism, cruelty and xenophobia would reaffirm that America is a nation of immigrants who help revitalize the country — an ideal that most Americans support.
With a pandemic and an economic crisis to address, immigration may not seem like a priority. Yet if it is not addressed, the immigration system Mr. Trump has erected may be in operation for years to come.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAATA VIA PBS ERIC GAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); VETERANS (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (79%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (76%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); ARRESTS (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (73%); WORLD WAR II (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (66%); CORONAVIRUSES (63%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (63%); BREASTFEEDING (60%); WHITE NATIONALISTS (52%); EPIDEMICS (50%); PANDEMICS (50%); VIRUSES (50%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Family Separation Policy (US Immigration) (%); Asylum, Right of (%); Refugees and Displaced Persons (%); Border Barriers (%); Presidential Election of 2016 (%); Dream Act (Development, Relief and Education for Minors Act) (%); Foreign Workers (%); Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Green Cards (US) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (79%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (79%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); JEFF SESSIONS (79%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%); PHILIPPINES (93%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: May 13, 2023


End of Document
Times Sq. Bombing Suspect's Route to Citizenship Reveals Limits of the Process
The New York Times
May 8, 2010 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1117 words
Byline: By NINA BERNSTEIN; Steven Greenhouse and Scott Shane contributed reporting.
Body


When Faisal Shahzad took his oath of citizenship a year ago, swearing to ''support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States of America against all enemies,'' he seemed the model of a legal immigrant success story. Moving from one coveted visa to the next over a decade, he had acquired an M.B.A., a decent job, a wife and two children and a fine suburban home.
  Now that he has admitted driving a car bomb into Times Square, every step of his path to citizenship is under fresh scrutiny. One key question is when Mr. Shahzad turned against his adopted country. The answer could determine whether the unraveling of his immigrant success story ends with the revocation of his American citizenship. 
  The typical grounds for denaturalization, immigration officials say, are fraud or misrepresentation in the reams of immigration forms that Mr. Shahzad filled out over the years, including accounting for every trip he made outside the country. But even if he never lied in his applications, an obscure anti-Communist statute enacted half a century ago could be used to revoke his citizenship, said Donald Kerwin, a vice president at the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute, a research organization in Washington.
  The law states that within five years of naturalization, any affiliation that would have precluded citizenship -- like membership in a terrorist organization -- is prima facie evidence that the person ''was not attached to the principles of the Constitution of the United States and was not well disposed to the good order and happiness of the United States at the time of naturalization.'' In the absence of countervailing evidence, the statute says, that affiliation is enough to authorize revocation.
  ''It doesn't happen very often, but you're obviously not attached to the principles of the Constitution if you're being trained in bomb-making in Waziristan when you take the oath,'' Mr. Kerwin said. 
  The narrative that has emerged suggests that after signs of financial stress and a turn to religion within the past year or two, Mr. Shahzad quit his job and flew to Pakistan. Law enforcement officials say he has admitted to training with terrorists there in December or January. 
  Mr. Kerwin said that such a sequence provides the prima facie evidence described in the statute, but that it is unclear whether the federal government would bother with revocation if Mr. Shahzad was headed for a long prison sentence anyway. 
  The Department of Justice declined to discuss the matter.
  In Washington, the more pressing question seems to be how he became a citizen in the first place. Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican, has demanded to see Mr. Shahzad's full immigration file.
  Experts on both sides of the nation's immigration debate said the case points to the limitations of a screening apparatus increasingly burdened with national security expectations. 
  Immigration lawyers in Connecticut said Mr. Shahzad followed a typical trajectory, though his path seemed more smooth than many others, especially men from Muslim countries, who can be stuck in security checks for years. 
  Mr. Shahzad's name had long been listed in the Treasury Enforcement Communication System, known as TECS, which helps the federal government track potential law violators entering the country, an administration official said. 
  He probably landed on the huge list because he entered the country on several occasions carrying large amounts of cash, declaring the totals on his customs entry forms as required. But for a Pakistani-American who traveled frequently between the two countries, that was neither unusual nor necessarily an indication of any illicit activity, added the official, who would discuss the confidential records only on condition of anonymity.
  He arrived at the University of Bridgeport in Connecticut in January 1999 on a foreign student visa approved  by the State Department in Pakistan. It allowed for a year of job training after graduation, and a temp agency placed him at Elizabeth Arden, the cosmetics company. Because he performed well as an account analyst there, a former manager said, the company applied to the Labor Department for one of the limited number of three-year H-1B visas available for foreigners with special skills. Critics of the H-1B visa system, like Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, say it is a source of cheap, captive labor, fed by mediocre schools. 
  ''All we're hearing is that these visas are for the best and brightest,'' said Mr. Krikorian, whose Washington-based group advocates sharp reductions in immigration. ''This guy, both from his grades and his incompetent bomb-making skills, wasn't the best and brightest of anything.''
  But lawyers who handle such cases said Mr. Shahzad probably had skills that were in short supply at the time, because the H-1B visa process is expensive and difficult for employers to pursue. ''You can't expect people to dump thousands of dollars in the schooling system and then not have a chance to work here,'' noted one lawyer, Nandita Ruchandani.
  In July 2003, Elizabeth Arden petitioned for an employment-based green card on Mr. Shahzad's behalf, a Labor Department official said. By the next year, he did not need it: he had married Huma Mian, who was born in Colorado. Based on her February 2005 petition, he was granted a green card in January 2006.
  To get it, he had to open his life to the government, supply his fingerprints for an F.B.I. background check and submit to an interview about whether his marriage was bona fide. 
  As a citizen's husband, he was entitled to petition for naturalization two years and nine months later. He did so in October 2008, and underwent another full security check and interview and a citizenship test, covering American civics, history and spoken English. 
  ''You can do all the checks in the world; there's no way to know what's in their heart or head,'' said Crystal Williams, executive director of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. ''People rarely go to their interview and say they think it would be a great idea to plant a bomb in Times Square.'' 
  Even Mr. Krikorian did not blame the immigration system, noting that Mr. Shahzad did not enter the country illegally and seems to have had a genuine marriage. ''Maybe there was nothing for them to find,'' he said. ''He may have been radicalized after he went through all this.'' 
  Or maybe not. ''Was it his plan all along? I don't know,'' said Christopher Bentley, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. 
  ''It's important to realize that all the background checks are just a snapshot in time.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CITIZENSHIP (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); BOMBINGS (90%); DENATURALIZATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); NATURALIZATION (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (77%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WEAPONS & ARMS (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); RESIGNATIONS (71%); COMMUNISM (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); BIPARTISANSHIP (66%); SENTENCING (60%); JAIL SENTENCING (50%)

Person: CHUCK GRASSLEY (50%)

Geographic: IOWA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (79%)

Load-Date: May 8, 2010


End of Document
At a Funeral Pyre in India, Anger Over a Shooting in Kansas
The New York Times 
February 28, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 758 words
Byline: SRIRAM KARRI and ELLEN BARRY
Highlight: As family and friends said goodbye to Srinivas Kuchibhotla, killed last week in a Kansas bar, mourners denounced President Trump for failing to condemn the act.
Body


HYDERABAD, India — Just after 2 p.m. Indian Standard Time on Tuesday, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, an Indian immigrant fatally shot in a bar outside Kansas City, Kan., was placed on a pyre made of logs.
Grains of rice were placed around his mouth, as per Hindu tradition, to signify his last earthly meal, and his forehead was smeared with sandalwood paste. His father poured clarified butter on his head, as a sign of purification, and used a burning stick to light the fire.
But before the ancient rituals could be completed, a cluster of young mourners — mostly information technology professionals or engineers, like the dead man — began shouting. “Trump, down, down!” they said. “Down with racism! Down with hatred!”
Here in Hyderabad, a city so immigration-minded that a particular temple deity is believed to help grant United States visas, Mr. Kuchibhotla’s violent death is seen by many as a harbinger of rising anti-immigrant sentiment in the United States.
Last Wednesday, a 51-year-old white Navy veteran confronted Mr. Kuchibhotla, 32, and another Indian patron at a bar in Olathe, Kan., questioned them belligerently about their visa status and, after being asked to leave, returned with a gun and shot them.
“Hate has a way of growing, and becoming a trend,” said Kiran Kumar, a software engineer who attended the funeral, holding a handmade sign condemning hate crimes.
On Tuesday night during his address to Congress, President Trump condemned the attack on the two men.
Earlier in the day, the White House issued a statement that called the shooting “an act of racially motivated hatred.”
In the days since Mr. Kuchibhotla’s death, most of India’s major daily newspapers had published angry editorials over what they saw as the Trump administration’s silence on the killing.
On Tuesday, as Mr. Kuchibhotla’s body was carried to the cremation ground, dozens of regional camera crews followed, their anchormen staging on-air debates on whether Indian immigrants should return home.
India’s minister of labor, Bandaru Dattatreya, attended, as did a major movie star in the Telugu language, and Chukka Ramaiah, a 91-year-old mathematics teacher who is celebrated for sending students to top-ranked Indian institutions and onward to the United States.
“It is heartbreaking for any teacher to see a student die, at such an age, before having lived his fullest life,” Mr. Ramaiah said. “How much has America lost, too, for this single act of hatred?” After the ceremony, Mr. Dattatreya publicly recommended that Indian students speak only in English for the duration of their time in the United States, as a safety measure.
The last rites on Tuesday coincided with the arrival of India’s foreign secretary, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, in Washington. He is expected to press the Trump administration to ensure the safety of immigrants — and to preserve the annual distribution of 65,000 temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which are overwhelmingly used by Indians.
The immigration story for Mr. Kuchibhotla’s family seemed to be ending. His mother, Parvatha Vardhini, said she had once been “happy that one of the Kuchibhotla family went to the U.S. for a better future.” But this week, after her older son’s death, she demanded that her younger son, who is also employed in the United States, give up his job and stay in India.
“I will not allow my younger son to return to the U.S. again,” she told The Hindustan Times. “I want him and his family to return to Hyderabad for good.”
As the rites reached their conclusion, a cousin, Venu Madhav, described Mr. Kuchibhotla as “a typical immigrant American success story,” and said he and his wife had recently bought their first home.
“He considered Kansas home,” he said. “He had American friends, was part of that society.”
Mr. Madhav had already turned from the pyre, which had burst into crackling, five-foot flames. According to tradition, mourners are expected to turn their backs from the body when it begins to burn. They should be gone before they can hear the sound of the skull cracking, which is believed to signify the soul breaking free.
Follow Ellen Barry on Twitter @EllenBarryNYT.
PHOTO: Sunayana Dumala mourned on Tuesday in Hyderabad, India, near the body of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHESH KUMAR A./ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Related Articles
    • F.B.I. Investigating Kansas Shooting of Indian Men as Hate Crime
    • Who Belongs in Trump’s America?
    • After Kansas Shootings, Indians Are Wary of Coming to U.S.
    • Hate Crime Is Feared as 2 Indian Engineers Are Shot in Kansas
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: SHOOTINGS (98%); IMMIGRATION (91%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); RACE & ETHNICITY (89%); SAFETY (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (84%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); BURIAL & FUNERAL PRACTICES (78%); CREMATION (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (75%); ENGINEERING (75%); TRENDS (74%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (60%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (60%); RANKINGS (60%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Murders, Attempted Murders and Homicides (%); Funerals and Memorials (%); Hate Crimes (%); Hyderabad (India) (%); Olathe (Kan) (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (75%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (75%); ENGINEERING (75%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (70%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (70%); DAILY NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (62%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (90%); KANSAS, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: March 2, 2017


End of Document
Killing in Kansas Bar Put Victim’s Widow at Risk of Deportation
The New York Times 
September 13, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 689 words
Byline: JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
Highlight: When Sunayana Dumala’s husband was killed in a suspected hate crime in February, she lost her legal right to remain in the United States.
Body


In February, Sunayana Dumala lost her husband to a man who shouted “Get out of my country!” and unloaded a semiautomatic pistol in a Kansas bar.
Ms. Dumala’s immigration status was tied to that of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, one of two Indian-born engineers shot that day. So along with dealing with the horror of his sudden death, she also had to face the fact that the man who shot him may have managed to put her at risk of deportation.
Mr. Kuchibhotla was in the United States on an H-1B visa. Upon his death, Ms. Dumala’s residency status was terminated. And when she went to India to attend his funeral, she feared that she might not be able to re-enter the United States.
It was also unclear whether she would want to. In an emotional Facebook post shortly after the shooting, she posed a question that she said “is in every immigrant’s mind: Do we belong here?”
Her congressman, Kevin Yoder, a Republican from Kansas’ third district, was “horrified” by the shooting, and pushed President Trump to condemn it in a joint address to Congress. Upon learning of Ms. Dumala’s immigration issues, he and his staff began looking at ways to assist her.
“It would have been a real tragedy, on top of the initial tragedy she suffered, to attend her husband’s funeral in India and then be locked out of the U.S. because of it,” Mr. Yoder said in an interview on Wednesday. “This woman suffered enough. We need to fix this.”
Mr. Kuchibhotla was sharing drinks with a colleague and friend, Alok Madasani, at a favorite bar in Olathe when a man sitting nearby began to question their visa status and whether they were in the country illegally.
The man, Adam W. Purinton, was thrown out of the bar. But he returned with a firearm and began shooting, killing Mr. Kuchibhotla and injuring Mr. Madasani, along with another customer who attempted to intervene. In June, Mr. Purinton was indicted by a federal grand jury on hate crime charges.
Ms. Dumala, a developer for Intouch Solutions, a pharmaceutical marketing agency, left the United States for Hyderabad, India, at the end of February.
Mr. Yoder’s office, working on Ms. Dumala’s behalf, helped her return about a month later and obtain a 12-month employment authorization document that will grant her the time she needs to apply for her own H-1B visa. She is also applying for a U visa, which is granted to victims of some crimes.
The congressman, who has taken the hard line on immigration typical of many Republicans in the past, has used the precariousness of Ms. Dumala’s situation to argue for immigration reform. Currently, immigration law dictates that only 7 percent of the green cards issued each year can be given to residents of any one country.
Mr. Yoder noted that between 230,000 and two million Indian workers are in line for a green card, which means that they could be waiting for decades, if not longer.
“Many of us think this is an injustice, it’s discriminatory, and the system is failing people like Srinivas and Sunayana,” he said.
He also argues that the law should explicitly address people whose spouses are the targets of hate crimes.
“I think we ought to have a special exception,” he said. “You don’t get deported because your husband was murdered. They don’t come and grab you at a funeral and say, ‘Now you’ve lost your status.’”
Ms. Dumala has added her voice to the push for the measure. And the help she has received from the congressman, her and her husband’s employers, and the F.B.I. has gone part of the way toward changing her ambivalence about whether people like her can live safely in the United States.
“A lot has happened in the last few months,” she said, when asked if she still questioned whether she belonged. “And one incident does not portray what the entire country stands for, which was evident when people from different communities came forward to lend their support in the time of tragedy and grief.”
Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.
Related Articles
    • He Became a Hate Crime Victim. She Became a Widow.
    • Hate Crime Is Feared as 2 Indian Engineers Are Shot in Kansas
    • Kansas Man Indicted on Hate Crime Charges in Shooting of Indian Immigrants
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: DEATH & DYING (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); WEAPONS & ARMS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); AUTOMATIC & SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARMS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); FIREARMS (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); EMOTIONS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); GRAND JURY (60%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Murders, Attempted Murders and Homicides (%); Visas (%); Hate Crimes (%); Indian-Americans (%); Dumala, Sunayana (%); Kuchibhotla, Srinivas (d 2017) (%); Olathe (Kan) (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (50%)

Person: KEVIN YODER (77%); Dumala, Sunayana; Kuchibhotla, Srinivas (d 2017)

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (73%); KANSAS, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: September 15, 2017


End of Document
Undoing Trump's Immigration Policies
The New York Times
October 11, 2020 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SR; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 1757 words
Byline: By The Editorial Board
Body


This administration has attacked every aspect of the immigration system -- and it won't be easy to undo.
It was a kind gesture to some 6,000 Filipinos who, in their youth, had fought with American armed forces in World War II and had been granted U.S. citizenship decades later. In 2016, when the veterans were in their 80s and 90s, the Obama administration agreed to allow some of their relatives in the Philippines to come to the United States before they completed the long wait for formal admission. 
  Last August, the Trump administration announced it was ending the program.
  This gratuitous swipe at a group of old veterans is a measure of how meticulously the Trump administration has pursued the destruction of immigration in America. Through administrative orders, strict enforcement and mere threat, the White House has attacked virtually every aspect of immigration, legal and illegal.
  This transformation of the American immigration system has been perhaps the administration's boldest accomplishment, overseen with single-minded focus by Stephen Miller, a top adviser to President Trump with an affinity for white nationalism.
  A report this summer from the Migration Policy Institute outlined over 400 actions on immigration that had been enacted by a sprawling array of federal departments in the Trump era.
  The effects are clear. Between 2016 and 2019, annual net immigration into the United States fell by almost half, to about 600,000 people per year -- a level not seen since the 1980s -- according to an analysis by William H. Frey of the Brookings Institution. (Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, that number has certainly decreased even more.)
  The 2016-19 drop ''is clearly a result of Trump's restrictive immigration measures,'' Mr. Frey told the editorial board, ''including immigrant bans from selected countries, greater limits on refugees, and generating fear among other potential immigrant groups over this administration's unwelcoming policies.''
  Along with more obscure actions, like ending that Filipino veterans program, the administration has been methodical in ensuring that its most widely criticized efforts succeed.
  In the spring of 2018, as thousands of Central American families crossed the southern U.S. border to seek asylum, the Justice Department ordered the arrest of anyone entering the country without authorization. This forced the separation of hundreds of families, even the removal of infants from nursing mothers.
  To scare people from bringing their families over the border, Jeff Sessions, the attorney general at the time, said, ''We need to take away children.'' It made no difference how young they were.
  National and international outrage over this cruelty led the administration to rescind that family separation policy. So it changed tack, shutting out asylum seekers through minute attention to administrative detail, bare knuckle diplomacy and ignoring legality.
  Border control officials said they would accept asylum applications only from people who arrived at approved border crossings, even though the law says anyone can apply for asylum once in the United States. At those crossings, asylum seekers were forced to wait for days, even weeks, in long lines just for a chance to approach the border to ask for protection. The White House packed the immigration appeals board with Trump appointees, with predictable results: Rejections increased.
  Mr. Trump also used the threat of tariffs to get Mexico to crack down on undocumented Central American immigrants and to allow frustrated asylum seekers to wait on the Mexican side of the border while their cases meandered through U.S. immigration courts.
  After Mr. Trump suspended aid to El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras in March, Guatemala and Honduras agreed to accept asylum seekers who had passed through those countries on their way north, so they could either apply for asylum there or go home. (A federal appeals court blocked this arrangement, but that's effectively moot during the pandemic, since the administration has all but shut down the border under a 1944 public health law.)
  The scope of the administration's actions has been far broader than Mr. Trump implied it would be when he campaigned. He promised to bar ''rapists'' from Mexico, create ''a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States'' and save America from homicidal undocumented immigrants.
  Once in office, it was not just criminals and terrorists who drew his attention. It was also people seeking protection from the horrors of their home countries, undocumented immigrants trying to support their families and foreigners striving for a better life in the United States.
  Mr. Trump eventually achieved a version of his Muslim ban when the Supreme Court approved of severe restrictions on entry for residents of 13 countries, the majority of them with mostly Muslim populations. While the White House said one reason the ban was needed was lax security in those countries, it also has drastically scaled back the refugee program, which involves stringent vetting by American and United Nations officials. In Barack Obama's last year as president, the ceiling for refugee admissions was 110,000. For the current fiscal year, it's 15,000. Mr. Trump has made these desperate people campaign punching bags. ''Are you having a good time with your refugees?'' he said with smirk to a roaring crowd in Minnesota recently. (In fact, when a poll asked Minnesotans whether they approved of having refugees resettled in their community, 59 percent said yes, and 29 percent said no.)
  Despite Mr. Trump's promises to protect Americans from killer immigrants, Immigration and Customs Enforcement is now more than twice as likely to pick up immigrants with no criminal record beyond immigration violations, compared with the number before he took office. After being labeled the ''deporter in chief,'' Mr. Obama ordered ICE to concentrate enforcement on unauthorized immigrants who had committed crimes. Within weeks of his own inauguration, Mr. Trump eliminated any deportation priorities and made all undocumented immigrants fair game for ICE. With many cities resisting ICE's more stringent demands for cooperation, the agency has also found it easier to just pick up anyone with an existing deportation warrant.
  ''I understand when you're a criminal and you do bad things, you shouldn't be in the country,'' Helen Beristain, who voted for Mr. Trump, said when her husband, Roberto, owner of a restaurant in Granger, Ind., was ordered to be deported to Mexico in March 2017 after 20 years in the United States. But, she said, when ''you support and you help and you pay taxes and you give jobs to people, you should be able to stay.''
  Not anymore.
  While Mr. Trump promised a crackdown on illegal immigration during his presidency, he has also eagerly pursued reductions in authorized immigration.
  The administration had threatened to furlough 70 percent of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services employees, blaming the pandemic, but some of those employees said the real problem was restrictive policies and delays in visa applications that have sharply reduced revenue from the processing fees that fund the agency. At the same time, applications for permanent residency have declined since the administration announced it would adopt a rule that would prevent those considered likely to receive public benefits from becoming permanent residents. Among recent green-card recipients, 69 percent had at least one of the characteristics that would be weighed, according to the Migration Policy Institute.
  Ken Cuccinelli, the acting deputy secretary of homeland security, recently announced that the number of H-1B visas for skilled workers would be cut by one-third because of tighter criteria for who can get them. Critics said this would make American companies shift more work abroad.
  Mr. Trump also has ended ''temporary protected status'' for 400,000 people from El Salvador, Haiti, Sudan and elsewhere who have legally lived and worked in the United States for decades after being provided a haven from war or natural disaster.
  If Democrats were to take control of Congress and the White House next year, it would be fairly simple to undo some of the damage Mr. Trump has done to the nation's immigration system. The protections that Mr. Trump overturned for the Dreamers -- the thousands of people who were brought to the United States without authorization when they were young -- could be written into law, with public support. The travel ban could be overturned, and more refugees could be admitted. ICE could be directed to once again concentrate on deporting criminals. Resources could be shifted to smarter border security measures that don't rely on a physical wall.
  But rolling back other measures will be difficult.
  ''There's so much change that has happened in the last four years, there's no way a new administration could reverse things in four or even eight years,'' said Sarah Pierce, a policy analyst at the Migration Policy Institute who was a co-author of the group's July report.
  Beyond that, there could be political challenges to undoing President Trump's clamps on the border if that would invite new caravans of asylum seekers. Would Democrats reverse the public charge rule and leave themselves open to accusations of coddling newcomers?
  After undoing the cruelest and most pointless of the president's changes to the immigration system, a new administration would need to make difficult decisions about controlling the border, assessing the role that skills and family ties should play in admitting immigrants, enforcing employment laws for unauthorized immigrants and creating a pathway to citizenship for millions of those workers and their families.
  But rejecting, by law and action, the Trump administration's racism, cruelty and xenophobia would reaffirm that America is a nation of immigrants who help revitalize the country -- an ideal that most Americans support.
  With a pandemic and an economic crisis to address, immigration may not seem like a priority. Yet if it is not addressed, the immigration system Mr. Trump has erected may be in operation for years to come.
  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/10/opinion/sunday/trump-immigration-child-separations.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAATA VIA PBS ERIC GAY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (92%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (89%); VETERANS (89%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); REFUGEES (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (75%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); BORDER CONTROL (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); WORLD WAR II (72%); ARRESTS (68%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (68%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (66%); RESEARCH REPORTS (65%); CORONAVIRUSES (63%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (63%); BREASTFEEDING (60%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (60%); WHITE NATIONALISTS (52%); EPIDEMICS (50%); PANDEMICS (50%); VIRUSES (50%)

Industry: TRUMP IMMIGRATION BAN (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); JEFF SESSIONS (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%); PHILIPPINES (93%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: October 11, 2020


End of Document
Border Bill Aims at Indian Companies
The New York Times
August 7, 2010 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 496 words
Byline: By MARC LACEY
Body


PHOENIX -- Indian high-tech workers do not typically sneak into the United States through Mexico, but beefing up the Southwest border may still make it tougher for them to migrate here.
A Senate bill approved Thursday night by unanimous consent would pay for more security along the Mexico border by raising fees for companies from India that operate in the United States and hire so many Indian workers that they have been criticized for violating the spirit of American immigration law.
The $600 million spending bill would send 1,500 more Border Patrol agents, customs inspectors and other law enforcement officials to the Southwest border, finance additional aerial drones to monitor remote desert regions and build two operating bases close to the border to help reduce illegal immigration and drug smuggling.
''It's just a great package,'' Janet Napolitano, the secretary of homeland security, said in a conference call with reporters on Friday. She contends that the Obama administration has made the border more secure than ever but nonetheless hears the frustration of many local politicians, especially those in her home state, Arizona, who say that immigration is out of control.
Republicans had proposed paying for the beefed-up security by tapping into stimulus money. But Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, said his staff had come up with an alternative that would not hurt American workers: raising the visa application fees paid by any companies with more than 50 people in which more than half the work force has H-1B or L visas that are intended for skilled foreign workers.
Senate aides said four Indian companies would qualify for the significantly higher fees: Tata, Infosys, Wipro and Mahindra Satyam, all of which operate in the United States and are criticized as ''body shops'' because they provide outsourcing of Indian professionals to American companies. Large American high-tech corporations, which bring the bulk of the skilled immigrants into the United States, would not be affected since the vast majority of their work forces are made up of Americans.
India's high-tech industry reacted angrily to the proposal, with the New Delhi-based National Association of Software and Services Companies issuing a statement saying that raising the visa fees by more than $2,000 per application would violate international trade practices and unfairly focus on Indian companies. And Peter McLaughlin, an Infosys spokesman, said, ''It is unfortunate that this tax is being levied on a discriminatory basis when the need is to open markets to make companies more competitive in the global marketplace.''
But senators complained that the companies could remedy the situation by hiring more Americans. ''I'm thrilled that these companies are complaining about having to hire more Americans,'' said Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri. ''That is the whipped cream and cherry on top of this sundae.''
The House may take up the bill next week.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LABOR FORCE (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SMUGGLING (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); POLITICS (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (75%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (75%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (70%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (70%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (67%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (60%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (54%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

Company:  TECH MAHINDRA LTD (58%);  INFOSYS LTD (53%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

Ticker: TECHM (NSE) (58%); INFY (PAR) (53%); INFY (NYSE) (53%); INFY (NSE) (53%)

Industry: NAICS541690 OTHER SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL CONSULTING SERVICES (58%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (58%); SIC8748 BUSINESS CONSULTING SERVICES, NEC (58%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (58%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (64%); UNMANNED AIRCRAFT (55%); CONFERENCE CALLS (53%)

Person: JANET NAPOLITANO (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); BARACK OBAMA (57%); CLAIRE MCCASKILL (57%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (93%); MEXICO (92%)

Load-Date: August 7, 2010


End of Document
At a Funeral Pyre in India, Anger Over a Death in Kansas
The New York Times
March 1, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 695 words
Byline: By SRIRAM KARRI and ELLEN BARRY
Follow Ellen Barry on Twitter @EllenBarryNYT .
Body


HYDERABAD, India -- Just after 2 p.m. Indian Standard Time on Tuesday, the body of Srinivas Kuchibhotla, an Indian immigrant fatally shot in a bar outside Kansas City, Kan., was placed on a pyre made of logs.
Grains of rice were placed around his mouth, as per Hindu tradition, to signify his last earthly meal, and his forehead was smeared with sandalwood paste. His father poured clarified butter on his head, as a sign of purification, and used a burning stick to light the fire. 
  But before the ancient rituals could be completed, a cluster of young mourners -- mostly information technology professionals or engineers, like the dead man -- began shouting. ''Trump, down, down!'' they said. ''Down with racism! Down with hatred!''
  Here in Hyderabad, a city so immigration-minded that a particular temple deity is believed to help grant United States visas, Mr. Kuchibhotla's violent death is seen by many as a harbinger of rising anti-immigrant sentiment in the United States.
  Last Wednesday, a 51-year-old white Navy veteran confronted Mr. Kuchibhotla, 32, and another Indian patron at a bar in Olathe, Kan., questioned them belligerently about their visa status and, after being asked to leave, returned with a gun and shot them.
  ''Hate has a way of growing, and becoming a trend,'' said Kiran Kumar, a software engineer who attended the funeral, holding a handmade sign condemning hate crimes.
  On Tuesday night during his address to Congress., President Trump condemned the attack on the two men.
  Earlier in the day, the White House issued a statement that called the shooting ''an act of racially motivated hatred.''
  In the days since Mr. Kuchibhotla's death, most of India's major daily newspapers had published angry editorials over what they saw as the Trump administration's silence on the killing.
  On Tuesday, as Mr. Kuchibhotla's body was carried to the cremation ground, dozens of regional camera crews followed, their anchormen staging on-air debates on whether Indian immigrants should return home.
  India's minister of labor, Bandaru Dattatreya, attended, as did a major movie star in the Telugu language, and Chukka Ramaiah, a 91-year-old mathematics teacher who is celebrated for sending students to top-ranked Indian institutions and onward to the United States.
  ''It is heartbreaking for any teacher to see a student die, at such an age, before having lived his fullest life,'' Mr. Ramaiah said. ''How much has America lost, too, for this single act of hatred?'' After the ceremony, Mr. Dattatreya publicly recommended that Indian students speak only in English for the duration of their time in the United States, as a safety measure.
  The last rites on Tuesday coincided with the arrival of India's foreign secretary, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, in Washington. He is expected to press the Trump administration to ensure the safety of immigrants -- and to preserve the annual distribution of 65,000 temporary skilled worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which are overwhelmingly used by Indians.
  The immigration story for Mr. Kuchibhotla's family seemed to be ending. His mother, Parvatha Vardhini, said she had once been ''happy that one of the Kuchibhotla family went to the U.S. for a better future.'' But this week, after her older son's death, she demanded that her younger son, who is also employed in the United States, give up his job and stay in India.
  ''I will not allow my younger son to return to the U.S. again,'' she told The Hindustan Times. ''I want him and his family to return to Hyderabad for good.''
  As the rites reached their conclusion, a cousin, Venu Madhav, described Mr. Kuchibhotla as ''a typical immigrant American success story,'' and said he and his wife had recently bought their first home.
  ''He considered Kansas home,'' he said. ''He had American friends, was part of that society.''
  Mr. Madhav had already turned from the pyre, which had burst into crackling, five-foot flames. According to tradition, mourners are expected to turn their backs from the body when it begins to burn. They should be gone before they can hear the sound of the skull cracking, which is believed to signify the soul breaking free.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/28/world/asia/at-a-funeral-pyre-in-india-anger-over-a-shooting-in-kansas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sunayana Dumala mourned on Tuesday in Hyderabad, India, near the body of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHESH KUMAR A./ASSOCIATED PRESS)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: SHOOTINGS (98%); IMMIGRATION (91%); RACE & ETHNICITY (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (83%); BURIAL & FUNERAL PRACTICES (78%); CREMATION (78%); DEATH & DYING (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); SAFETY (77%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (75%); ENGINEERING (75%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (75%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (74%); TRENDS (74%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (69%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (63%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (60%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (60%); RANKINGS (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (75%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (75%); ENGINEERING (75%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (75%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (70%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (69%); DAILY NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (62%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (73%)

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (89%); KANSAS, USA (92%); INDIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: March 1, 2017


End of Document
Killing in Kansas Bar Put Victim's Widow at Risk of Deportation
The New York Times
September 14, 2017 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Express; Pg. 
Length: 657 words
Byline: By JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
Follow Jonah Bromwich on Twitter: @Jonesieman.
Body


In February, Sunayana Dumala lost her husband to a man who shouted ''Get out of my country!'' and unloaded a semiautomatic pistol in a Kansas bar.
Ms. Dumala's immigration status was tied to that of her husband, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, one of two Indian-born engineers shot that day. So along with dealing with the horror of his sudden death, she also had to face the fact that the man who shot him may have managed to put her at risk of deportation. 
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was in the United States on an H-1B visa. Upon his death, Ms. Dumala's residency status was terminated. And when she went to India to attend his funeral, she feared that she might not be able to re-enter the United States.
  It was also unclear whether she would want to. In an emotional Facebook post shortly after the shooting, she posed a question that she said ''is in every immigrant's mind: Do we belong here?''
  Her congressman, Kevin Yoder, a Republican from Kansas' third district, was ''horrified'' by the shooting, and pushed President Trump to condemn it in a joint address to Congress. Upon learning of Ms. Dumala's immigration issues, he and his staff began looking at ways to assist her.
  ''It would have been a real tragedy, on top of the initial tragedy she suffered, to attend her husband's funeral in India and then be locked out of the U.S. because of it,'' Mr. Yoder said in an interview on Wednesday. ''This woman suffered enough. We need to fix this.''
  Mr. Kuchibhotla was sharing drinks with a colleague and friend, Alok Madasani, at a favorite bar in Olathe when a man sitting nearby began to question their visa status and whether they were in the country illegally.
  The man, Adam W. Purinton, was thrown out of the bar. But he returned with a firearm and began shooting, killing Mr. Kuchibhotla and injuring Mr. Madasani, along with another customer who attempted to intervene. In June, Mr. Purinton was indicted by a federal grand jury on hate crime charges.
  Ms. Dumala, a developer for Intouch Solutions, a pharmaceutical marketing agency, left the United States for Hyderabad, India, at the end of February.
  Mr. Yoder's office, working on Ms. Dumala's behalf, helped her return about a month later and obtain a 12-month employment authorization document that will grant her the time she needs to apply for her own H-1B visa. She is also applying for a U visa, which is granted to victims of some crimes.
  The congressman, who has taken the hard line on immigration typical of many Republicans in the past, has used the precariousness of Ms. Dumala's situation to argue for immigration reform. Currently, immigration law dictates that only 7 percent of the green cards issued each year can be given to residents of any one country.
  Mr. Yoder noted that between 230,000 and two million Indian workers are in line for a green card, which means that they could be waiting for decades, if not longer.
  ''Many of us think this is an injustice, it's discriminatory, and the system is failing people like Srinivas and Sunayana,'' he said.
  He also argues that the law should explicitly address people whose spouses are the targets of hate crimes.
  ''I think we ought to have a special exception,'' he said. ''You don't get deported because your husband was murdered. They don't come and grab you at a funeral and say, 'Now you've lost your status.'''
  Ms. Dumala has added her voice to the push for the measure. And the help she has received from the congressman, her and her husband's employers, and the F.B.I. has gone part of the way toward changing her ambivalence about whether people like her can live safely in the United States.
  ''A lot has happened in the last few months,'' she said, when asked if she still questioned whether she belonged. ''And one incident does not portray what the entire country stands for, which was evident when people from different communities came forward to lend their support in the time of tragedy and grief.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/13/us/widow-deported-indian-kansas.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); DEATH & DYING (90%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); WEAPONS & ARMS (89%); AUTOMATIC & SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARMS (78%); FIREARMS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (77%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (72%); EMOTIONS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (66%); INDICTMENTS (64%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (61%); GRAND JURY (60%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (56%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (56%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (56%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (50%)

Person: KEVIN YODER (77%)

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (58%); KANSAS, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: September 14, 2017


End of Document
Indian-Americans Overwhelmingly Support Joe Biden, New Poll Shows
The New York Times 
October 14, 2020 Wednesday 20:32 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1089 words
Byline: Emily Schmall
Highlight: Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-American voters — but she’s not the only reason they support the Democratic ticket.
Body


Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-American voters — but she’s not the only reason they support the Democratic ticket.
CHICAGO — A large majority of Indian-Americans plan to cast ballots for the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Kamala Harris, according to a survey released Wednesday, despite elaborate overtures by the Trump White House to win their support.
The survey, by the polling firm YouGov, found that 72 percent of Indian-American voters planned to vote for Mr. Biden, with just 22 percent planning to go for President Trump.
While Indian-Americans hold a wide variety of political views, the presence on the Democratic ticket of Ms. Harris, whose mother immigrated from Chennai, India, has had a galvanizing effect on a voting bloc that could help Mr. Biden in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan.
Their potential impact on the presidential election highlights the growing importance of Indian-Americans in U.S. politics: As the second-largest immigrant group in the country, Indian-Americans are gaining influence, making political donations, vocally supporting candidates and causes and, most notably, running for office, from the school board to Congress.
“We have arrived,” said Ramesh Kapur, a Democratic Party fund-raiser.
Mr. Kapur, 72, who owns a gas processing and distributing company in Medford, Mass., and supported Ms. Harris’s 2016 Senate race and her run for the 2020 presidential nomination, said that Indian-Americans donated $3.3 million to the Biden Victory Fund at a single fund-raising event in September.
But Ms. Harris isn’t the only reason many Indian-Americans support the Democratic ticket this year, Mr. Kapur said. They are also turned off by the president’s frequent attacks on immigrants and people of color, despite standing to gain from Mr. Trump’s economic policies.
“Even though they are supposedly saving taxes, to the Indian-American community, when you get the president of the United States saying to an elected official, ‘Go home,’ that scares the hell out of us,” he said, referring to Mr. Trump’s tweet in July 2019 about a group of four minority congresswomen.
While the approximately two million Indian-American voters make up less than 1 percent of the electorate, they are voters whom both parties seek to attract. The larger Indian-American population is twice as rich as the rest of the country as a whole, and two times as likely to hold a bachelor’s degree or higher.
And at the rate the community is growing — doubling in size every decade since the 1980s — they represent an increasingly formidable force in U.S. politics.
The apparently wide support among Indian-Americans for Mr. Biden comes despite high-profile efforts by Mr. Trump and the Republicans to win their votes.
A year ago, Mr. Trump drew 50,000 people to a rally in Houston with India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, an event that organizers called “Howdy, Modi.” The prime minister, a right-wing populist whose bellicose views on two of India’s rivals, Pakistan and China, helped win his party a landslide re-election in 2019, and who has generally received support from the Indian diaspora, lauded Mr. Trump’s name as “familiar to every person on the planet.” He returned the favor in February with an even larger spectacle for Mr. Trump in India.
The rallies did win Mr. Trump some support, said M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a nonpartisan group that promotes the interests of Indians in the United States.
“Trump has invested in India, has invested in Indian-Americans with the ‘Howdy, Modi’ visit and with going to India, and it has shown results,” Mr. Rangaswami said. “The question is: Will it outweigh the Kamala factor?”
Indeed, the survey reported that 45 percent of respondents said that Ms. Harris’s nomination had made them more likely to vote, and 49 percent said they were more enthusiastic about supporting Mr. Biden. It also showed that respondents cared more about health care, the economy and the environment than U.S.-India relations.
YouGov conducted the survey as part of a research project by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Trump has also lost some favor in India, where the news media criticized him for casting doubt on the integrity of Indian government coronavirus statistics during the presidential debate last month.
Mr. Rangaswami, who attended the Houston rally and is registered as an independent, said the audience appeared to consist largely of older Indian-Americans, who he said leaned conservative and most likely voted for Mr. Trump in 2016.
That Indian-American voters lean liberal over all is partly because a younger generation, born in the United States, is far less convinced by the conservative cultural mores brought by their parents and grandparents from India, Mr. Rangaswami said.
“There’s definitely that schism in the Indian-American community,” said Raj Bhutoria, 20, a junior at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif., who has dreamed of running for office since working as a volunteer on the successful 2016 campaign of Representative Ro Khanna, Democrat of California and an Indian-American.
Mr. Khanna’s victory and Ms. Harris’s nomination show that “now being Indian is no longer a barrier to run for office or get elected,” Mr. Bhutoria said.
Despite wishing that the Democratic nominees were more progressive on some issues, Mr. Bhutoria said he was supporting them — though with perhaps less gusto than his parents, Ajay and Vinita Bhutoria, Bay Area tech entrepreneurs in their 40s who, as avowed liberals, are somewhat of an exception for their generation. They have starred in three ads supporting the Biden-Harris campaign, set to Bollywood music and featuring slogans in a variety of Indian languages.
Mr. Bhutoria cited Mr. Trump’s trade disputes with India, pressure on countries not to trade with Iran — an important source of cheap oil for India — and the suspension of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a large number of which go to Indians.
“The ‘Howdy, Modi’ event was wonderful to look at, but they were only beautiful picture moments,” he said. “Trump has not done much for India or Indians-Americans.”
PHOTO: Senator Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-Americans, a voting bloc that could help the Democratic ticket in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hilary Swift for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); POLLS & SURVEYS (91%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (89%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); FUNDRAISING (89%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); POLITICS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); ELECTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (77%); POLITICAL PARTY DONATIONS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (67%); ECONOMIC POLICY (62%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); Presidential Election of 2020 (%); Indian-Americans (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Harris, Kamala D (%); Trump, Donald J (%); India (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Race and Ethnicity (%); Voting and Voters (%); Democratic Party (%); Polls and Public Opinion (%)

Industry: MARKET RESEARCH FIRMS (76%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (94%); KAMALA HARRIS (94%); DONALD TRUMP (93%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Harris, Kamala D; Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CHENNAI, TAMIL NADU, INDIA (58%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: October 15, 2020


End of Document
Asians Flock To South Bay, Census Shows
The New York Times
March 13, 2011 Sunday
National Edition


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Bay Area ; Pg. 27A; THE BAY CITIZEN
Length: 500 words
Byline: By AARON GLANTZ
aglantz@baycitizen.org Sydney Lupkin provided research assistance.
Body


Jin Hu Jiang is part of the biggest demographic change in Silicon Valley over the past decade.
Mr. Jiang, a 29-year-old computer engineer, moved to Palo Alto from Jiangsu Province in China two years ago to do postdoctoral work at Stanford University and then decided to stay. He got an H-1B visa to work as a computer engineer at Qualcomm, the wireless company.
''This is the best place to find high-paid, high-tech work in the States,'' Mr. Jiang said as he ate lunch in the Cupertino Village mall with two co-workers, both of whom recently moved from China to take high-tech jobs in Silicon Valley.
Census figures released last week show that from 2000 to 2010, the Asian population of Santa Clara County grew to 571,000, an increase of 140,000. About 300,000 Asians live in San Jose alone.
San Francisco, by contrast, added 28,000 Asians, raising the city's total to 268,000.
''The gravitational center of the Bay Area's Asian community has moved,'' said James S. Lai, director of the ethnic studies program at Santa Clara University.
Asian immigrants ''are moving directly to particular suburbs that cater to their background,'' Mr. Lai said. They are looking for places that offer native-language schools, ethnic supermarkets and other amenities that a generation ago were available only in big cities.
This is particularly true in the South Bay, because a majority of Asian immigrants are coming to work in the tech sector, and they are both highly educated and ''from the higher end of the income scale,'' said Vivek Wadhwa, a visiting scholar at the School of Information at the University of California, Berkeley.
The Census Bureau has not yet released income data to go with the new population figures. But the American Community Survey, conducted in 2009, found that 71 percent of Santa Clara County's population growth came from ethnic Chinese and Asian Indians, whose median family incomes were $127,000 and $148,000 respectively.
Cupertino has the highest percentage of Asians in the region, 63 percent, the new figures show. In 1980, it was 91 percent white.
''There's been a tremendous change,'' said Gilbert Wong, Cupertino's 44-year-old mayor, who grew up in San Jose. ''In elementary school we used to drive up to Oakland Chinatown every Friday because it had the nearest Chinese grocery store. Now we have a Ranch 99 market right here in Cupertino.''
But new arrivals from Asia do not necessarily see Silicon Valley as their ultimate destination.
Wei Zhang, 29, a Qualcomm employee who moved to Santa Clara after attending graduate school at Georgia Tech, said he appreciated the ''nice weather'' and the fact that there were ''a lot of Asians'' in the area, but he added: ''I'd prefer to live somewhere else. The jobs are good here, but people are moving all the time for something different.''
Still, Mr. Wong is not worried about the trend's reversing.
''The Chinese and Indian governments have tried to entice these workers to go back,'' he said, ''but when they do, another group would come.''

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CENSUS (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (90%); POPULATION SIZE (89%); POPULATION ESTIMATES & PROJECTIONS (78%); POPULATION GROWTH (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (77%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); FOREIGN LANGUAGE EDUCATION (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (77%); IMMIGRATION (76%); COUNTIES (73%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (73%); ARTS & HUMANITIES EDUCATION (72%); CITY GOVERNMENT (72%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (71%); LANGUAGE SCHOOLS (70%); POLLS & SURVEYS (65%)

Company:  QUALCOMM INC (57%)

Organization: STANFORD UNIVERSITY (58%)

Ticker: QCOM (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS334220 RADIO & TELEVISION BROADCASTING & WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (57%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (77%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); SHOPPING CENTERS & MALLS (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (71%); LANGUAGE SCHOOLS (70%); GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS (67%); WIRELESS INDUSTRY (57%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (97%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (93%); SAN JOSE, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (70%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); EAST CHINA (79%); JIANGSU, CHINA (79%); CHINA (93%); ASIA (79%)

Load-Date: March 13, 2011


End of Document
Amid ‘Trump Effect’ Fear, 40% of Colleges See Dip in Foreign Applicants
The New York Times 
March 16, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1234 words
Byline: STEPHANIE SAUL
Highlight: College officials wondered if there would be a price to pay for the president’s travel ban and the anti-Muslim rhetoric. Now the first numbers are in.
Body


The president of Portland State University, Wim Wiewel, met last week with 10 prospective students in Hyderabad, India. But what started as a get-acquainted visit quickly turned into more of a counseling session, as the students expressed fears about coming to the United States this fall.
One student, who is Muslim, said his father was worried that America had an anti-Muslim attitude, Mr. Wiewel recounted. “Several others said they were concerned about the ‘Trump effect,’” he said in an email.
“I’d say the rhetoric and actual executive orders are definitely having a chilling effect,” Mr. Wiewel wrote, referring to the Trump administration’s travel ban.
Like many universities across the country, the Oregon university is getting fewer international applications.
Nearly 40 percent of colleges are reporting overall declines in applications from international students, according to a survey of 250 college and universities, released this week by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers. The biggest decline is in applications from the Middle East.
Many officials cited worries among prospective students about Trump administration immigration policies. “International student recruitment professionals report a great deal of concern from students all over the globe,” the study said.
On Wednesday, the federal judge in Hawaii who blockedthe latest version of the administration’s travel ban cited the financial harm the executive order posed to the state’s university system, which recruits students and hires faculty members from the six target countries. (Washington State officials raised similar concerns in successfully            challengingthe first travel ban.)
Graduate schools appear to be feeling the worst pinch, with nearly half reporting drops. “Our deans describe it as a chilling effect,” said Suzanne Ortega, president of the Council of Graduate Schools.
The numbers — while not yet final — are provoking anxiety in some programs that rely on international students, who bring more than $32 billion a year into the United States economy. International enrollment at American colleges has been on the rise over the past decade, and for the first time exceeded one million students last year.
Still, despite the steady increase, the movement of students from one country to another is sensitive to fluctuations tied to political and economic forces. So some officials cautioned that a “Trump effect’ is just one possible explanation for this year’s application figures. Beyond that, many schools, including New York University, the University of Southern California and Northeastern University, reported that their international numbers are up. Purdue University reported a 1.2 percent decline in graduate school applications.
Mr. Wiewel made his trip to Hyderabad not long after residents of the city held funeral services for a young Indian man who was killed in a bar in Olathe, Kan., where he worked as an engineer. The shooting is being investigated as a hate crime.
Mr. Wiewel reassured the students — all admitted to Portland State’s graduate engineering program — that his university’s environment was safe and welcoming. He was a bit surprised by their concerns, he said, because students he visited earlier in New Delhi and Bangalore had been more anxious about financing their graduate studies, apparently a reaction to India’s recent currency shortage. Other economic factors may also be involved in the application declines, Ms. Ortega said, including crude oil prices in Saudi Arabia.
Also at play: uncertainty about the future of a visa program called H-           1           B that international graduates frequently rely on to remain in the United States to work.
For several graduate schools, the Trump administration’s travel ban, which initially affected seven predominantly Muslim countries, could not have been more poorly timed. It was announced in late January as deadlines loomed for applications to some graduate programs, and it came on the heels of Mr. Trump’s virulently anti-immigrant rhetoric during the campaign.
Slumping graduate school applications can now be seen at universities ranging from giant Big Ten public universities like Ohio State and Indiana University to regional programs such as Portland State, with just over 27,000 students, including more than 1,900 international students.
At Indiana University, international applications for undergraduate programs increased 6 percent, but graduate applications for some programs are posting big drops, said David Zaret, vice president for international affairs.
Mr. Zaret said international applications to the masters program in business were down 20 percent, and down 30 percent in both the master of law program and at the School of Informatics and Computing. The university will not have problems filling the programs, but the drop might affect the overall quality of the applicant pool, he said.
Ohio State has also seen an increase in international undergraduate applications but a significant overall drop — 8.4 percent — in international applicants to its graduate programs, a university spokesman, Chris Davey, said. The biggest decline was among students from China — a fact Mr. Davey said did not support the “Trump effect” theory. In 2016, he said, there were 2,412 graduate applications from China; this year the number was down to 1,952.
“We’re inclined to say that the overarching factors that might be influencing this are probably global economic factors and it would be premature to conclude that it’s the travel ban,” Mr. Davey said. “But it certainly could be.”
Because application deadlines at several larger colleges had passed before Mr. Trump’s travel ban was announced, some universities are more worried about the “yield” — the number of students offered admission who end up enrolling, said Frances Leslie, vice provost for the graduate division at the University of California, Irvine.
Applications at Irvine are not down, but students have expressed concerned about coming to the United States, Ms. Leslie said. “We’re hearing from students, even beyond the seven countries, expressing concern,” Ms. Leslie said, referring to Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, which were singled out in the first travel ban. “This year, even when students are admitted, they may not be willing to accept the offers.”
The university will not have those numbers until April 15, a national deadline for students to make a decision.
At Portland State, where undergraduate international applications are up 4 percent but international graduate applications are down 15 percent, the vice provost for international affairs, Margaret Everett, said she had heard recently from a Chinese student who canceled his application, citing the political climate.
“Obviously we’re concerned about the climate and the rhetoric and the administration policies and travel ban,” Ms. Everett said.
PHOTOS: John Gorgan chatted this week with a fellow student, Fatima Alkharaz, a Libyan, on the campus of Portland State University in Oregon.; Graduate engineering students from India at Portland State. The college has worked to reassure foreign students. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LEAH NASH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • ‘Is It Safe?’ Foreign Students Consider College in Donald Trump’s U.S.
    • After Visa Ban, Hints of Hidden Tension on Mississippi Campus
    • 2 Federal Judges Rule Against Trump’s Latest Travel Ban
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (94%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (79%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (74%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (60%); ENGINEERING (60%); JUDGES (51%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Colleges and Universities (%); Visas (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Refugees and Displaced Persons (%)

Industry: COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (91%); TRAVEL BANS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (79%); ENGINEERING (60%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: PORTLAND, OR, USA (92%); HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (90%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); HAWAII, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); OREGON, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

Load-Date: March 18, 2017


End of Document
Microsoft C.E.O. Says Tech’s Progress on Gender Equality Is ‘Not Sufficient’
The New York Times 
September 26, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 788 words
Byline: TIFFANY HSU
Highlight: Satya Nadella said Silicon Valley had “a significant distance to cover” in offering equal opportunities for female workers.
Body


More women are working in Silicon Valley, showing the tech industry has made progress that is “good, but not sufficient,” Satya Nadella, the chief executive of Microsoft, said Tuesday.
“We always had equal pay for equal work, but it’s more about equal opportunity for equal work,” Mr. Nadella said at a TimesTalks event hosted by The New York Times. “In tech, we do have a significant distance to cover.”
Mr. Nadella’s remarks — at a time when Silicon Valley is roiled by allegations of a pervasive culture of sexism at companies such as Google,            Uber and            SoFi — came from personal experience. Mr. Nadella, the third chief executive in Microsoft’s 42-year history, has had to deal with the backlash of a misstep on gender issues.
In 2014, shortly after taking over the chief executive position, he suggested at a conference that women should not push for pay raises and instead wait to be recognized for their work. He soon apologized. On Tuesday, he said that opinion had been “completely nonsensical” and reflected how little he actually understood the issue.
“I was answering a question literally using my own personal experience without understanding the broader context of the question, which frankly is unacceptable,” he said. “My job is about creating a system that allows women to participate, to feel free to ask for a raise, to expect to be recognized for their progress — I had not internalized how the system was not working.”
Mr. Nadella, who joined Microsoft in 1992, touched on a range of topics during the talk in Manhattan, discussing privacy, gaming, immigration and the effect of artificial intelligence on jobs.
Mr. Nadella said that immigrants — and not just those with highly valued skills — help improve competition. He said he himself had benefited from “enlightened” immigration policy that allowed him to study and work in the United States.
“That’s what makes America exceptional, both being the place where the talent comes and also being the beacon of hope for the people who need hope,” said Mr. Nadella, who early in his employment at Microsoft had given up his green card for a temporary H-1B work visa that allowed him to bring his wife, Anu, to the United States from India.
Like many tech companies, Microsoft has voiced opposition to President Trump’s decision to begin rolling back the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals immigration policy. Microsoft said it would cover the legal costs for any worker threatened with deportation.
Mr. Nadella also addressed a series of business flops — including a disastrous acquisition of the phone maker Nokia and Microsoft’s late start in development of cloud computing services — that pushed it out of the top tier of white-hot tech companies like Facebook, Apple and Google.
But recently, Microsoft has regained traction, making some of the most innovative personal computers in the industry, experimenting with            artificial intelligence and augmented reality and testing            autonomous vehicles. Microsoft’s share price has more than doubled during Mr. Nadella’s tenure as chief executive.
But there is still room to grow. Revenue from Microsoft’s Azure cloud service soared 97 percent in its fourth quarter, but the business still lags behind the offering of its nearby rival, Amazon.
Mr. Nadella said that companies cannot expect to “hit every trend or catch every wave,” noting that Microsoft faced “a new existential threat” every five years throughout its history. He said that while “zero sum competition” exists in the industry, he also values partnerships.
Amazon and Microsoft, based a short drive apart in Washington State, compete for both talent and business. But the two companies recently paired up to integrate Amazon’s Alexa voice-controlled digital assistant with its Microsoft counterpart Cortana.
“I do not view it primarily through a competitive lens — technology today is much more pervasive, and the top five companies by market cap are all very different,” he said. “The worst mistake I can make is to assume that we should do what they’re doing and not be true to our identity.”
Mr. Nadella is promoting his new autobiography, “Hit Refresh,” which went on sale on Tuesday.
PHOTO: Satya Nadella, the chief executive of Microsoft since 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE COHEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Tech Firms Add $300 Million to Trump Administration’s Computer Science Push
    • How Microsoft Has Become the Surprise Innovator in PCs
    • Microsoft to Cut Up to 4,000 Sales and Marketing Jobs
    • Democrats Begin Legal Assault on Trump’s Move to End ‘Dreamer’ Program
    • To Close Digital Divide, Microsoft to Harness Unused Television Channels
    • In Ransomware Attack, Where Does Microsoft’s Responsibility Lie?
    • ‘Cortana, Open Alexa,’ Amazon Says. And Microsoft Agrees.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: GENDER EQUALITY (91%); WOMEN WORKERS (91%); EQUAL PAY (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (90%); WAGE DISCRIMINATION (90%); WOMEN (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (78%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); DEPORTATION (73%); TRENDS & EVENTS (71%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Artificial Intelligence (%); Microsoft Corp (%); Nadella, Satya (%)

Ticker: Microsoft Corp

Industry: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (78%); CLOUD COMPUTING (76%); CONSUMER COMPUTING PRODUCTS (75%); AUGMENTED REALITY (73%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS MFG (63%); PERSONAL COMPUTERS (60%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT MFG (60%); AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES (50%)

Person: SATYA NADELLA (94%); Nadella, Satya

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: October 11, 2017


End of Document
Indian-Americans Overwhelmingly Support Joe Biden, New Poll Shows
The New York Times
October 14, 2020 Wednesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk
Length: 1059 words
Byline: By Emily Schmall
Body


Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-American voters -- but she's not the only reason they support the Democratic ticket.
CHICAGO -- A large majority of Indian-Americans plan to cast ballots for the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Kamala Harris, according to a survey released Wednesday, despite elaborate overtures by the Trump White House to win their support. 
  The survey, by the polling firm YouGov, found that 72 percent of Indian-American voters planned to vote for Mr. Biden, with just 22 percent planning to go for President Trump.
  While Indian-Americans hold a wide variety of political views, the presence on the Democratic ticket of Ms. Harris, whose mother immigrated from Chennai, India, has had a galvanizing effect on a voting bloc that could help Mr. Biden in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan.
  Their potential impact on the presidential election highlights the growing importance of Indian-Americans in U.S. politics: As the second-largest immigrant group in the country, Indian-Americans are gaining influence, making political donations, vocally supporting candidates and causes and, most notably, running for office, from the school board to Congress.
  ''We have arrived,'' said Ramesh Kapur, a Democratic Party fund-raiser.
  Mr. Kapur, 72, who owns a gas processing and distributing company in Medford, Mass., and supported Ms. Harris's 2016 Senate race and her run for the 2020 presidential nomination, said that Indian-Americans donated $3.3 million to the Biden Victory Fund at a single fund-raising event he organized in September.
  But Ms. Harris isn't the only reason many Indian-Americans support the Democratic ticket this year, Mr. Kapur said. They are also turned off by the president's frequent attacks on immigrants and people of color, despite standing to gain from Mr. Trump's economic policies.
  ''Even though they are supposedly saving taxes, to the Indian-American community, when you get the president of the United States saying to an elected official, 'Go home,' that scares the hell out of us,'' he said, referring to Mr. Trump's tweet in July 2019 about a group of four minority congresswomen.
  While the approximately two million Indian-American voters comprise less than 1 percent of the electorate, they are voters who both parties seek to attract. The larger Indian-American population is twice as rich as the rest of the country as a whole, and two times as likely to hold a bachelor's degree or higher.
  And at the rate the community is growing -- doubling in size every decade since the 1980s -- they represent an increasingly formidable force in U.S. politics.
  The apparently wide support among Indian-Americans for Mr. Biden comes despite high-profile efforts by Mr. Trump and the Republicans to win their votes.
  A year ago, Mr. Trump drew 50,000 people to a rally in Houston with India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, an event that organizers called ''Howdy, Modi.'' The prime minister, a right-wing populist whose bellicose views on two of India's rivals, Pakistan and China, helped win his party a landslide re-election in 2019, and who has generally received support from the Indian diaspora, lauded Mr. Trump's name as ''familiar to every person on the planet.'' He returned the favor in February with an even larger spectacle for Mr. Trump in India.
  The rallies did win Mr. Trump some support, said M.R. Rangaswami, the founder of Indiaspora, a nonpartisan group that promotes the interests of Indians in the United States.
  ''Trump has invested in India, has invested in Indian-Americans with the 'Howdy, Modi' visit and with going to India, and it has shown results,'' Mr. Rangaswami said. ''The question is: Will it outweigh the Kamala factor?''
  Indeed, the survey reported that 45 percent of respondents said that Ms. Harris's nomination had made them more likely to vote, and 49 percent said they were more enthusiastic about supporting Mr. Biden. It also showed that respondents cared more about health care, the economy and the environment than U.S.-India relations.
  YouGov conducted the survey as part of a research project by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania.
  Mr. Trump has also lost some favor in India, where the news media criticized him for casting doubt on the integrity of Indian government coronavirus statistics during the presidential debate last month.
  Mr. Rangaswami, who attended the Houston rally and is registered as an independent, said the audience appeared to consist largely of older Indian-Americans, who he said leaned conservative and most likely voted for Mr. Trump in 2016.
  That Indian-American voters lean liberal over all is partly because a younger generation, born in the United States, is far less convinced by the conservative cultural mores brought by their parents and grandparents from India, Mr. Rangaswami said.
  ''There's definitely that schism in the Indian-American community,'' said Raj Bhutoria, 20, a junior at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif., who has dreamed of running for office since working as a volunteer on the successful 2016 campaign of Representative Ro Khanna, Democrat of California and an Indian-American.
  Mr. Khanna's victory and Ms. Harris's nomination show that ''now being Indian is no longer a barrier to run for office or get elected,'' Mr. Bhutoria said.
  Despite wishing that the Democratic nominees were more progressive on some issues, Mr. Bhutoria said he was supporting them -- though with perhaps less gusto than his parents, Ajay and Vinita Bhutoria, Bay Area tech entrepreneurs in their 40s who, as avowed liberals, are somewhat of an exception for their generation. They have starred in three ads supporting the Biden-Harris campaign, set to Bollywood music and featuring slogans in a variety of Indian languages.
  Mr. Bhutoria cited Mr. Trump's trade disputes with India, pressure on countries not to trade with Iran -- an important source of cheap oil for India -- and the suspension of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a large number of which go to Indians.
  ''The 'Howdy, Modi' event was wonderful to look at, but they were only beautiful picture moments,'' he said. ''Trump has not done much for India or Indians-Americans.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/14/us/politics/biden-harris-indian-americans.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Senator Kamala Harris has had a galvanizing effect on Indian-Americans, a voting bloc that could help the Democratic ticket in battleground states like Pennsylvania, Florida and Michigan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hilary Swift for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); POLLS & SURVEYS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (89%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); FUNDRAISING (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING (88%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); MINORITY GROUPS (74%); POLITICAL PARTY DONATIONS (71%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (67%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (66%); ECONOMIC POLICY (61%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%)

Industry: MARKET RESEARCH FIRMS (76%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); KAMALA HARRIS (92%); DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: CHENNAI, TAMIL NADU, INDIA (58%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: October 14, 2020


End of Document
Outsourcers Are Criticized On Visa Use
The New York Times
April 1, 2011 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 688 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Major outsourcing companies from India have been the biggest recipients of visas in recent years under a program intended to allow American companies to bring highly skilled foreign workers temporarily to the United States, an immigration scholar testified Thursday before a House of Representatives judiciary panel.
Loopholes in the visa program have made it easy for the outsourcers ''to bring in cheaper foreign workers, with ordinary skills, who directly substitute for, rather than complement, workers in America,'' the scholar, Ronil Hira, a professor at Rochester Institute of Technology who has studied the program, told the House Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement.
Four of the five biggest users of the program from 2007 to 2009 were Indian outsourcing companies: Infosys, Wipro, Mahindra Satyam and Tata, Mr. Hira said. Microsoft was the only company with headquarters in the United States among the top five users, he said. Among them, the Indian companies sent 22,766 workers to the United States on temporary visas during the two deepest years of the recession.
The hearing marked a new round in a rancorous tug of war over the visas, known as H-1B visas. Granted to foreign workers with at least a bachelor's degree to work in the United States for up to three years, they have been used by computer companies to bring in technology experts.
American companies are requesting an increase in the annual national limit of 65,000 temporary visas, saying it is too low and inflexible to meet their needs for engineers and scientists during unpredictable variations in the economy. But numerous cases have come to light of American workers who were ousted from jobs and replaced by workers from Indian outsourcing companies, often at lower wages.
As a measure of the frustration among American technology businesses and workers, a representative from an engineers' association urged lawmakers to set aside the H-1B debate entirely and to focus instead on providing permanent residence visas, known as green cards, to foreign students graduating with advanced degrees in science and mathematics from American universities.
''We are asking this subcommittee to change the subject, from H-1B to green cards,'' said the representative, Bruce Morrison of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. He urged the legislators to change the law quickly to make green cards available to students who will get their degrees in June.
His plea was supported in a letter from the Semiconductor Industry Association, which represents many large technology employers. Thousands of foreign students who get advanced science degrees in the United States do not remain because permanent work visas are not available.
Donald Neufeld, a Citizenship and Immigration Services official, testified that auditors had found fraud in about 7 percent of visa petitions, down from 21 percent in 2008. But Mr. Hira said that because of low wage requirements in the program, employers were using it to legally hire foreign workers at significantly lower pay than Americans.
Brendan Kavanagh, who runs a small technology consulting company in Miami Lakes, Fla., said that he had experienced the competition directly, after his contract with a major pharmaceutical company in Illinois was abruptly terminated last September. He was replaced by three Wipro employees on temporary visas, he said in an interview.
Mr. Kavanagh, who attended the hearing to press his case with lawmakers, said that he had been hired by the company to overhaul a major software system, and that many of the workers he managed were Indians with H-1B visas. ''They absolutely misrepresented their skills,'' he said. ''They are working with very critical software, and they don't understand the nature of it -- these are patients' lives.''
He said the time he took to train the temporary workers had slowed the project and led to disputes with the company, which finally terminated his contract. He said he could not name the company because of a contractual confidentiality clause.
''Employers are using these visas to give away our knowledge,'' Mr. Kavanagh said.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); OUTSOURCING (90%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (89%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (77%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (75%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (75%); PUBLIC POLICY (75%); RECESSION (72%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (72%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (70%); ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (62%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (90%);  INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS INC (63%);  TECH MAHINDRA LTD (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (56%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (90%); INFY (NYSE) (90%); INFY (NSE) (90%); TECHM (NSE) (58%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (90%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (90%); NAICS541690 OTHER SCIENTIFIC & TECHNICAL CONSULTING SERVICES (58%); SIC8748 BUSINESS CONSULTING SERVICES, NEC (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); ELECTRONICS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (77%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (75%); ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY REGULATION & POLICY (75%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (70%); ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (69%); SEMICONDUCTORS (65%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 1, 2011


End of Document
In a Survey, 40% of Colleges Report a Drop in Foreign Applicants
The New York Times
March 17, 2017 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1162 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE SAUL
Body


The president of Portland State University, Wim Wiewel, met last week with 10 prospective students in Hyderabad, India. But what started as a get-acquainted visit quickly turned into more of a counseling session, as the students expressed fears about coming to the United States this fall.
One student, who is Muslim, said his father was worried that America had an anti-Muslim attitude, Mr. Wiewel recounted. ''Several others said they were concerned about the 'Trump effect,''' he said in an email. 
  ''I'd say the rhetoric and actual executive orders are definitely having a chilling effect,'' Mr. Wiewel wrote, referring to the Trump administration's travel ban.
  Like many universities across the country, the Oregon university is getting fewer international applications.
  Nearly 40 percent of colleges are reporting overall declines in applications from international students, according to a survey of 250 college and universities, released this week by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers. The biggest decline is in applications from the Middle East.
  Many officials cited worries among prospective students about Trump administration immigration policies. ''International student recruitment professionals report a great deal of concern from students all over the globe,'' the study said.
  On Wednesday, the federal judge in Hawaii who blocked the latest version of the administration's travel ban cited the financial harm the executive order posed to the state's university system, which recruits students and hires faculty members from the six target countries. (Washington State officials raised similar concerns in successfully challenging the first travel ban.)
  Graduate schools appear to be feeling the worst pinch, with nearly half reporting drops. ''Our deans describe it as a chilling effect,'' said Suzanne Ortega, president of the Council of Graduate Schools.
  The numbers -- while not yet final -- are provoking anxiety in some programs that rely on international students, who bring more than $32 billion a year into the United States economy. International enrollment at American colleges has been on the rise over the past decade, and for the first time exceeded  one million students last year.
  Still, despite the steady increase, the movement of students from one country to another is sensitive to fluctuations tied to political and economic forces. So some officials cautioned that a ''Trump effect' is just one possible explanation for this year's application figures. Beyond that, many schools, including New York University, the University of Southern California and Northeastern University, reported that their international numbers are up. Purdue University reported a 1.2 percent decline in graduate school applications.
  Mr. Wiewel made his trip to Hyderabad not long after residents of the city held funeral services for a young Indian man who was killed in a bar in Olathe, Kan., where he worked as an engineer. The shooting is being investigated as a hate crime.
  Mr. Wiewel reassured the students -- all admitted to Portland State's graduate engineering program -- that his university's environment was safe and welcoming. He was a bit surprised by their concerns, he said, because students he visited earlier in New Delhi and Bangalore had been more anxious about financing their graduate studies, apparently a reaction to India's recent currency shortage. Other economic factors may also be involved in the application declines, Ms. Ortega said, including crude oil prices in Saudi Arabia.
  Also at play: uncertainty about the future of a visa program called H-1B that international graduates frequently rely on to remain in the United States to work.
  For several graduate schools, the Trump administration's travel ban, which initially affected seven predominantly Muslim countries, could not have been more poorly timed. It was announced in late January as deadlines loomed for applications to some graduate programs, and it came on the heels of Mr. Trump's virulently anti-immigrant rhetoric during the campaign.
  Slumping graduate school applications can now be seen at universities ranging from giant Big Ten public universities like Ohio State and Indiana University to regional programs such as Portland State, with just over 27,000 students, including more than 1,900 international students.
  At Indiana University, international applications for undergraduate programs increased 6 percent, but graduate applications for some programs are posting big drops, said David Zaret, vice president for international affairs.
  Mr. Zaret said international applications to the masters program in business were down 20 percent, and down 30 percent in both the master of law program and at the School of Informatics and Computing. The university will not have problems filling the programs, but the drop might affect the overall quality of the applicant pool, he said.
  Ohio State has also seen an increase in international undergraduate applications but a significant overall drop -- 8.4 percent -- in international applicants to its graduate programs, a university spokesman, Chris Davey, said. The biggest decline was among students from China -- a fact Mr. Davey said did not support the ''Trump effect'' theory. In 2016, he said, there were 2,412 graduate applications from China; this year the number was down to 1,952.
  ''We're inclined to say that the overarching factors that might be influencing this are probably global economic factors and it would be premature to conclude that it's the travel ban,'' Mr. Davey said. ''But it certainly could be.''
  Because application deadlines at several larger colleges had passed before Mr. Trump's travel ban was announced, some universities are more worried about the ''yield'' -- the number of students offered admission who end up enrolling, said Frances Leslie, vice provost for the graduate division at the University of California, Irvine.
  Applications at Irvine are not down, but students have expressed concerned about coming to the United States, Ms. Leslie said. ''We're hearing from students, even beyond the seven countries, expressing concern,'' Ms. Leslie said, referring to Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen, which were singled out in the first travel ban. ''This year, even when students are admitted, they may not be willing to accept the offers.''
  The university will not have those numbers until April 15, a national deadline for students to make a decision.
  At Portland State, where undergraduate international applications are up 4 percent but international graduate applications are down 15 percent, the vice provost for international affairs, Margaret Everett, said she had heard recently from a Chinese student who canceled his application, citing the political climate.
  ''Obviously we're concerned about the climate and the rhetoric and the administration policies and travel ban,'' Ms. Everett said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/16/us/international-students-us-colleges-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: John Gorgan chatted this week with a fellow student, Fatima Alkharaz, a Libyan, on the campus of Portland State University in Oregon.
 Graduate engineering students from India at Portland State. The college has worked to reassure foreign students. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY LEAH NASH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); POLLS & SURVEYS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); IMMIGRATION (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (74%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (73%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION (72%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (70%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); JUDGES (51%)

Organization: AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF COLLEGIATE REGISTRARS & ADMISSIONS OFFICERS (56%)

Industry: COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); TRAVEL BANS (88%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: HYDERABAD, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA (90%); PORTLAND, OR, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); HAWAII, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); OREGON, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

Load-Date: March 17, 2017


End of Document
Silicon Valley Still Has Far to Go on Gender Equality, Microsoft C.E.O. Says
The New York Times
September 27, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6
Length: 703 words
Byline: By TIFFANY HSU
Body


More women are working in Silicon Valley, showing the tech industry has made progress that is ''good, but not sufficient,'' Satya Nadella, the chief executive of Microsoft, said Tuesday.
''We always had equal pay for equal work, but it's more about equal opportunity for equal work,'' Mr. Nadella said at a TimesTalks event hosted by The New York Times. ''In tech, we do have a significant distance to cover.'' 
  Mr. Nadella's remarks -- at a time when Silicon Valley is roiled by allegations of a pervasive culture of sexism at companies such as Google, Uber and SoFi -- came from personal experience. Mr. Nadella, the third chief executive in Microsoft's 42-year history, has had to deal with the backlash of a misstep on gender issues.
  In 2014, shortly after taking over the chief executive position, he suggested at a conference that women should not push for pay raises and instead wait to be recognized for their work. He soon apologized. On Tuesday, he said that opinion had been ''completely nonsensical'' and reflected how little he actually understood the issue.
  ''I was answering a question literally using my own personal experience without understanding the broader context of the question, which frankly is unacceptable,'' he said. ''My job is about creating a system that allows women to participate, to feel free to ask for a raise, to expect to be recognized for their progress -- I had not internalized how the system was not working.''
  Mr. Nadella, who joined Microsoft in 1992, touched on a range of topics during the talk in Manhattan, discussing privacy, gaming, immigration and the effect of artificial intelligence on jobs.
  Mr. Nadella said that immigrants -- and not just those with highly valued skills -- help improve competition. He said he himself had benefited from ''enlightened'' immigration policy that allowed him to study and work in the United States.
  ''That's what makes America exceptional, both being the place where the talent comes and also being the beacon of hope for the people who need hope,'' said Mr. Nadella, who early in his employment at Microsoft had given up his green card for a temporary H-1B work visa that allowed him to bring his wife, Anu, to the United States from India.
  Like many tech companies, Microsoft has voiced opposition to President Trump's decision to begin rolling back the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals immigration policy. Microsoft said it would cover the legal costs for any worker threatened with deportation.
  Mr. Nadella also addressed a series of business flops -- including a disastrous acquisition of the phone maker Nokia and Microsoft's late start in development of cloud computing services -- that pushed it out of the top tier of white-hot tech companies like Facebook, Apple and Google.
  But recently, Microsoft has regained traction, making some of the most innovative personal computers in the industry, experimenting with artificial intelligence and augmented reality and testing autonomous vehicles. Microsoft's share price has more than doubled during Mr. Nadella's tenure as chief executive.
  But there is still room to grow. Revenue from Microsoft's Azure cloud service soared 97 percent in its fourth quarter, but the business still lags behind the offering of its nearby rival, Amazon.
  Mr. Nadella said that companies cannot expect to ''hit every trend or catch every wave,'' noting that Microsoft faced ''a new existential threat'' every five years throughout its history. He said that while ''zero sum competition'' exists in the industry, he also values partnerships.
  Amazon and Microsoft, based a short drive apart in Washington State, compete for both talent and business. But the two companies recently paired up to integrate Amazon's Alexa voice-controlled digital assistant with its Microsoft counterpart Cortana.
  ''I do not view it primarily through a competitive lens -- technology today is much more pervasive, and the top five companies by market cap are all very different,'' he said. ''The worst mistake I can make is to assume that we should do what they're doing and not be true to our identity.''
  Mr. Nadella is promoting his new autobiography, ''Hit Refresh,'' which went on sale on Tuesday.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/26/business/satya-nadella-microsoft-gender-equality.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Satya Nadella, the chief executive of Microsoft since 2014. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MIKE COHEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GENDER EQUALITY (91%); EXECUTIVES (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (90%); WOMEN (90%); WOMEN WORKERS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); IMMIGRATION (88%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (85%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (85%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); EQUAL PAY (78%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (77%); WAGE DISCRIMINATION (77%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); TRENDS & EVENTS (71%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (67%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (67%); DEPORTATION (62%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (50%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (90%);  GOOGLE INC (57%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (90%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (90%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (90%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (85%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (74%); CLOUD COMPUTING (71%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS MFG (62%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT MFG (60%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (50%)

Person: SATYA NADELLA (79%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (53%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: September 27, 2017


End of Document
Justice Dept. Suit Says Facebook Discriminates Against U.S. Workers
The New York Times 
December 3, 2020 Thursday 15:58 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1057 words
Byline: Cecilia Kang and Mike Isaac
Highlight: The complaint, which targets the company’s hiring of immigrants on temporary visas, opens a new front in Washington’s battle against Big Tech.
Body


The complaint, which targets the company’s hiring of immigrants on temporary visas, opens a new front in Washington’s battle against Big Tech.
WASHINGTON — The Justice Department sued Facebook on Thursday, accusing it of being un-American by favoring foreign workers with visas over those from the United States, in a new push against tech companies in the waning days of the Trump administration.
In the complaint, the department’s civil rights division said Facebook “refused to recruit, consider or hire qualified and available U.S. workers” for more than 2,600 positions, with an average salary of $156,000. Those jobs instead went to immigrant visa holders, according to the complaint.
The action followed a two-year investigation into whether Facebook intentionally favored so-called H1-B visa and other temporary immigrant workers over U.S. workers, the Justice Department said.
“Our message to workers is clear: If companies deny employment opportunities by illegally preferring temporary visa holders, the Department of Justice will hold them accountable,” said Eric S. Dreiband, the assistant attorney general for the civil rights division. “Our message to all employers — including those in the technology sector — is clear: You cannot illegally prefer to recruit, consider or hire temporary visa holders over U.S. workers.”
Andy Stone, a Facebook spokesman, said, “Facebook has been cooperating with the D.O.J. in its review of this issue, and while we dispute the allegations in the complaint, we cannot comment further on pending litigation.”
Bipartisan anger in Washington has mounted in recent years against Facebook, Google, Amazon and Apple — some of the world’s most valuable companies — for data privacy abuses, the spread of disinformation and other toxic content on their platforms, and complaints of anticompetitive practices that have harmed consumers and small businesses.
For months, regulators and lawmakers have homed in on Facebook for possible monopoly violations. The Federal Trade Commission and dozens of states are preparing antitrust lawsuits against the social network for maintaining its power through mergers of nascent competitors, such as Instagram and WhatsApp. They are expected to announce plans for legal action soon, people briefed on the cases have said.
The discrimination suit, which goes before an administrative law judge, opens a different front in Washington’s battle against Big Tech. Although President Trump has jabbed at the companies as recently as this week, when he threatened to revoke speech liability protections for internet platforms like Facebook and Twitter, it is the first time the administration has brought legal action claiming immigrant employment bias.
Skilled-worker visas in the technology industry have been a focus of debate for a decade. Facebook, Google, Microsoft, IBM and other companies have lobbied for years to expand H1-B visas, arguing the importance of getting the best engineers from overseas, particularly from China and India. Critics have called the visa program a crutch for tech companies to overlook U.S.-born talent and lure foreign workers at lower wages.
Mr. Trump has been a vocal critic of temporary worker visas. In October, his administration announced new rules for the H1-B program, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants.
The Justice Department has rarely sued tech companies on the issue, though other agencies have accused the firms of racial or gender bias. In 2016, the Labor Department sued the data firm Palantir, alleging bias against Asians. The Labor Department separately sued Google to reveal data on hiring based on gender, race, religion and sexual orientation.
According to its complaint, the Justice Department found that between Jan. 1 and Sept. 18 last year, Facebook routinely put H1-B and other immigrant temporary workers on a track for permanent employment that was not available to U.S. citizens. Facebook also used less effective methods to advertise jobs to U.S. workers, including declining to promote the positions on Facebook.com/careers, the department said.
The hiring spotlighted by the complaint made up just 0.5 percent of Facebook’s 50,000 employees. But the Justice Department said Facebook had violated federal labor laws that require employers to make permanent employment opportunities as easily available to U.S. workers as they are to foreign visa holders.
“Facebook’s discriminatory recruitment and hiring practice is routine, ongoing and widespread,” the complaint said.
Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, has for years made fighting for immigrants’ rights to work in the U.S. tech industry a pet issue. In 2013, he and several friends created Fwd.us, a nonprofit group that pushed for an overhaul of immigration laws and stumped for easing the immigration process for tech workers.
The issue has been a source of friction between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Trump. In 2015, leaders at Fwd.us chafed at Mr. Trump’s immigration proposals, which would have restricted H-1B visas for skilled, foreign-born employees. They claimed that the plan would “radically restrict” paths to the United States for immigrant tech workers.
When Mr. Trump signed an executive order in 2017 limiting immigration from majority-Muslim countries, Mr. Zuckerberg spoke out against it.
“We need to keep this country safe, but we should do that by focusing on people who actually pose a threat,” he said in a post to his Facebook page. “We should also keep our doors open to refugees and those who need help. That’s who we are.”
Kim Clarke, a lawyer at Varnum who advises employers on immigration and labor issues, said the Justice Department suit could have a chilling effect on tech hiring.
“In the long run, if broader tech companies can’t hire the skilled talent on which they rely, their competitive positions will be hindered,” Ms. Clarke said. “The trickle-down effect of this action could impact even smaller employers that hire only a handful of foreign workers.”
Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.
PHOTO: Outside the headquarters of Facebook, which the Justice Department accused of favoring immigrants over Americans when hiring. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Henry for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); TECHNOLOGY (90%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (89%); LITIGATION (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); SOCIAL MEDIA (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (79%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES (78%); ANTITRUST LITIGATION (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JOINT VENTURES, MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS LAW (78%); JUDGES (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (78%); RESTRAINT OF TRADE (78%); SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); UNFAIR COMPETITION (78%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (76%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (73%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (73%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); AGENCY ADJUDICATION (72%); BIPARTISANSHIP (70%); ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE (69%); CONSUMERS (67%); TRADE PRACTICES & UNFAIR COMPETITION LAW (67%); DISINFORMATION & MISINFORMATION (63%); LOBBYING (62%); Foreign Workers (%); Social Media (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Workplace Hazards and Violations (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Visas (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Suits and Litigation (Civil) (%); Facebook Inc (%); Justice Department (%); Zuckerberg, Mark E (%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (90%); GOOGLE LLC (54%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION (83%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (90%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); BIG TECH (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOCIAL MEDIA (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); DATA PRIVACY (63%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (63%)

Person: MARK ZUCKERBERG (90%); Zuckerberg, Mark E

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: October 19, 2021


End of Document
Return of Islamic College Raises New Questions
The New York Times
May 29, 2011 Sunday
National Edition


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Chicago ; Pg. 27A; CHICAGO NEWS COOPERATIVE
Length: 1137 words
Byline: By DAVID LEPESKA
Body


The American Islamic College, closed since 2004 when the state revoked its operating authority, is expected early next month to win approval to reopen.
Supporters see the opening of the Chicago college, founded in 1981 in the Lakeview neighborhood, as an important step for Islamic instruction in the United States. But its detractors point to the college's ties to a secretive and far-reaching international movement that has been accused of Islamism in some countries and of an overuse of non-immigrant work visas to hire foreign teachers in its schools in the United States.
The movement, led by Fetullah Gulen, a Turkish religious leader living in self-imposed exile in rural Pennsylvania, supports scores of charter schools that have gained a reputation for academic achievement and a commitment to spreading Turkish language and culture.
Yet the Gulen schools have caused widespread concern about possible manipulation of immigration laws and misallocation of taxpayer dollars. Mr. Gulen, an extremely wealthy and well-connected Turkish spiritual and political leader, fled Turkey amid charges of plotting to overthrow the secular government. He was acquitted of all charges in 2006.
The college would become the second Islamic educational institution in the country to offer college-level credit. For Muslims in the area, it would be a rejoinder to those who depict followers of Islam as prone to extremism.
''It looks like a resurrection of the college, which is great,'' said Zaher Sahloul, head of the Council of Islamic Organizations of Greater Chicago. ''It's very important to have an institution of higher learning run by the Muslim community.''
Top officials at American Islamic College have been linked to Mr. Gulen's movement. In a cable obtained by Wikileaks, the United States' former ambassador to Turkey characterized the Gulen movement as a potentially destabilizing influence in Turkey that more secular Turks see as an effort to bring about an Islamic state.
The Gulen movement, called Hizmet (a Turkish word meaning ''service''), promotes public service and education and oversees research institutes, universities, media outlets and one of Turkey's largest banks. The movement seeks to spread Gulen's influence internationally through an informal network of 1,000 schools in 130 countries.
Hizmet operates more than 120 publicly financed charter schools in 25 states, in addition to a handful of private schools, like the Science Academy of Chicago, run by Niagara Educational Services, a Mount Prospect firm associated with the Gulen movement. Like many of the movement's American schools, the Science Academy focuses on math and science.
Administrators of the schools often deny any official connection to the movement, which has no formal organization or official membership but operates through a network of followers, according to Hakan Yavuz, a political science professor at the University of Utah and co-editor of a 2003 book on the organization.
''It's safe to assume that A.I.C. will be influenced by the Gulen movement,'' mainly through the selection of the college's instructors and administrative staff, Mr. Yavuz said.
''It makes sense for them to hire people from the Gulen community,'' he said, ''as they have much more knowledge and experience in the American education system.''
According to recent news reports, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Departments of Labor and Education are investigating accusations that as many as 100 of the movement's American schools have used taxpayer money to pay for the immigration of teachers' families from Turkey and provide other financial support for the Gulen movement.
Federal officials declined to comment.
Ali Yurtsever, head of the executive committee setting up the American Islamic College, denied any connection with Gulen. The school will have to generate its own income, unlike Gulen schools in the United States that are supported by the movement, he said.
Mr. Yurtsever has long been a follower of Mr. Gulen and serves as administrator of Niagara Educational Services. He previously was president of the Gulen-backed Rumi Forum, a Washington research institute whose honorary president is Mr. Gulen.
Attempts to contact Mr. Gulen through his Web site and through Mr. Yurtsever were unsuccessful.
School officials say the college will present what Mr. Gulen has long stood for: a more moderate form of Islam than the extremist version that has often dominated public debate in the United States since Sept. 11, 2001. The school plans to offer more than a dozen courses in the fall and hopes to attract up to 400 local and international students in the next few years.
The college was established 30 years ago by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, a Saudi Arabia-based association of more than 50 predominantly Muslim countries. In 2004, the Illinois Board of Higher Education revoked its operating authority, citing a failure to comply with state regulations.
Now, after spending $500,000 from the Islamic Conference to renovate its library, dorms, mosque, and 1,000-seat auditorium, the college is reopening under new management. It is led by Mr. Yurtsever, a mathematician with a Ph.D. from Ege University in Turkey who taught at Georgetown University.
College officials expect to receive authority to offer for-credit courses from the Illinois Board of Higher Education on June 7. The college has applied for full accreditation, which would allow it to confer four-year degrees.
Mr. Gulen, 70, has lived in the United States since 1999, when he left Turkey. In a widely circulated video from that time, he advised his followers to ''move within the arteries of the system, without anyone noticing your existence, until you reach all the power centers.''
In the United States, Gulen schools often import Turkish teachers using H-1B visas, which allow American employers to temporarily hire foreign workers in specialty jobs.
The federal government places a strict limit on the number of H1-B visas it issues, and corporations often complain the cap restrains their ability to transfer highly qualified workers from foreign countries. Yet Gulen-backed schools received 839 H-1B visas in 2010, a 65 percent increase from 2007, according to The Philadelphia Inquirer.
Teachers unions and education reform groups in several states have spoken out against the spike in foreign-born teachers at Gulen schools. ''There is no reason to bring teachers in from other countries under the guise of lack of staffing,'' said Jenni White, president of Restore Oklahoma Public Education.
Mr. Yavuz, the political scientist, said he did not see the movement as a danger, ''but I don't see it as productive. ''
''I think their main goal is to improve the image of Islam in the U.S.,'' he said, ''but even there, I don't know if they can be successful.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Mustafa Kaya, a Turk attending the University of Chicago, worked on calligraphy in a class at American Islamic College. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHN KONSTANTARAS/CHICAGO NEWS COOPERATIVE) 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: RELIGION (94%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SCHOOL CLOSINGS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%); APPROVALS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (78%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (78%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); FOREIGN LABOR (75%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (75%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (74%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS VOCATIONS (73%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (73%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (72%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (72%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (71%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (70%); IMMIGRATION LAW (70%); CHARTER SCHOOLS (69%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (69%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (59%)

Industry: EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (78%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (73%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (71%); CHARTER SCHOOLS (69%)

Person: FETHULLAH GULEN (79%)

Geographic: TURKEY (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: May 29, 2011


End of Document
Rural Areas Brace for a Shortage of Doctors Due to Visa Policy
The New York Times 
March 18, 2017 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1398 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: Small-town America relies on a program that attracts foreign physicians to underserved areas. A recent federal change, however, could delay newcomers.
Body


Correction Appended
In Coudersport, Pa., a town in a mountainous region an hour’s drive from the nearest Walmart, Cole Memorial Hospital counts on two Jordanian physicians to keep its obstetrics unit open and is actively recruiting foreign specialists.
In Fargo, N.D., a gastroenterologist from Lebanon — who is among hundreds of foreign physicians in the state — has risen to become vice president of the North Dakota Medical Association.
In Great Falls, Mont., 60 percent of the doctors who specialize in hospital care at Benefis Health System, which serves about 230,000 people in 15 counties, are foreign doctors on work visas.
Small-town America relies on a steady flow of doctors from around the world to deliver babies, treat heart ailments and address its residents’ medical needs. But a recent, little-publicized decision by the government to alter the timetable for some visa applications is likely to delay the arrival of new foreign doctors, and is causing concern in the places that depend on them.
While the Trump administration is fighting, in the courts of justice and public opinion, for its temporary travel ban affecting six countries, the slowdown in the rural doctor pipeline shows how even a small, relatively uncontroversial change can ripple throughout the country.
In Montana, for example, where nine counties do not have a single physician, it means Benefis Health does not know when a Romanian doctor trained in kidney transplants will arrive. The health care company spent months recruiting the doctor and had been expecting her in July.
“Our health system already has nine months invested in her, and now we have no idea when she can start,” said Erica Martin, who recruits doctors for the company.
The doctor, Silviana Marineci, who is completing a fellowship at the University of Minnesota, said she was frazzled by being in limbo.
“I won’t have an income, I don’t know if I will afford rent, I don’t know where I will be,” she said. “It’s insane.”
The procedural change regards temporary visas for skilled workers, known as H-1B visas. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services           recently announced that it would temporarily suspend a “premium processing” option by which employers could pay an extra $1,225 to have H-1B applications approved in as little as two weeks, rather than several months.
Companies using that option, the government said, have effectively delayed visas for others who did not pay the extra fee.
A spokeswoman for the immigration agency, Arwen Consaul, said in a statement that the measure was necessary to “work down the existing backlogs due to the high volume of incoming petitions.”
The H-1B program has raised questions about whether it displaces American workers, particularly in computer programming and engineering jobs, for which most of the visas are issued.
H-1B recipients also include foreign physicians who practice in places shunned by American doctors for personal and professional reasons.
About 25 percent of all physicians practicing or training in the United States are foreign, but in some inner cities and most rural areas, that share is significantly higher.
There were 211,460 international medical graduates practicing in the United States in December 2015, according to the latest data available from the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates.
Senators Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat; Susan M. Collins, Republican of Maine; and Heidi Heitkamp, Democrat of North Dakota, have urged the agency to continue premium processing.
“Slowing down this successful two-decade-old program and the doctors it brings to rural areas will hurt families across North Dakota and rural America,” Ms. Heitkamp wrote in an email.
It was a North Dakota senator, Kent Conrad, who in 1994 proposed to relieve a shortage of doctors by tapping foreign physicians who have completed medical education in the United States.
His program waives the requirement that foreign doctors who graduate from residency programs in the United States return to their home countries for two years before working here. It lures such graduates to practice in underserved areas by offering them the chance to apply for a green card to live permanently in the United States after three years.
The program must be reauthorized by Congress every two years. Ms. Klobuchar, who twice has introduced legislation to make the program permanent, plans to do so again in the coming weeks.
Since the program’s inception, tens of thousands of foreign physicians in a variety of specialties have flocked to clinics and hospitals in Appalachia, the Mississippi Delta region, the Great Plains and elsewhere.
Many of them, such as Dr. Fadel E. Nammour, the vice president of the North Dakota Medical Association, put down roots and never leave.
The friendliness that he found in Fargo reminded him of his home country, Dr. Nammour said. As a token of his gratitude, one of his first patients brought him a Styrofoam box filled with freshly caught walleye, a fish that thrives in the state’s lakes.
“We provide not only the care but also our leadership,” said Dr. Nammour, who is now an American citizen. “The focus should be on making it easier to bring people in to cover the physician shortage we have.”
The delay also could affect the roughly 400 foreign medical graduates who come each year to participate in residency programs at teaching hospitals. The doctors were matched on Friday for residencies starting July 1 across the country.
“Everyone around the country will be in a mad scramble to figure out this visa situation,” said Michelle Larson-Krieg, the director of international student and scholar services at the University of Colorado in Denver, which usually takes 10 or 12 residents on H-1Bs each year at its Anschutz Medical Campus.
The immigration agency said in a statement that applicants could still request an H-1B approval on an “expedited basis,” if they could prove there was an emergency or humanitarian justification.
Immigration lawyers said that it was extremely difficult to meet that standard, and that they doubted whether the agency could handle a flood of such requests.
“If they don’t have the manpower to do premium processing, I don’t see how they are going to do special requests,” said Andrea Szew, a lawyer in Los Angeles.
In the meantime, hospitals and clinics are adjusting to the possibility of being without some doctors for a while. Ms. Martin of Benefis Health said the hospital would have to give other doctors additional shifts or hire costly temporary physicians, who are frowned upon because they cannot develop a rapport with patients during their brief stints or provide continuity of care.
Ms. Martin said Benefis Health was also recruiting other foreign physicians who could end up in the same situation as Dr. Marineci. “The most problematic thing is the unknown” about when the doctors can start, she said.
Rom Satchi, a Canadian who completed his pediatric residency at the University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, was invited for interviews at facilities in Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Pennsylvania and several other places desperate for a pediatrician.
Ultimately, Dr. Satchi signed a contract with Mama Mia Pediatrics in northern Las Vegas, a working-class area that has been struggling to handle a swelling patient caseload. He agreed to start in mid-June.
But now, it is uncertain whether he will be able to get his visa in time.
“At this point, I have no voice,” said Dr. Satchi, who plans to return to Canada and wait, jobless, until the visa is approved. “I can’t do anything.”
Correction: March 28, 2017, Tuesday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on March 19 about the effect a change in visa policy has had on foreign doctors in rural areas referred incorrectly to the number of such doctors in North Dakota. There are hundreds — not thousands — of foreign physicians practicing in that state.
PHOTO: Dr. Silviana Marineci, a Romanian finishing a fellowship in Minnesota, said an H-1B visa policy change left her in limbo. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Afghans Who Worked for U.S. Are Told Not to Apply for Visas, Advocates Say
    • E.U. Lawmakers Call for End to Visa-Free Travel for Americans
    • In Open Letter, 65 Writers and Artists Urge Trump to Reconsider Visa Ban
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS SHORTAGES (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (78%); RURAL HEALTH (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%); GASTROENTEROLOGY (73%); PETITIONS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (56%); ENGINEERING (50%); TRANSPLANT SURGERY (50%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Rural Areas (%); Doctors (%); Appalachian Region (%); Shortages (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Ticker: Citizenship and Immigration Services (US)

Industry: PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (92%); MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TRAVEL & TOURISM REGULATION & POLICY (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); HEALTH CARE (78%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS SHORTAGES (78%); HOSPITALS (78%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (78%); GASTROENTEROLOGY (73%); TRAVEL BANS (73%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (60%); ENGINEERING (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: FARGO, ND, USA (58%); MONTANA, USA (92%); NORTH DAKOTA, USA (92%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (79%)

Load-Date: March 29, 2017


End of Document
IBM Now Has More Employees in India Than in the U.S.
The New York Times 
September 28, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1618 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL
Highlight: IBM has shifted its center of gravity halfway around the world to India, making it a high-tech example of the globalization trends that the Trump administration has railed against.
Body


BANGALORE, India — IBM dominated the early decades of computing with inventions like the mainframe and the floppy disk. Its offices and factories, stretching from upstate New York to Silicon Valley, were hubs of American innovation long before Microsoft or Google came along.
But over the last decade, IBM has shifted its center of gravity halfway around the world to India, making it a high-tech example of the globalization trends that the Trump administration has railed against.
Today, the company employs 130,000 people in India — about one-third of its total work force, and more than in any other country. Their work spans the entire gamut of IBM’s businesses, from managing the computing needs of global giants like AT&T and Shell to performing cutting-edge research in fields like visual search, artificial intelligence and computer vision for self-driving cars. One team is even working with the producers of Sesame Street to teach vocabulary to kindergartners in Atlanta.
“IBM India, in the truest sense, is a microcosm of the IBM company,” Vanitha Narayanan, chairman of the company’s Indian operations, said in an interview at IBM’s main campus in Bangalore, where the office towers are named after American golf courses like Peachtree and Pebble Beach.
The work in India has been vital to keeping down costs at IBM, which has posted 21 consecutive quarters of revenue declines as it has struggled to refashion its main business of supplying tech services to corporations and governments.
The tech industry has been shifting jobs overseas for decades, and other big American companies like Oracle and Dell also employ a majority of their workers outside the United States.
But IBM is unusual because it employs more people in a single foreign country than it does at home. The company’s employment in India has nearly doubled since 2007, even as its work force in the United States has shrunk through waves of layoffs and buyouts. Although IBM refuses to disclose exact numbers, outsiders estimate that it employs well under 100,000 people at its American offices now, down from 130,000 in 2007. Depending on the job, the salaries paid to Indian workers are one-half to one-fifth those paid to Americans, according to data posted by the research firm Glassdoor.
Ronil Hira, an associate professor of public policy at Howard University who studies globalization and immigration, said the range of work done by IBM in India shows that offshoring threatens even the best-paying American tech jobs.
“The elites in both parties have had this Apple iPhone narrative, which is, look, it’s O.K. if we offshore the lower-level stuff because we’re just going to move up,” he said. “This is a wake-up call. It’s not just low-level jobs but high-level jobs that are leaving.”
While other technology titans have also established huge satellite campuses in India, IBM caught the attention of President Trump. At a campaign rally in Minneapolis just before the November election, he accused the company of laying off 500 Minnesotans and moving their jobs to India and other countries, a claim that IBM denied.
Although he has not singled out the company for criticism since, Mr. Trump has tried to curb what he viewed as too many foreigners taking tech jobs from Americans. In April, he signed an executive order discouraging the granting of H-1B temporary work visas for lower-paid tech workers, most of whom come from India. IBM was the sixth-largest recipient of such visas in 2016, according to            federal data.
IBM, which is based in Armonk, N.Y., is sensitive to the perception that Americans are losing jobs to Indians. After Mr. Trump won the election, IBM’s chief executive, Ginni Rometty, pledged to create 25,000 new American jobs. Ms. Rometty, who helped carry out the India expansion strategy when she was head of IBM’s global services division, has also discussed            with the new administration plans to modernize government technology and expand tech training for people without four-year college degrees. She also joined one of Mr. Trump’s now-defunct business advisory councils.
IBM declined to make Ms. Rometty or another top executive available for an interview. But the company noted that it is investing in the United States, including committing $1 billion to training programs and opening new offices.
Ms. Narayanan, who spent 12 years working at IBM in the United States and China before moving to India in 2009, said the company decided where to put jobs based on where it could find enough qualified workers and the customer’s budget. “It’s not as if someone says, ‘Oh, jeez, let me just take these jobs from here and put them there,’” she said.
William Lazonick, a professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business, said IBM and other tech companies had benefited greatly from the emergence of a low-cost, technically skilled English-speaking work force in India.
“IBM didn’t create this,” he said. “But IBM would be a totally different company if it wasn’t for India.”
IBM, which opened its first Indian offices in Mumbai and Delhi in 1951, is now spread across the country, including Bangalore, Pune, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Chennai.
Most of the Indian employees work in IBM’s core business: helping companies like AT&T and Airbus manage the technical sides of their operations. Indians perform consulting services, write software and monitor cloud-based computer systems for many of the world’s banks, phone companies and governments.
But researchers here also try out new ideas. Looking to build a new system for searching with images instead of words, a team in Bangalore turned to Watson to index 600,000 photos from the world’s top fashion shows and Bollywood movies. Last spring, a major Indian fashion house, Falguni Shane Peacock, tried the tool, which helps designers avoid direct copies or even do a riff on an old look, and generated new patterns for three dresses.
“It has the capability of doing research in a couple of seconds that would take a long time,” Shane Peacock, who runs the Mumbai firm with his wife, said in an interview.
IBM even has a Bangalore “garage” full of app designers who build corporate iPhone and iPad apps to simplify tasks like helping airline agents rebook passengers, bankers make loans and doctors update patient files.
During a recent visit, Ramya Karyampudi, a user experience designer, was at the whiteboard sketching out an app for a smart refrigerator that would solve the universal problem of what to make for dinner.
Starting with a drawing of a husband trying to plan a surprise meal for his wife, Ms. Karyampudi depicted the internet-connected refrigerator looking at what food was inside, sending over relevant recipes, telling him what extra ingredients he needed to pick up, and playing a video showing him how to cook it all.
IBM’s outsize presence in India today is all the more striking given that it left the country entirely in 1978 after a dispute           with the government about foreign ownership rules.
IBM re-entered the country through a joint venture with Tata in 1993, initially intending to assemble and sell personal computers. IBM’s leaders soon decided that India’s potential was far bigger — both as a market and as a base from which to serve customers around the world. The company took full control of the venture, established an Indian branch of its famed research labs, and in 2004, landed a landmark 10-year, $750 million contract from Bharti Airtel, one of India’s biggest phone companies, which remains a major customer.
IBM’s chief executive at the time, Samuel J. Palmisano, was so proud of his India initiative that he rented out the grounds of the Bangalore Palace in June 2006, flew out the board, and told a crowd of 10,000 that IBM would invest $6 billion in India over the next three years.
Today, India does not just deliver services to IBM’s global clients. It is also a crucial market and the center of IBM’s efforts to help businesses serve the next big slice of customers: the billions of poorer people who have been largely ignored by the tech revolution.
For example, teams here have been applying IBM technology to process very small loans so that banks can make a profit on them.
IBM has also been working with Manipal Hospitals, a chain based in Bangalore, to adapt Watson to help doctors treat certain cancers. Presented with a patient’s medical history, the system taps into a database that includes advice from doctors at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York to recommend the best treatments — including the price, a big consideration since most Indians lack health insurance.
Dr. Ajay Bakshi, Manipal’s chief executive, said the biggest potential for the technology was in rural hospitals with few doctors. Manipal has just begun offering online “second opinions” from Watson for 2000 rupees, or about $31. “It never sleeps. It never forgets. It doesn’t get biased,” he said.
IBM executives say projects like these represent the company’s future. “I am looking for India to be my hub for affordable innovation,” Ms. Narayanan said.
Follow Vindu Goel on Twitter @vindugoel.
PHOTOS: IBM employees collaborating in a casual work space at the company’s new offices in the Bhartiya Center of Information Technology in Bangalore. (BU1); Top, an IBM display in Bangalore; above, an IBM building at Manyata Tech Park; below, a model in a dress designed with the help of IBM’s artificial intelligence technology. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PHILIPPE CALIA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU5)
Related Articles
    • A New Kind of Tech Job Emphasizes Skills, Not a College Degree
    • Even Business Leaders Who Abandoned Trump’s Councils May Not Stray Far
    • Piecemeal Layoffs Avoid Warning Laws
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: GLOBALIZATION (90%); TRENDS (90%); LABOR FORCE (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (79%); BUSINESS FINANCIAL TROUBLE (78%); EMPLOYMENT LISTINGS & SITES (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); OFFSHORING (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); IMMIGRATION (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (73%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (73%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (68%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (66%); International Business Machines Corporation (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Rometty, Virginia M (%); India (%)

Ticker: International Business Machines Corporation

Industry: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); IMAGE PROCESSING & COMPUTER VISION (73%); OFFICE PROPERTY (73%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (68%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (66%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (60%); AUTONOMOUS MOTOR VEHICLES (53%)

Person: Rometty, Virginia M

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (91%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (97%)

Load-Date: October 11, 2017


End of Document
Justice Dept. Says Facebook Shuns Americans in Hiring
The New York Times
December 4, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1046 words
Byline: By Cecilia Kang and Mike Isaac
Body


The complaint, which targets the company's hiring of immigrants on temporary visas, opens a new front in Washington's battle against Big Tech.
WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department sued Facebook on Thursday, accusing it of being un-American by favoring foreign workers with visas over those from the United States, in a new push against tech companies in the waning days of the Trump administration. 
  In the complaint, the department's civil rights division said Facebook ''refused to recruit, consider or hire qualified and available U.S. workers'' for more than 2,600 positions, with an average salary of $156,000. Those jobs instead went to immigrant visa holders, according to the complaint.
  The action followed a two-year investigation into whether Facebook intentionally favored so-called H1-B visa and other temporary immigrant workers over U.S. workers, the Justice Department said.
  ''Our message to workers is clear: If companies deny employment opportunities by illegally preferring temporary visa holders, the Department of Justice will hold them accountable,'' said Eric S. Dreiband, the assistant attorney general for the civil rights division. ''Our message to all employers -- including those in the technology sector -- is clear: You cannot illegally prefer to recruit, consider or hire temporary visa holders over U.S. workers.''
  Andy Stone, a Facebook spokesman, said, ''Facebook has been cooperating with the D.O.J. in its review of this issue, and while we dispute the allegations in the complaint, we cannot comment further on pending litigation.''
  Bipartisan anger in Washington has mounted in recent years against Facebook, Google, Amazon and Apple -- some of the world's most valuable companies -- for data privacy abuses, the spread of disinformation and other toxic content on their platforms, and complaints of anticompetitive practices that have harmed consumers and small businesses.
  For months, regulators and lawmakers have homed in on Facebook for possible monopoly violations. The Federal Trade Commission and dozens of states are preparing antitrust lawsuits against the social network for maintaining its power through mergers of nascent competitors, such as Instagram and WhatsApp. They are expected to announce plans for legal action soon, people briefed on the cases have said.
  The discrimination suit, which goes before an administrative law judge, opens a different front in Washington's battle against Big Tech. Although President Trump has jabbed at the companies as recently as this week, when he threatened to revoke speech liability protections for internet platforms like Facebook and Twitter, it is the first time the administration has brought legal action claiming immigrant employment bias.
  Skilled-worker visas in the technology industry have been a focus of debate for a decade. Facebook, Google, Microsoft, IBM and other companies have lobbied for years to expand H1-B visas, arguing the importance of getting the best engineers from overseas, particularly from China and India. Critics have called the visa program a crutch for tech companies to overlook U.S.-born talent and lure foreign workers at lower wages.
  Mr. Trump has been a vocal critic of temporary worker visas. In October, his administration announced new rules for the H1-B program, substantially raising the wages that U.S. companies must pay foreign hires and narrowing eligibility criteria for applicants.
  The Justice Department has rarely sued tech companies on the issue, though other agencies have accused the firms of racial or gender bias. In 2016, the Labor Department sued the data firm Palantir, alleging bias against Asians. The Labor Department separately sued Google to reveal data on hiring based on gender, race, religion and sexual orientation.
  According to its complaint, the Justice Department found that between Jan. 1 and Sept. 18 last year, Facebook routinely put H1-B and other immigrant temporary workers on a track for permanent employment that was not available to U.S. citizens. Facebook also used less effective methods to advertise jobs to U.S. workers, including declining to promote the positions on Facebook.com/careers, the department said.
  The hiring spotlighted by the complaint made up just 0.5 percent of Facebook's 50,000 employees. But the Justice Department said Facebook had violated federal labor laws that require employers to make permanent employment opportunities as easily available to U.S. workers as they are to foreign visa holders.
  ''Facebook's discriminatory recruitment and hiring practice is routine, ongoing and widespread,'' the complaint said.
  Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive of Facebook, has for years made fighting for immigrants' rights to work in the U.S. tech industry a pet issue. In 2013, he and several friends created Fwd.us, a nonprofit group that pushed for an overhaul of immigration laws and stumped for easing the immigration process for tech workers.
  The issue has been a source of friction between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Trump. In 2015, leaders at Fwd.us chafed at Mr. Trump's immigration proposals, which would have restricted H-1B visas for skilled, foreign-born employees. They claimed that the plan would ''radically restrict'' paths to the United States for immigrant tech workers.
  When Mr. Trump signed an executive order in 2017 limiting immigration from majority-Muslim countries, Mr. Zuckerberg spoke out against it.
  ''We need to keep this country safe, but we should do that by focusing on people who actually pose a threat,'' he said in a post to his Facebook page. ''We should also keep our doors open to refugees and those who need help. That's who we are.''
  Kim Clarke, a lawyer at Varnum who advises employers on immigration and labor issues, said the Justice Department suit could have a chilling effect on tech hiring.
  ''In the long run, if broader tech companies can't hire the skilled talent on which they rely, their competitive positions will be hindered,'' Ms. Clarke said. ''The trickle-down effect of this action could impact even smaller employers that hire only a handful of foreign workers.''
  Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.Cecilia Kang reported from Washington, and Mike Isaac from San Francisco.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/03/technology/facebook-hiring-discrimination-suit.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Outside the headquarters of Facebook, which the Justice Department accused of favoring immigrants over Americans when hiring. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Henry for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (89%); LITIGATION (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); SOCIAL MEDIA (89%); TECHNOLOGY (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUDGES (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); RESTRAINT OF TRADE (78%); SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); UNFAIR COMPETITION (78%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES (77%); ANTITRUST LITIGATION (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (77%); JOINT VENTURES, MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS LAW (77%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (76%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (76%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); AGENCY ADJUDICATION (71%); BIPARTISANSHIP (69%); ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE (68%); CONSUMERS (67%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (67%); TRADE PRACTICES & UNFAIR COMPETITION LAW (66%); DISINFORMATION & MISINFORMATION (62%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (62%); LOBBYING (61%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (90%); GOOGLE LLC (55%);  MICROSOFT CORP (50%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (96%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (90%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (90%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (50%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (50%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); BIG TECH (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOCIAL MEDIA (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); DATA PRIVACY (62%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (62%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: December 4, 2020


End of Document
Company in Payroll Project Shuts Down Amid Inquiry
The New York Times
June 2, 2011 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 21
Length: 758 words
Byline: By DAVID W. CHEN
Body


WAYNE, N.J. - A New Jersey technology company that had been a major contractor on the Bloomberg administration's troubled CityTime payroll project abruptly halted operations and terminated its employees amid a widening city and federal investigation, according to a company memorandum sent out this week.
The top two executives of the company, TechnoDyne L.L.C., have returned to their native India, according to people familiar with the case who were not authorized to speak publicly because the investigation was continuing.
Whether the executives - Reddy and Padma Allen, American citizens who are husband and wife - will return is unclear. They are alluded to but not identified by name as co-conspirators in a federal complaint that was made public on Friday; neither they nor their company has been charged.
The sudden demise of TechnoDyne, which according to earlier company statements had 500 employees and $100 million in annual revenue, means that for the first time, the scandal adversely affected a substantial number of people who may have been simply associated with a CityTime contractor, and not necessarily involved in the project.
The United States attorney's office in Manhattan and the New York City Department of Investigation have accused several employees of CityTime contractors of defrauding the city in an $80 million scheme that began in 2005. But even before the accusations, the automated payroll project had become a liability for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg because of its costs, which have climbed to about $700 million after an initial estimate of $63 million.
On Friday, investigators charged the project's senior manager, Gerard Denault, with receiving over $5 million in kickbacks, as well as wire fraud conspiracy and money laundering. Mr. Denault urged his employer, Science Applications International Corporation, to hire TechnoDyne as the project's main information technology subcontractor.
TechnoDyne, based here, received $464 million out of $628 million that was paid to Science Applications International. According to the complaint, TechnoDyne funneled $5.6 million to a sham consulting company owned by Mr. Denault via three companies affiliated with TechnoDyne, including one owned by Padma Allen's mother, and two others in India.
The complaint said there was evidence that TechnoDyne tried to ''conceal its interest'' in one of the Indian companies, ''and thereby its connections to the millions of dollars that were being paid to Denault.''
By Tuesday night, as TechnoDyne employees, concerned that the company's Web site and switchboard were not working, began contacting reporters, the company had issued a memorandum.
Sent to The New York Times by an employee and signed by its human resources department, the memorandum said that ''due to legal action recently taken against TechnoDyne by a governmental authority,'' the company was ''unable to continue normal operations'' and was immediately ''terminating the services of its employees and consultants.''
The company, which investigators said relied on Science Applications International for 80 percent of its revenue, pledged to cooperate with immigration lawyers to help workers who have H-1B visas or green cards. The company also said it would keep employees updated on compensation, health insurance and other issues.
A spokeswoman for the company did not respond to phone calls and e-mails to her. Meanwhile, a visit to the company's two addresses here on Wednesday - one in an office park, the other at a U.P.S. store - did not reveal any activity or presence, other than the company's name tacked onto a building directory. One person who works in the office park said few people had shown up to TechnoDyne's office in recent months.
TechnoDyne billed itself as an information technology consulting company that helped governments and private businesses with software development and cloud-computing management.
The company also enlisted prominent lobbyists in the city procurement process, including Gino P. Menchini, a former commissioner at the city's Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications, and Agostino Cangemi, a former deputy commissioner at the same agency.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Menchini's and Mr. Cangemi's current company, National Strategies, said that the company never worked on CityTime, and that once the TechnoDyne accusations were known on Friday, the contract between National Strategies and TechnoDyne was terminated immediately.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Web Log

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); CONSPIRACY (89%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (89%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (89%); COMPANY STRUCTURES & OWNERSHIP (78%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (78%); SUBCONTRACTING (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); LITIGATION (71%); WIRE FRAUD (70%); MONEY LAUNDERING (69%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (66%)

Company:  SCIENCE APPLICATIONS INTERNATIONAL CORP (82%)

Ticker: SAIC (NYSE) (82%)

Industry: NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (82%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (82%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); CONSULTING SERVICES (78%); WIRE FRAUD (70%)

Person: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (90%)

Load-Date: June 2, 2011


End of Document
Rural Areas Brace for Shortage of Doctors After Changes in Visa Policy
The New York Times
March 19, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 1274 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


In Coudersport, Pa., a town in a mountainous region an hour's drive from the nearest Walmart, Cole Memorial Hospital counts on two Jordanian physicians to keep its obstetrics unit open and is actively recruiting foreign specialists.
In Fargo, N.D., a gastroenterologist from Lebanon -- who is among hundreds of foreign physicians in the state -- has risen to become vice president of the North Dakota Medical Association. 
  In Great Falls, Mont., 60 percent of the doctors who specialize in hospital care at Benefis Health System, which serves about 230,000 people in 15 counties, are foreign doctors on work visas.
  Small-town America relies on a steady flow of doctors from around the world to deliver babies, treat heart ailments and address its residents' medical needs. But a recent, little-publicized decision by the government to alter the timetable for some visa applications is likely to delay the arrival of new foreign doctors, and is causing concern in the places that depend on them.
  While the Trump administration is fighting, in the courts of justice and public opinion, for its temporary travel ban affecting six countries, the slowdown in the rural doctor pipeline shows how even a small, relatively uncontroversial change can ripple throughout the country.
  In Montana, for example, where nine counties do not have a single physician, it means Benefis Health does not know when a Romanian doctor trained in kidney transplants will arrive. The health care company spent months recruiting the doctor and had been expecting her in July.
  ''Our health system already has nine months invested in her, and now we have no idea when she can start,'' said Erica Martin, who recruits doctors for the company.
  The doctor, Silviana Marineci, who is completing a fellowship at the University of Minnesota, said she was frazzled by being in limbo.
  ''I won't have an income, I don't know if I will afford rent, I don't know where I will be,'' she said. ''It's insane.''
  The procedural change regards temporary visas for skilled workers, known as H-1B visas. United States Citizenship and Immigration Services recently announced that it would temporarily suspend a ''premium processing'' option by which employers could pay an extra $1,225 to have H-1B applications approved in as little as two weeks, rather than several months.
  Companies using that option, the government said, have effectively delayed visas for others who did not pay the extra fee.
  A spokeswoman for the immigration agency, Arwen Consaul, said in a statement that the measure was necessary to ''work down the existing backlogs due to the high volume of incoming petitions.''
  The H-1B program has raised questions about whether it displaces American workers, particularly in computer programming and engineering jobs, for which most of the visas are issued.
  H-1B recipients also include foreign physicians who practice in places shunned by American doctors for personal and professional reasons.
  About 25 percent of all physicians practicing or training in the United States are foreign, but in some inner cities and most rural areas, that share is significantly higher.
  There were 211,460 international medical graduates practicing in the United States in December 2015, according to the latest data available from the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates.
  Senators Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat; Susan M. Collins, Republican of Maine; and Heidi Heitkamp, Democrat of North Dakota, have urged the agency to continue premium processing.
  ''Slowing down this successful two-decade-old program and the doctors it brings to rural areas will hurt families across North Dakota and rural America,'' Ms. Heitkamp wrote in an email.
  It was a North Dakota senator, Kent Conrad, who in 1994 proposed to relieve a shortage of doctors by tapping foreign physicians who have completed medical education in the United States.
  His program waives the requirement that foreign doctors who graduate from residency programs in the United States return to their home countries for two years before working here. It lures such graduates to practice in underserved areas by offering them the chance to apply for a green card to live permanently in the United States after three years.
  The program must be reauthorized by Congress every two years. Ms. Klobuchar, who twice has introduced legislation to make the program permanent, plans to do so again in the coming weeks.
  Since the program's inception, tens of thousands of foreign physicians in a variety of specialties have flocked to clinics and hospitals in Appalachia, the Mississippi Delta region, the Great Plains and elsewhere.
  Many of them, such as Dr. Fadel E. Nammour, the vice president of the North Dakota Medical Association, put down roots and never leave.
  The friendliness that he found in Fargo reminded him of his home country, Dr. Nammour said. As a token of his gratitude, one of his first patients brought him a Styrofoam box filled with freshly caught walleye, a fish that thrives in the state's lakes.
  ''We provide not only the care but also our leadership,'' said Dr. Nammour, who is now an American citizen. ''The focus should be on making it easier to bring people in to cover the physician shortage we have.''
  The delay also could affect the roughly 400 foreign medical graduates who come each year to participate in residency programs at teaching hospitals. The doctors were matched on Friday for residencies starting July 1 across the country.
  ''Everyone around the country will be in a mad scramble to figure out this visa situation,'' said Michelle Larson-Krieg, the director of international student and scholar services at the University of Colorado in Denver, which usually takes 10 or 12 residents on H-1Bs each year at its Anschutz Medical Campus.
  The immigration agency said in a statement that applicants could still request an H-1B approval on an ''expedited basis,'' if they could prove there was an emergency or humanitarian justification.
  Immigration lawyers said that it was extremely difficult to meet that standard, and that they doubted whether the agency could handle a flood of such requests.
  ''If they don't have the manpower to do premium processing, I don't see how they are going to do special requests,'' said Andrea Szew, a lawyer in Los Angeles.
  In the meantime, hospitals and clinics are adjusting to the possibility of being without some doctors for a while. Ms. Martin of Benefis Health said the hospital would have to give other doctors additional shifts or hire costly temporary physicians, who are frowned upon because they cannot develop a rapport with patients during their brief stints or provide continuity of care.
  Ms. Martin said Benefis Health was also recruiting other foreign physicians who could end up in the same situation as Dr. Marineci. ''The most problematic thing is the unknown'' about when the doctors can start, she said.
  Rom Satchi, a Canadian who completed his pediatric residency at the University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, was invited for interviews at facilities in Alabama, Arkansas, Kansas, Pennsylvania and several other places desperate for a pediatrician.
  Ultimately, Dr. Satchi signed a contract with Mama Mia Pediatrics in northern Las Vegas, a working-class area that has been struggling to handle a swelling patient caseload. He agreed to start in mid-June.
  But now, it is uncertain whether he will be able to get his visa in time.
  ''At this point, I have no voice,'' said Dr. Satchi, who plans to return to Canada and wait, jobless, until the visa is approved. ''I can't do anything.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/18/us/doctor-shortage-visa-policy.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Dr. Silviana Marineci, a Romanian finishing a fellowship in Minnesota, said an H-1B visa policy change left her in limbo. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENN ACKERMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS SHORTAGES (78%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (78%); RURAL HEALTH (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (77%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (77%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%); GASTROENTEROLOGY (73%); PETITIONS (67%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (56%); ENGINEERING (50%); TRANSPLANT SURGERY (50%)

Industry: PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TRAVEL & TOURISM REGULATION & POLICY (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); HEALTH CARE (78%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS SHORTAGES (78%); HOSPITALS (78%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (78%); GASTROENTEROLOGY (73%); TRAVEL BANS (72%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (60%); ENGINEERING (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (56%)

Geographic: FARGO, ND, USA (58%); MONTANA, USA (92%); NORTH DAKOTA, USA (92%); MINNESOTA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); LEBANON (79%)

Load-Date: March 28, 2017


End of Document
IBM Makes a Big Bet on India
The New York Times
October 1, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1536 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


BANGALORE, India -- IBM dominated the early decades of computing with inventions like the mainframe and the floppy disk. Its offices and factories, stretching from upstate New York to Silicon Valley, were hubs of American innovation long before Microsoft or Google came along.
But over the last decade, IBM has shifted its center of gravity halfway around the world to India, making it a high-tech example of the globalization trends that the Trump administration has railed against. 
  Today, the company employs 130,000 people in India -- about one-third of its total work force, and more than in any other country. Their work spans the entire gamut of IBM's businesses, from managing the computing needs of global giants like AT&T and Shell to performing cutting-edge research in fields like visual search, artificial intelligence and computer vision for self-driving cars. One team is even working with the producers of Sesame Street to teach vocabulary to kindergartners in Atlanta.
  ''IBM India, in the truest sense, is a microcosm of the IBM company,'' Vanitha Narayanan, chairman of the company's Indian operations, said in an interview at IBM's main campus in Bangalore, where the office towers are named after American golf courses like Peachtree and Pebble Beach.
  The work in India has been vital to keeping down costs at IBM, which has posted 21 consecutive quarters of revenue declines as it has struggled to refashion its main business of supplying tech services to corporations and governments.
  The tech industry has been shifting jobs overseas for decades, and other big American companies like Oracle and Dell also employ a majority of their workers outside the United States.
  But IBM is unusual because it employs more people in a single foreign country than it does at home. The company's employment in India has nearly doubled since 2007, even as its work force in the United States has shrunk through waves of layoffs and buyouts. Although IBM refuses to disclose exact numbers, outsiders estimate that it employs well under 100,000 people at its American offices now, down from 130,000 in 2007. Depending on the job, the salaries paid to Indian workers are one-half to one-fifth those paid to Americans, according to data posted by the research firm Glassdoor.
  Ronil Hira, an associate professor of public policy at Howard University who studies globalization and immigration, said the range of work done by IBM in India shows that offshoring threatens even the best-paying American tech jobs.
  ''The elites in both parties have had this Apple iPhone narrative, which is, look, it's O.K. if we offshore the lower-level stuff because we're just going to move up,'' he said. ''This is a wake-up call. It's not just low-level jobs but high-level jobs that are leaving.''
  While other technology titans have also established huge satellite campuses in India, IBM caught the attention of President Trump. At a campaign rally in Minneapolis just before the November election, he accused the company of laying off 500 Minnesotans and moving their jobs to India and other countries, a claim that IBM denied.
  Although he has not singled out the company for criticism since, Mr. Trump has tried to curb what he viewed as too many foreigners taking tech jobs from Americans. In April, he signed an executive order discouraging the granting of H-1B temporary work visas for lower-paid tech workers, most of whom come from India. IBM was the sixth-largest recipient of such visas in 2016, according to federal data.
  IBM, which is based in Armonk, N.Y., is sensitive to the perception that Americans are losing jobs to Indians. After Mr. Trump won the election, IBM's chief executive, Ginni Rometty, pledged to create 25,000 new American jobs. Ms. Rometty, who helped carry out the India expansion strategy when she was head of IBM's global services division, has also discussed with the new administration plans to modernize government technology and expand tech training for people without four-year college degrees. She also joined one of Mr. Trump's now-defunct business advisory councils.
  IBM declined to make Ms. Rometty or another top executive available for an interview. But the company noted that it is investing in the United States, including committing $1 billion to training programs and opening new offices.
  Ms. Narayanan, who spent 12 years working at IBM in the United States and China before moving to India in 2009, said the company decided where to put jobs based on where it could find enough qualified workers and the customer's budget. ''It's not as if someone says, 'Oh, jeez, let me just take these jobs from here and put them there,''' she said.
  William Lazonick, a professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts, Lowell, who has studied the globalization of business, said IBM and other tech companies had benefited greatly from the emergence of a low-cost, technically skilled English-speaking work force in India.
  ''IBM didn't create this,'' he said. ''But IBM would be a totally different company if it wasn't for India.''
  IBM, which opened its first Indian offices in Mumbai and Delhi in 1951, is now spread across the country, including Bangalore, Pune, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Chennai.
  Most of the Indian employees work in IBM's core business: helping companies like AT&T and Airbus manage the technical sides of their operations. Indians perform consulting services, write software and monitor cloud-based computer systems for many of the world's banks, phone companies and governments.
  But researchers here also try out new ideas. Looking to build a new system for searching with images instead of words, a team in Bangalore turned to Watson to index 600,000 photos from the world's top fashion shows and Bollywood movies. Last spring, a major Indian fashion house, Falguni Shane Peacock, tried the tool, which helps designers avoid direct copies or even do a riff on an old look, and generated new patterns for three dresses.
  ''It has the capability of doing research in a couple of seconds that would take a long time,'' Shane Peacock, who runs the Mumbai firm with his wife, said in an interview.
  IBM even has a Bangalore ''garage'' full of app designers who build corporate iPhone and iPad apps to simplify tasks like helping airline agents rebook passengers, bankers make loans and doctors update patient files.
  During a recent visit, Ramya Karyampudi, a user experience designer, was at the whiteboard sketching out an app for a smart refrigerator that would solve the universal problem of what to make for dinner.
  Starting with a drawing of a husband trying to plan a surprise meal for his wife, Ms. Karyampudi depicted the internet-connected refrigerator looking at what food was inside, sending over relevant recipes, telling him what extra ingredients he needed to pick up, and playing a video showing him how to cook it all.
  IBM's outsize presence in India today is all the more striking given that it left the country entirely in 1978 after a dispute with the government about foreign ownership rules.
  IBM re-entered the country through a joint venture with Tata in 1993, initially intending to assemble and sell personal computers. IBM's leaders soon decided that India's potential was far bigger -- both as a market and as a base from which to serve customers around the world. The company took full control of the venture, established an Indian branch of its famed research labs, and in 2004, landed a landmark 10-year, $750 million contract from Bharti Airtel, one of India's biggest phone companies, which remains a major customer.
  IBM's chief executive at the time, Samuel J. Palmisano, was so proud of his India initiative that he rented out the grounds of the Bangalore Palace in June 2006, flew out the board, and told a crowd of 10,000 that IBM would invest $6 billion in India over the next three years.
  Today, India does not just deliver services to IBM's global clients. It is also a crucial market and the center of IBM's efforts to help businesses serve the next big slice of customers: the billions of poorer people who have been largely ignored by the tech revolution.
  For example, teams here have been applying IBM technology to process very small loans so that banks can make a profit on them.
  IBM has also been working with Manipal Hospitals, a chain based in Bangalore, to adapt Watson to help doctors treat certain cancers. Presented with a patient's medical history, the system taps into a database that includes advice from doctors at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York to recommend the best treatments -- including the price, a big consideration since most Indians lack health insurance.
  Dr. Ajay Bakshi, Manipal's chief executive, said the biggest potential for the technology was in rural hospitals with few doctors. Manipal has just begun offering online ''second opinions'' from Watson for 2000 rupees, or about $31. ''It never sleeps. It never forgets. It doesn't get biased,'' he said.
  IBM executives say projects like these represent the company's future. ''I am looking for India to be my hub for affordable innovation,'' Ms. Narayanan said.
  Follow Vindu Goel on Twitter @vindugoel.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/28/technology/ibm-india.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: IBM employees collaborating in a casual work space at the company's new offices in the Bhartiya Center of Information Technology in Bangalore. (BU1)
Top, an IBM display in Bangalore
above, an IBM building at Manyata Tech Park
 below, a model in a dress designed with the help of IBM's artificial intelligence technology. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PHILIPPE CALIA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU5)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GLOBALIZATION (89%); LABOR FORCE (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); BUSINESS FINANCIAL TROUBLE (78%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); OFFSHORING (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); TRENDS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); EMPLOYMENT LISTINGS & SITES (75%); WAGES & SALARIES (75%); LAYOFFS (73%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (73%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (70%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (68%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (66%); IMMIGRATION (62%)

Company:  IBM LTD (91%);  APPLE INC (58%);  MICROSOFT CORP (58%);  GOOGLE INC (58%)

Ticker: AAPL (NASDAQ) (58%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (58%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); NAICS423430 COMPUTER & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE MERCHANT WHOLESALERS (58%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS334112 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC5045 COMPUTERS & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE (58%); SIC3674 SEMICONDUCTORS & RELATED DEVICES (58%); SIC3577 COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT, NEC (58%); SIC3572 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICES (58%); SIC3571 ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (58%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (58%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (89%); IMAGE PROCESSING & COMPUTER VISION (73%); OFFICE PROPERTY (73%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (68%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (66%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (60%); AUTONOMOUS MOTOR VEHICLES (53%)

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (91%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); INDIA (97%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: October 1, 2017


End of Document
Use Remote Work to Revitalize Cities That Need It Most
The New York Times
December 6, 2020 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section F; Column 0; SpecialSections; Pg. 2
Length: 508 words
Body


By Prithwiraj Choudhury | Professor at Harvard Business School 
  The Covid-19 pandemic has prompted a lot of change in America, including changes to where we work. My research suggests that if organizations adopt the right practices, workers can indeed ''work from anywhere.'' This presents an opportunity for the incoming administration to promote policies that will lead to more equitable talent distribution nationwide. But it also presents a potential threat -- if remote workers for U.S.-based companies decide they would rather live and work outside of the United States.
  For years, brain drain has plagued noncoastal cities in America, with talent and companies relocating to a handful of cities on the coasts. Fostering ''work from anywhere'' is an opportunity to reverse that trend. In 2018, a program called Tulsa Remote offered $10,000 and a range of services to remote workers who were willing to move to Tulsa, Okla., for one year. The program received more than 10,000 applications for 100 slots. Two years later, only a handful of program participants have left the city, and Tulsa Remote is fielding applications for its third cohort.
  Other regions have taken note, and similar programs have launched in Northwest Arkansas (participants receive a mountain bike) and Tucson, Ariz. Moving forward, the federal government should support these initiatives, in two ways: First, the Economic Development Administration should launch a program to share best practices and provide funding to enable smaller towns to start these initiatives. Second, the federal government should invest in establishing nationwide access to high-speed internet.
  If the United States doesn't invest in offering our workers the freedom to work from anywhere, other countries will -- to our detriment. The adoption of ''work from anywhere'' means just that: Workers can work from anywhere, worldwide.
  Immigration issues in the United States, from soaring rejection rates for H-1B visas to long wait times for permanent residence status, are already pushing global talent to alternative destinations. MobSquad, a Canadian-based staffing company, took advantage of Canada's Express Entry program for skilled workers and recruited foreign workers based in the United States, who were struggling with the immigration system to relocate to Canada -- while continuing to work for their U.S. employers.
  The new administration should stop this outflux of talent. Start by exempting immigrants with U.S. graduate degrees in STEM fields -- or Ph.D. holders in any field -- from visa quotas and provide them a faster path to permanent residence.
  By reforming the U.S. immigration system and replicating the Tulsa story in other smaller towns, the next administration can ensure that, when workers work from anywhere, rather than taking their talent -- and tax dollars -- across the border, these workers will choose to work from, and help revitalize, the cities in America's heartland that need it most.Prithwiraj Choudhury is a professor at Harvard Business School.

https://www.nytimes.com/live/2020/fix-america-economy-climate-health/prithwiraj-choudhury-remote-work-revitalize-cities

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY GETTY IMAGES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Live Blog Post

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TELECOMMUTING (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); RELOCATIONS (88%); BEST PRACTICES (78%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (78%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (78%); CITY LIFE (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (78%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (78%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (78%); TRENDS (78%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (77%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (77%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (76%); COMPANY RELOCATIONS (74%); EPIDEMICS (73%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (73%); STEM EDUCATION (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%)

Industry: GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%); BROADBAND AVAILABILITY (50%)

Geographic: TULSA, OK, USA (94%); TUCSON, AZ, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); CANADA (93%)

Load-Date: December 6, 2020


End of Document
Charter Schools Tied to Turkey Grow in Texas
The New York Times
June 7, 2011 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 4477 words
Byline: By STEPHANIE SAUL
Body


TDM Contracting was only a month old when it won its first job, an $8.2 million contract to build the Harmony School of Innovation, a publicly financed charter school that opened last fall in San Antonio.
It was one of six big charter school contracts TDM and another upstart company have shared since January 2009, a total of $50 million in construction business. Other companies scrambling for work in a poor economy wondered: How had they qualified for such big jobs so fast?
The secret lay in the meteoric rise and financial clout of the Cosmos Foundation, a charter school operator founded a decade ago by a group of professors and businessmen from Turkey. Operating under the name Harmony Schools, Cosmos has moved quickly to become the largest charter school operator in Texas, with 33 schools receiving more than $100 million a year in taxpayer funds.
While educating schoolchildren across Texas, the group has also nurtured a close-knit network of businesses and organizations run by Turkish immigrants. The businesses include not just big contractors like TDM but also a growing assemblage of smaller vendors selling school lunches, uniforms, after-school programs, Web design, teacher training and even special education assessments.
Some of the schools' operators and founders, and many of their suppliers, are followers of Fethullah Gulen, a charismatic Turkish preacher of a moderate brand of Islam whose devotees have built a worldwide religious, social and nationalistic movement in his name. Gulen followers have been involved in starting similar schools around the country -- there are about 120 in all, mostly in urban centers in 25 states, one of the largest collections of charter schools in America.
The growth of these ''Turkish schools,'' as they are often called, has come with a measure of backlash, not all of it untainted by xenophobia. Nationwide, the primary focus of complaints has been on hundreds of teachers and administrators imported from Turkey: in Ohio and Illinois, the federal Department of Labor is investigating union accusations that the schools have abused a special visa program in bringing in their expatriate employees.
But an examination by The New York Times of the Harmony Schools in Texas casts light on a different area: the way they spend public money. And it raises questions about whether, ultimately, the schools are using taxpayer dollars to benefit the Gulen movement -- by giving business to Gulen followers, or through financial arrangements with local foundations that promote Gulen teachings and Turkish culture.
Harmony Schools officials say they scrupulously avoid teaching about religion, and they deny any official connection to the Gulen movement. The say their goal in starting charter schools -- publicly financed schools that operate independently from public school districts -- has been to foster educational achievement, especially in science and math, where American students so often falter.
''It's basically a mission of our organization,'' said Soner Tarim, the superintendent of the 33 Texas schools.
The schools, Dr. Tarim said, follow all competitive bidding rules, and do not play favorites in awarding contracts. In many cases, Turkish-owned companies have in fact been the low bidders.
Even so, records show that virtually all recent construction and renovation work has been done by Turkish-owned contractors. Several established local companies said they had lost out even after bidding several hundred thousand dollars lower.
''It kind of boils my blood a little bit, all the money that was spent, when I know it could have been done for less,'' said Deborah Jones, an owner of daj Construction, one of four lower bidders who failed to win a recent contract for a school renovation in the Austin area.
Harmony's history underscores the vast latitude that many charter school systems have been granted to spend public funds. While the degree of oversight varies widely from state to state, the rush to approve charter schools has meant that some barely monitor charter school operations.
In Washington, concern is growing. A number of charter schools across the country have been accused of a range of improprieties in recent years, from self-dealing on contracts to grade-changing schemes and inflating attendance records to increase financing.
Last year, the inspector general's office in the federal Education Department cited these complaints in a memo alerting the agency of ''our concern about vulnerabilities in the oversight of charter schools.''
The Texas Education Agency has a total of nine people overseeing more than 500 charter school campuses. ''They don't have the capacity at the state level to do the job,'' said Greg Richmond, president of the National Association of Charter School Authorizers. Even so, the state's education commissioner, Robert Scott, last year took the unusual step of granting Harmony permission to open new schools outside the normal approval process.
Officials at the education agency said staffing was sufficient to oversee charter schools. They would not discuss Harmony's contracts, but a check of the agency's past audits -- largely desk reviews of financial statements submitted by the schools -- did not find any alarms raised about Harmony contracting.
In April, however, the agency notified Harmony of an unreleased preliminary audit questioning more than $540,000 in inadequately documented expenses, the vast majority involving federal grant money. Neither the agency nor Harmony would disclose details of the findings.
Starting Out
The charter school movement did not begin in Texas, but the state embraced it with ideological fervor in the late 1990s as a pet project of the governor at the time, George W. Bush. The schools' independence from local school boards and union contracts, the theory went, would free them to become seedbeds of educational achievement in a landscape of underperforming failure.
While Texas charter schools must meet core curriculum standards, they may emphasize some subjects over others, as Harmony does with math, science and technology. They do not have to hew to standard public school calendars or hours. They may -- and some do -- pay teachers less than the standard state-mandated salaries. (In exchange for this flexibility, the schools get less state money than regular schools, with various calculations showing an annual difference of between $1,000 and $2,000 per pupil.)
David Bradley, a member of the Texas Board of Education, served on the panel that reviewed the early charter proposals. ''The only requirement was that you expressed an interest,'' he said, adding, ''The first time Harmony came forth, they had a great application, and they were great people.''
One of those people was Yetkin Yildirim, who had arrived from Turkey in 1996 to attend the University of Texas in Austin. He also worked as a volunteer tutor in local high schools. The idea for the Harmony schools was born, he said, when he and friends -- including Dr. Tarim -- saw how much less rigorous the American high schools were in teaching science and math.
''Then we realized that something can be done,'' said Dr. Yildirim, now a University of Texas professor specializing in asphalt technology. They spent a year writing their proposal, and in 2000 the group opened its first school, in Houston.
The schools represented the expansion of a mission that had already created hundreds of schools -- and a number of universities -- in Turkey and around the world. According to social scientists who have studied them, these schools have been the primary vehicle for the aspirations of the Gulen movement, a loose network of several million followers of Mr. Gulen, who preaches the need to embrace modernity in a peace-loving, ecumenical version of Islam. At the center of his philosophy is the concept of ''hizmet'' -- public service.
The movement is also influential in Turkish politics and controls substantial commercial holdings, including a bank, Asya; one of Turkey's largest daily newspapers, Zaman; and an American cable television network, Ebru-TV, based in New Jersey.
Mr. Gulen, 70, considers his teachings a bulwark against Islamic extremism. Yet he and the movement that bears his name have been surrounded by controversy in Turkey. He came to this country in 1999 while under pressure from secular Turkish authorities who accused him of promoting an Islamic state. He was charged, though the case was thrown out. More recently, the arrests of Turkish journalists critical of the Gulen movement have led to accusations of retaliation by followers in the current government, which has a more religious leaning.
Mr. Gulen now lives in a Pennsylvania retreat owned by a foundation. In an interview there last year with The International Herald Tribune, he said he had not benefited financially from the movement. His only possessions, he said, were a blanket, some bed sheets and a few prized books.
Still, at least for the schools, America has been a land of opportunity. The creation story has been enacted across the country -- Turkish immigrants, often scientists or professors, founding charter schools run by boards of mostly Turkish-born men. Today the United States has more Gulen-inspired schools than any country but Turkey, according to a presentation by Joshua Hendrick, a professor at Loyola University Maryland whose 2009 dissertation explored the movement.
In Texas, Harmony now educates more than 16,000 children. Eight schools have opened in the last year alone.
Dr. Yildirim said that while he had been influenced by Mr. Gulen -- he writes and speaks about his teachings -- his primary motivation in starting the schools was to give back to the community.
''My life changed here. I'm so thankful for that,'' he said. ''I believe some people born in this country are taking some things for granted.''
At first, Harmony Schools used a mix of local American and Turkish immigrant contractors. But as it has grown, especially in the rush of new schools, Harmony has increasingly relied on its Turkish network.
In response to questions, Harmony provided a list showing that local American contractors had been awarded 13 construction and renovation jobs over the years. But a review of contracts since January 2009 -- 35 contracts and $82 million worth of work -- found that all but 3 jobs totaling about $1.5 million went to Turkish-owned businesses.
TDM, builder of the new San Antonio school, is one of several companies that stand out -- for the size of their contracts, their seemingly overnight success or both. One of TDM's owners, records and interviews show, is Kemal Oksuz, president of the Turquoise Council for Americans and Eurasians, an umbrella group over several foundations established by Gulen followers. Since TDM was formed in November 2009, its work has involved only Harmony Schools and a job at the Turquoise Council headquarters, according to a company accountant.
Another TDM principal is a civil engineer, Osman Ozguc.
''Please don't think that I'm a new guy, inexperienced in this area,'' Mr. Ozguc said when asked about the San Antonio project, explaining that he had 26 years of construction experience, mostly on large projects in Turkey. ''I provided all the requirements asked in the bid. And when we got the job, we delivered in a very short time period, and with a very economical result.'' He did acknowledge that change orders had added about $1 million to the cost.
Mr. Ozguc said he formed TDM after a split from Solidarity, another Houston company that has done major ground-up construction jobs for Harmony in the past two years. Records show that Solidarity is run by Levent Ulusal, a civil engineer with a prior connection to Harmony: he was a school business manager until March 2009, when he joined Solidarity.
Since Texas charter schools do not get separate public money for facilities, Harmony's construction program is financed by bonds that will be paid off over time using regular public payments to the schools, bond documents show. The group has issued more than $200 million in bonds since 2007, making it the state's largest charter school bond issuer.
With public money in play, Texas law requires charter schools to award contracts to the bidder that offers the ''best value.'' Lowest is not necessarily best, with the schools given leeway. But the criteria for choosing the best bidder must be clear.
Last year, local contractors questioned the fairness of bidding on two Harmony renovation jobs in the Austin area. On one job, in the suburb of Pflugerville, the low bidder, at $1.17 million, was a well-known Texas company, Harvey-Cleary. The job went to Atlas Texas Construction and Trading, even though its bid was several hundred thousand dollars higher. Atlas, with offices in Texas and Turkey, shows up on a list of Gulen-affiliated companies in a 2006 cable from the American Consul General in Istanbul, Deborah K. Jones, that was released by WikiLeaks.
A vice president of Harvey-Cleary said Harmony never explained its decision.
The same day Atlas won the Pflugerville contract, it got a job at another Austin-area Harmony school, even though four bidders came in lower.
Harmony Schools asked two architects to analyze the disputed Austin jobs. Both architects had previously worked for Harmony Schools; both concluded that the jobs should have been awarded to Atlas.
Atlas has an eclectic business portfolio: for several years, it has also supplied breakfast and lunch at many Harmony schools. The contract is worth hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Two other bidders submitted formal catering proposals. One was Preferred Meal Systems, a national company that undercut Atlas's price by 78 cents a day, a substantial margin given that the two meals are often supplied for about $4.
Jim Drumm, the regional vice president for Preferred Meal, said that when the company learned that its bid was lower than the winner's, ''We attempted, without success, to recontact Harmony Schools to learn why our proposal was rejected.''
Dr. Tarim said Preferred Meal was turned down because its food is heated in special company-installed ovens. With no kitchens in the schools, he said, there is no room for ovens.
Inside the Schools
Recently Dr. Tarim led a tour of one of Harmony's big renovation jobs -- the new home of the Harmony Science Academy, the chain's marquee Houston high school. The academy, one of 11 Harmony schools in Houston, was recently rated among the city's top 10 high schools by Children at Risk, an advocacy group. The campus used to be an ITT business center, and even now, the low-slung buildings communicate office park more than high school. There is also a new building, constructed by TDM, housing a gym and the Cosmos Foundation's headquarters.
This being Texas, the academy is conspicuous for the absence of a football field. But in many ways, the Harmony Schools seem much like standard public schools, albeit of the strict, testing-oriented sort in vogue today.
Students wear uniforms, and anything that detracts from uniform appearance -- even hoop earrings or highlighted hair -- is frowned upon. One teacher described a disciplinary system in which students receive points for behavioral infractions as minor as tilting back in a chair.
The students, as at most Gulen-inspired schools, represent a racial and ethnic cross-section of the community. Many are children of immigrants drawn by the upwardly mobile allure of careers in technology and health care. Beginning in fourth grade, all students must complete science projects.
In a physics class, students demonstrated a homemade hovercraft -- a simple plywood disc fitted with a chair. Rigged to a leaf blower, the contraption levitated inches above the ground, even with someone in the chair.
The project illustrates principles of physics, but the larger point, said the teacher, Levent Sakar, is developing an excitement about science.
''Once a student does a project like that, they will never forget it,'' he said.
Still, the bottom line is measurable achievement. And so the Harmony schools place a heavy emphasis on preparing for state assessment tests, with four practice tests annually, according to schedules on school Web sites. Each practice test occupies the better part of a week, and students who fail get mandatory tutoring, some of it on Saturdays.
Judging school quality, of course, is an imprecise business. But by the measure that Harmony and most charter schools have embraced -- scores on the state tests -- the Harmony schools seem to be succeeding. Last year, 16 of the schools were deemed ''exemplary,'' the highest rating, while seven were rated ''recognized,'' and the other two ''academically acceptable.'' The eight new schools have not yet been rated.
The Harmony schools advertise themselves as college preparatory schools with every graduate accepted to college, and a bulletin board in the hallway at the science academy displays pictures of this year's senior class, along with their college acceptances. But Harmony's ''100 percent'' acceptance rate actually represents only a small census, since most of the schools do not have senior classes and many students transfer earlier on. Statewide, 154 students graduated this year, the largest class yet.
And while the schools' combined math and English SAT scores -- an average of 1026 -- were 37 points above the statewide average last year, they fell short of the 1100 on those two parts that the state regards as predicting ''college readiness.''
Dr. Tarim, who came from Turkey and studied aquatic ecology at Texas A&M, objects to common references to the schools as Turkish. Still, even if they are American charter schools first and foremost, the schools do have an undeniable Turkish flavor.
Many of the furnishings are imported from Turkey -- at a San Antonio school, the entryway features a turquoise arch, and the lobby ceiling is decorated with images of the sun and a star and crescent moon. Harmony advertises that its teachers ''are recruited from around the world,'' but most of its foreign teachers are Turkish men, and all but a handful of the 33 principals are men from Turkey. In addition to the standard foreign languages, the schools offer instruction in Turkish. They encourage students and teachers, even parents, to join subsidized trips to Turkey.
What they avoid, as publicly financed schools, is religious instruction. And amid jabs from critics -- educators, disaffected parents and bloggers -- about their Turkishness and ties to a Muslim group, the schools take great pains to separate themselves from the Gulen movement. They are not ''Gulen schools,'' they insist, and have no affiliation with any movement.
''I'm not a follower of anybody,'' Dr. Tarim said in an interview. Records show, however, that when applying to the State of Texas to form Harmony schools, he was a consultant to Virginia International University in Fairfax, one of the private universities that lawyers for Mr. Gulen say were originally inspired by his teachings.
At a forum on the schools last December in Houston, Dr. Hendrick, the Maryland professor, argued that such denials had only deepened the ambiguity and helped fuel suspicion. ''Why do leaders deny affiliation when affiliation is clear?'' he asked.
Ultimately, some scholars say, the schools are about more than just teaching schoolchildren.
Hakan Yavuz, a Turkish-born assistant professor at the University of Utah's Middle East Center, says he does not oppose the movement, though he is critical of what he calls its male domination and lack of transparency. In his view, the schools are the foundation for the movement's attempts to grow in the United States.
''The main purpose right now is to show the positive side of Islam and to make Americans sympathize with Islam,'' Dr. Yavuz said.
Teachers and Visas
Around the country, the most persistent controversy involving the schools -- and the one most covered in the news -- centers on the hundreds of Turkish teachers and administrators working on special visas.
The schools say they bring in foreign teachers because of a shortage of Americans qualified to teach math and science. Of the 1,500 employees at the Texas Harmony schools this year, Dr. Tarim said, 292 were on the special ''H-1B'' visas, meant for highly skilled foreign workers who fill a need unmet by the American workforce.
But some teachers and their unions, as well as immigration experts, have questioned how earnestly the schools worked to recruit American workers. They say loopholes have made it easy to bring in workers with relatively ordinary skills who substitute for American workers.
''I think they have a preference for these H-1B workers,'' said Dr. Ronil Hira, a professor at the Rochester Institute of Technology who has studied the visa program. ''It may be a preference for a variety of reasons -- lower wages or a network where they've got family or friends and connections and this is a stepping stone for them to get a green card.''
The American jobs, often offered to educators at Gulen schools around the world or graduates of Gulen universities, also provide a way for the movement to expand its ranks in this country, Dr. Yavuz said.
American consular employees reviewing visas have questioned the credentials of some teachers as they sought to enter the country. ''Most applicants had no prior teaching experience, and the schools were listed as related to'' Mr. Gulen, a consular employee wrote in a 2009 cable. It did not say which schools had hired the teachers. Some with dubious credentials were denied visas.
In February, a Chicago charter school union affiliated with the American Federation of Teachers complained to the federal Department of Labor, alleging that the Chicago Math and Science Academy and Concept Schools, a group that operates 25 schools in the Midwest, had abused the visa system by ''routinely assigning these teachers duties or class load that seemingly do not take into account the laws governing H1-B visa holders.''
The Labor Department had already been investigating at least one Concept school. The investigation appeared to have been triggered by a complaint in July 2008 by Mustafa Emanet, a network systems administrator and teacher at a middle school in Cleveland. By law, imported teachers must be paid ''prevailing wage.'' Mr. Emanet alleged that while his visa reflected his promised salary, $44,000, he was actually paid $28,000 his first year.
A Labor Department spokesman said the investigation was ongoing.
Expanding the Network
The heart of the movement's Texas operations is the Turquoise Center, a Houston complex that houses several foundations established by Gulen followers. Their activities show how the movement has integrated itself into life in Texas, often by dint of the foundations' connections to the Harmony Schools.
The Turquoise Center opened in 2008, financed partly through donations from Gulen followers, who on average tithe 10 percent of their income, experts say. The money, Dr. Hendrick wrote in his dissertation, goes ''to pay for a student's scholarship, to provide start-up capital for a new school, to send a group of influential Americans on a two-week trip to Turkey or to sponsor an academic conference devoted to Fethullah Gulen.''
Dozens of Texans -- from state lawmakers to congressional staff members to university professors -- have taken trips to Turkey partly financed by the foundations.
One group, the Raindrop Foundation, helped pay for State Senator Leticia Van de Putte's travel to Istanbul last year, according to a recent campaign report. In January, she co-sponsored a Senate resolution commending Mr. Gulen for ''his ongoing and inspirational contributions to promoting global peace and understanding.''
In an interview, Ms. Van de Putte described the trip as a working visit.
The Raindrop Foundation says its mission is to promote Turkish culture in America. It sponsors cooking classes, traditional Turkish dinners and performances of the Whirling Dervishes, a dance group associated with Sufi Muslim tradition. It also organizes an annual Turkish Language Olympiad where 6,000 students, many from Harmony schools, compete in Turkish language, poetry, dance and singing contests.
The 2011 singing winner was a Hispanic girl from a Harmony school in northwest Houston.
The Raindrop Foundation's president, Mehmet Okumus, is a former Harmony school principal, and some of the foundation's income -- $770,000 a year, he said -- comes through arrangements with the schools. Two Raindrop Foundation units, Zenith Learning and Merit Learning, operate after-school programs, test preparation programs and summer camps at the schools. Parents pay Zenith up to $200 a week to leave their children after school. Of that, Harmony collects 25 cents per child per day, according to Dr. Tarim.
Another group at the Turquoise Center, the Institute of Interfaith Dialog, sponsors lectures on interfaith relations and finances the Gulen Institute at the University of Houston, which sponsors graduate scholarships in social work and pays for graduate students to study in Turkey.
The Institute of Interfaith Dialog -- founded by Mr. Gulen himself, according to court documents -- does not appear to have business dealings with Harmony. But its president, Yuksel Alp Aslandogan, does. Indeed, in 2002, he purchased the former Austin church that became Harmony's second school.
Dr. Aslandogan, a former computer science professor at the University of Texas at Arlington, paid $1.375 million for the building, then leased it to Harmony. Last year, he said in an e-mail, Harmony bought it for $1.7 million. He described his original purchase as ''an investment opportunity toward a good cause'' but declined to say how much he made off the deal, emphasizing that he had to pay taxes and make repairs.
Dr. Aslandogan has other connections to Harmony. He is chief executive of the Texas Gulf Foundation, a nonprofit that provides an array of services to the schools.
The foundation, in fact, grew out of Harmony: its owners and operators originally worked for the schools, according to a statement from Harmony, but left to form Texas Gulf, which they believed would ''provide Harmony and other Texas schools with quality services at lower costs.'' Until recently, Texas Gulf had offices at a Harmony campus.
Since 2007, Harmony says, it has paid Texas Gulf $525,000 for services that include an online professional development program for teachers and administrators, an assessment tool for students and special education assessments.
Dr. Aslandogan reflected on his role in Texas' Turkish community in a PBS program on the Gulen movement broadcast in January. He said he donates ''beyond the expected level in my income'' and added: ''I believe that all these actions -- charitable donations, volunteerism -- are pleasing to God. That's why I am doing all this.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: FETHULLAH GULEN: Turkish Muslim preacher whose followers have started hundreds of schools worldwide (PHOTOGRAPH BY RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Levent Sakar tested a homemade hovercraft in his physics class at Harmony Science Academy High School. The larger point of the project was developing excitement about science for his students, he said. (A20)
 Soner Tarim, Harmony's superintendent, said the schools are separate from the Gulen movement, a Turkish religious group whose followers helped finance the Turquoise Center, right, a community center in Houston. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL STRAVATO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21) GRAPHIC: The Harmony Schools Network: In the past decade, Harmony has become the largest charter school operator in Texas. Social scientists say its schools are part of a global network inspired by Fethullah Gulen, a preacher who promotes public service and a moderate form of Islam. As the Harmony school system grows, it provides contracts to a network of Turkish-owned businesses, many of them also owned by Gulen followers. (A20)            
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CHARTER SCHOOLS (93%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (89%); AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAMS (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (78%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (78%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (78%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (78%); CONSTRUCTION SECTOR PERFORMANCE (76%); PUBLIC FINANCE (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (73%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (73%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (72%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (72%); TEACHER EDUCATION (71%); RELIGION (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (69%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (69%); IMMIGRATION (67%); NEGATIVE NEWS (67%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (63%); INVESTIGATIONS (61%)

Industry: CHARTER SCHOOLS (93%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (90%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); CONSTRUCTION (78%); CONSTRUCTION SECTOR PERFORMANCE (76%); WEB DEVELOPMENT (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (69%)

Person: FETHULLAH GULEN (79%)

Geographic: SAN ANTONIO, TX, USA (78%); TEXAS, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: June 7, 2011


End of Document
What’s on TV Sunday: ‘The Circus’ and ‘Radio Days’
The New York Times 
March 19, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTS; television
Length: 531 words
Byline: JOSHUA BARONE
Highlight: “The Circus,” Showtime’s documentary series, returns to cover the early days of the Trump administration. And Woody Allen’s “Radio Days” is on Hulu.
Body


“The Circus,” Showtime’s documentary series that captured the 2016 election in real time, returns to cover the early days of the Trump administration. And Woody Allen’s nostalgic film “Radio Days” is on Hulu.
What’s on TV
THE CIRCUS 8 p.m. on Showtime. The first season of this newsy documentary series, presented by Mark McKinnon and the “Game Change” authors Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, provided real-time glimpses inside the wild 2016 election. Season 2 will focus on the early days of the Trump administration and the stories behind the daily barrage of newspaper headlines and tweets.
60 MINUTES 7 p.m. on CBS. Bill Whitaker explores the H-1B visa program, which was devised to help American companies recruit tech talent from around the world, in “You’re Fired.” Then, Scott Pelley reports on the civil war in South Sudan in “Fighting Famine,” and Lesley Stahl visits the set of “Sesame Street” in “New Kid on the Street.”
IT FOLLOWS (2015) 8 p.m. on TMC. David Robert Mitchell’s slick teenage horror film is both a homage to the genre’s tropes and a refreshingly original story full of haunting mystery. To explain the terrifying plot would be both difficult and unfair to those who aren’t familiar with it. “‘It Follows’ abides by a principle that few horror movies have the courage to embrace: The unknown is the unknown,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “Clues to the source and motives of this menace are dropped, but they don’t add up. Like the evil in a David Lynch horror film, it is out there in the night, waiting to get you.”
BIG LITTLE LIES 9 p.m. on HBO. David E. Kelley’s mini-series, gorgeously directed by Jean-Marc Vallée, continues with its fifth of seven installments. Among this week’s drama: Madeline receives encouraging but still worrisome news about the play, while Dr. Reisman tries to understand Celeste’s relationship with Perry. Then on “Girls,” at 10, Hannah gets some advice from her dad about a big life decision (no spoilers here). At 10:30, Pete Holmes’s comedy “Crashing,” presented in part by Judd Apatow, returns with Pete’s parents coming to New York. He begs Jess to tag along to pretend they are still married. But a tense dinner puts the charade to a test. Stick around at 11 for the latest episode of “Last Week Tonight With John Oliver.” All these are also streaming on HBO Go and HBO Now.
What’s Streaming
RADIO DAYS (1987) on Hulu. The Times critic Vincent Canby (1924-2000), in his review of this nostalgic movie, lyrically recalled its era, the 1930s and ’40s: “Radio wasn’t outside our lives. It coincided with — and helped to shape — our childhood and adolescence. As we slogged toward maturity, it also grew up and turned into television, leaving behind, like dead skin, transistorized talk-radio and nonstop music shows.” This brief and “enchanted” period, Mr. Canby continued, is what “Woody Allen remembers in his most buoyant, comic and poignantly expressed of memoirs, titled, with his unflagging, poetic exactitude, ‘Radio Days.’”
PHOTOS: President Trump in “The Circus.” (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHOWTIME); Maika Monroe in “It Follows.” (PHOTOGRAPH BY RADIUS TWC); Diane Keaton in “Radio Days.” (PHOTOGRAPH BY ORION PICTURES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Schedule

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); HORROR FILMS (90%); FILM (89%); WRITERS (76%); ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (72%); NEWS BRIEFS (70%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (55%); Television (%); Movies (%)

Industry: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); HORROR FILMS (90%); FILM (89%); STREAMING MEDIA (89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES (79%); WRITERS (76%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (55%)

Geographic: SOUTH SUDAN (79%); SUDAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 20, 2017


End of Document
Is Anyone Good Enough for an H-1B Visa?; Op-Ed Contributor
The New York Times 
November 23, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 859 words
Byline: FRIDA YU
Highlight: Many of my Stanford classmates and I had plans to use our education to contribute to this country. Instead, we’re being kicked out.
Body


Six months ago I won the lottery — the H-1B visa processing lottery for skilled foreign workers. I called my thrilled parents and celebrated with friends. I’m from northeastern China and have an M.B.A. from Stanford, and was planning to stay in Silicon Valley to help start a company based on a promising new technology to improve the use of data. I was overjoyed because, historically, being selected in the lottery was a near guarantee that an applicant could remain in this country at least three more years.
But at the end of July, I received the dreaded Request for Further Evidence from immigration authorities. I provided the extra information that United States Citizenship and Immigration Services asked for. In September, I got another request. I complied again. Finally, on Oct. 11, half a year after my celebration, I learned I had been denied a visa.
After earning law degrees in China and at Oxford, after having worked in Hong Kong as a lawyer at a top international firm, after coming to United States three years ago for an M.B.A. and graduating and joining a start-up, I was given just 60 days to leave the country. I have 17 days left.
In the past, it was fairly safe to assume that once you were selected in the lottery, your H-1B petition would be accepted by immigration officials. In 2016, this happened about 87 percent of the time. But things began to change in April when the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice announced measures to increase scrutiny of the highly skilled applicants who use the H-1B program, and President Trump            signed an executive order calling for federal agencies to suggest reforms to the program.
While it’s unclear exactly what percentage of petitions have been approved so far in 2017, requests for evidence like the ones I received have increased by           44 percent compared with last year, according to immigration statistics, strongly suggesting that more people are being denied than before Mr. Trump took office.
Many of my fellow international students are in situations similar to mine. Some had job offers from companies like Google, Apple and PwC when they learned that their applications had been denied or did not even make it into the lottery. For those whose employers have only United States offices, losing the lottery meant losing jobs and going home, with no real way to use the skills they were on the verge of contributing to the American economy.
And some classmates who, like me, were picked in the H-1B lottery last spring are still waiting for an answer. The Trump administration on April 3 announced that it would suspend the “premium processing” service that, for a fee, guaranteed applicants responses to their petitions within 15 days. This has caused problems for students who needed a quick decision because their work authorization expired over the summer or because they wanted to plan overseas trips that they couldn’t make while their status was in limbo. My mom had surgery for cancer in July, but I simply couldn’t go back to China to be with her and risk being denied at the border upon my return because I didn’t have H-1B approval.
My two requests for evidence asked me to prove my job was a “specialty occupation” — that is, work that only someone with a bachelor’s degree or higher can do. My work involves artificial intelligence and big data, and my letters of support came from an authority in my industry and veteran start-up investor, and a Nobel Prize winner. But it wasn’t enough to convince the government that my job requires advanced skills.
While I gave up my law job and used my savings and my parents’ to pay my Stanford graduate school tuition, in the grand scheme of things, I know my situation is much better than that of many immigrants who are forced to leave this country: Just this week, thousands of Haitians in the United States learned that they may have to return to Haitias a result of the administration’s decision to strip them of the Temporary Protected Status they were granted while their country recovered from disasters.
It’s true that I’m brokenhearted about missing the chance to return to China to care for my mother (she insisted that I stay and pursue the visa that was her dream for me), but I’m not looking for sympathy. As much as I hate to leave, I know I will be fine.
Rather, I’m frustrated, because I know I’m part of a pattern: America is losing many very skilled workers because of its anti-immigrant sentiment, and while this is a disappointing blow to me and my classmates, it will also be a blow to the United States’ competitiveness in the global economy. Tech giants such as Google and Tesla were founded by immigrants.
I can’t make sense of why an administration that claims to want this country to be strong would be so eager to get rid of us. We are losing our dreams, and America is losing the value we bring.
As I make plans to go back to China, I find myself wondering: If I am not qualified to stay in the United States, then who is?
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and            Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the            Opinion Today newsletter. 
Frida Yu is a lawyer and entrepreneur.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); PETITIONS (86%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (78%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); LAYOFFS (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); LAWYERS (71%); APPROVALS (70%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (58%); NATIONAL SECURITY (57%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); United States Economy (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Ticker: Citizenship and Immigration Services (US); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US); Homeland Security Department

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); LOTTERIES (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (78%); LAWYERS (71%)

Person: Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (78%); HONG KONG, CHINA (79%); NORTHEAST CHINA (78%); UNITED STATES (96%); CHINA (92%)

Load-Date: November 29, 2017


End of Document
Biden Is Expected to Expand U.S.-India Relations While Stressing Human Rights
The New York Times 
December 24, 2020 Thursday 22:36 EST


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1371 words
Byline: Pranshu Verma and Jeffrey Gettleman
Highlight: Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India’s relationship with Washington changes in a Biden administration.
Body


Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India’s relationship with Washington changes in a Biden administration.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration has significantly invested in its relationship with India over the past four years, seeing the country as a crucial partner in counterbalancing the rise of China.
Military cooperation and a personal friendship between President Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India — both domineering nationalists — have pushed New Delhi and Washington closer.
Now, as President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. is set to move into the White House, American diplomats, Indian officials and security experts are resetting their expectations for relations between the world’s two largest democracies.
On one hand, experts said, Mr. Biden’s administration will most likely pay more attention to India’s contentious domestic developments, where Mr. Modi’s right-wing party has been steadily consolidating power and becoming overtly hostile toward Muslim minorities. Mr. Trump has largely turned a blind eye.
Others believe that the United States cannot afford to drastically alter its policy toward New Delhi because the United States needs its help to counter China and increasingly values India as a military and trade partner.
“The real opening between the United States and India began under President Clinton, it accelerated under President Bush, it continued under President Obama, and it’s accelerating again under our president, President Trump,” Stephen Biegun, the deputy secretary of state, said in October. “One of the constants in U.S.-India relations has been that every presidential administration here in the United States has left the relationship in even better shape than the one it inherited.”
Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India’s relationship with Washington morphs in a Biden administration.
“We need India for various reasons,” saidAshley J. Tellis, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington. “Most important of which is balancing Chinese power in Asia.”
This year, 20 Indian soldiers were killed in the worst border clash between India and China in decades. As relations between New Delhi and Beijing soured, India strengthened its commitment to a multilateral partnership with the United States, India, Japan and Australia — known as the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, or Quad.
China has castigated this forum as an Asian version of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, one that is directly aimed at counterbalancing its interests. India, leery of formal alliances and upsetting trade relations with Beijing, was initially hesitant to fully engage.
Mr. Biden, who once spoke optimistically of China’s emergence “as a great power,” has become increasingly tough on Beijing, and some analysts said his administration would most likely use the Quad as a way to ensure that the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific region does not tilt too far toward China.
“They’ll keep the Quad going,” said Richard Fontaine, the chief executive of the Center for a New American Security, adding that the partnership had gone from largely being considered “a meeting in search of an agenda to something real that is doing things.”
But some Indian officials are concerned that the next administration will not be as tough on China as the current one and that Mr. Biden will adopt a more nuanced and less favorable position toward India, analysts said.
“If he’s seen as pursuing a softer approach with China, it will make New Delhi have second thoughts about a soft alliance,” said Brahma Chellaney, a professor of strategic studies at the Center for Policy Research, a think tank in New Delhi.
Mr. Biden’s administration will inherit a growing military relationship with India. In recent months, the United States and India have shared more intelligence and conducted more coordinated military training exercises. The military cooperation is closest among the navies of the two countries; Kenneth J. Braithwaite, the Navy secretary, visited India last week.
The United States has been trying to increase arms sales to India, but the country’s history of buying weapons from nations such as France, Israel and Russia, has complicated that effort. American officials are concerned about providing equipment to India if there is a risk that members of the Russian military or other foreign agents would then have access to it. American and Indian officials signed an agreement to share real-time geographical data through satellite images when Secretary of State Mike Pompeo visited India in October.
Despite the warming ties, though, Indian officials also worry that Mr. Biden might be less critical of Pakistan, the country’s archrival, than Mr. Trump has been. Mr. Biden may even reach out to Islamabad for support as the United States draws down troops in Afghanistan. Early in his presidency, Mr. Trump suspended military aid to Pakistan, accusing it of supporting terrorists and giving the United States “nothing but lies and deceit.”
In contrast, Mr. Trump has said little about the increasing hostility toward Muslims in India and the divisive politics of Mr. Modi’s Hindu nationalist party. The Trump administration has kept largely quiet about Mr. Modi’s crackdown on Kashmir last year and the passage of a new, blatantly anti-Muslim citizenship law. And Mr. Modi’s recent pro-market agricultural policies have fueled a farmer rebellion that has snarled daily life in the capital and stirred up more anti-government feeling.
Both Mr. Biden — who is considered a strong friend of India since his days as a senator, when he worked to approve the country’s landmark civil nuclear agreement in 2008 — and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris are likely to be more critical of India’s human rights record, both in private and in public, experts said.
Ms. Harris, whose mother was Indian and who has remained close to that side of her family, has already indicated that she is concerned about Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim area that has long been a flash point between India and Pakistan.
Mr. Biden’s campaign documents specifically called on the Indian government to “take all necessary steps to restore rights for all the people” in Kashmir. His campaign added that he was also “disappointed” in Mr. Modi’s citizenship law.
Some activists in the United States want the Biden administration to go even further and warn Indian officials that discontent over some of its current policies could imperil how strong a partner India might be for the United States.
“Human rights first is equally important,” said Simran Noor, the chairwoman of South Asian Americans Leading Together, an advocacy group in the United States. “The impacts of not addressing it now could lead to a lot worse conditions in the future.”
Another challenging issue is visas. Mr. Trump this year suspended H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a major setback for American technology companies, which employ many Indians, and the wider Indian diaspora in the United States.
The two countries have also struggled to sign a comprehensive trade agreement, with talks hung up over imports of American dairy products and medical devices such as coronary stents. After two decades of India loosening its trade restrictions, Western officials say the country has been tightening them over the past two years, embracing Mr. Modi’s push for a “self-reliant India.”
And many of Mr. Biden’s priorities — including climate change — will most likely require India’s cooperation, ensuring that New Delhi remains front of mind for Mr. Biden’s chief diplomats.
“There is no relationship today between any two countries that is as important as the relationship between the U.S. and India,” said Nisha D. Biswal, Mr. Obama’s assistant secretary of state for South and Central Asian affairs. “Neither of us can go it alone.”
Pranshu Verma reported from Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mumbai, India.
Pranshu Verma reported from Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mumbai, India. 
PHOTO: The Biden administration is likely to focus on domestic issues in India, where policies fueled a farmer rebellion. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANINDITO MUKHERJEE/GETTY IMAGES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (77%); ARMED FORCES (73%); DEMOCRACIES (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (73%); INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS (73%); NATIONALISM (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (72%); MINORITY GROUPS (72%); EXECUTIVES (71%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (60%); India (%); United States International Relations (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Defense and Military Forces (%); Arms Trade (%); Muslims and Islam (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Indian-Americans (%); State Department (%); Presidential Transition (US) (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Harris, Kamala D (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Modi, Narendra (%); China (%)

Industry: DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (78%); ARMED FORCES (73%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (94%); DONALD TRUMP (92%); KAMALA HARRIS (92%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); NARENDRA MODI (79%); BILL CLINTON (58%); R RICHARD FONTAINE (56%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Harris, Kamala D; Trump, Donald J; Modi, Narendra

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (93%); BEIJING, CHINA (88%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%); INDIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (95%); ASIA (79%); JAPAN (79%)

Load-Date: December 24, 2020


End of Document
Indian Company Under Scrutiny Over U.S. Visas
The New York Times
June 22, 2011 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2011 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 1479 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON and VIKAS BAJAJ
Body


A giant Indian outsourcing company with thousands of employees in the United States is facing an expanding federal investigation prompted by claims from an American whistle-blower that it misused short-term visitors' visas to bring in low-cost workers from India.
Accusations that the company, Infosys Technologies, repeatedly violated the terms of business visitor visas were first raised in a lawsuit filed in February in Alabama by Jack Palmer, an Infosys project manager. Aside from Mr. Palmer, at least two other Infosys managers in the United States have submitted internal whistle-blower reports pointing to Indians on business visitor visas who were performing longer-term work not authorized under those visas, according to internal documents and current Infosys managers.
In May, Infosys acknowledged that it had received a subpoena from a federal grand jury in Texas seeking information about the company's use of the visitor documents, known as B-1 visas, which are easier to obtain. This month, N. R. Narayana Murthy, an Infosys founder, expressed his concern about that investigation at a board meeting in Bangalore, India, in his final address before he retired as company chairman.
''As I leave the board, I feel sad'' about the subpoena, he said. ''The issue will be decided on its merits in due course,'' said Mr. Murthy, who is something of a legend in global business for building the company over three decades from a $250 investment into an outsourcing powerhouse with $6 billion in revenues.
In papers filed in Mr. Palmer's lawsuit, Infosys denied all his accusations and asked a federal judge to remove the dispute from court and send it to arbitration. In a statement, Infosys said it was committed to ''absolute compliance'' with American visa requirements and had undertaken an internal review of its practices.
''Infosys is a large and rapidly growing company,'' the statement said. ''We have made changes over time to certain of our policies relating to the business visa program and we may continue to make improvements in those policies and controls.''
The Infosys inquiry coincides with a broader attack in Congress on longer-term visas, known as H-1B, that Infosys and other Indian companies rely on to bring Indian technology workers to the United States. With unemployment for Americans stubbornly high, lawmakers have become increasingly reluctant to defend H-1B visas, which give temporary residence to highly skilled foreigners. In recent years, the top companies receiving those visas were not American names, but Infosys and another big Indian outsourcing company, Wipro.
Last week, Representative Zoe Lofgren of California, the senior Democrat on the immigration subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, introduced a bill that would increase the wages employers would have to pay H-1B workers, in an effort to ensure they do not undercut Americans. The measure is specifically aimed at Indian outsourcing companies. Last year, Congress added an extra $2,000 to the fee for H-1B visas, in another move aimed at the Indian companies.
Yet the criminal investigation is perhaps the most worrisome development for Infosys, which enjoys a reputation as one of India's best-run and most respected companies. The events began with Mr. Palmer, 43, a project manager from Alabama who was hired by the company in 2008. In a sworn affidavit he submitted to the federal court, Mr. Palmer said his differences with Infosys management began after he was summoned to a meeting in Bangalore in March 2010. Top executives, he said, discussed ways to ''creatively'' get around H-1B visa limitations ''to fulfill the high demand for its customers at lower cost.''
In general, B-1 visas are granted to business visitors coming to the United States for short stays to attend meetings, conferences or training sessions, or to install specialized equipment. Visitors may not be employed for contract work like H-1B workers, nor can they be paid salaries in this country. There is no annual limit on business visitor visas, whereas H-1B visas are restricted to 85,000 a year.
Mr. Palmer said his supervisors asked him to write letters inviting workers to come from India for sales and training meetings, letters he believed were false. ''I refused to write the letters,'' he said.
After word got out of his refusal, Mr. Palmer said, he was chastised by his managers and began to receive threats by e-mail and telephone. In October, Infosys has confirmed, Mr. Palmer filed a whistle-blower report about B-1 visa holders from India assigned to projects he or others managed. His report said the B-1 visa holders were doing the same tasks as workers on H-1B visas, including writing and testing software code. Mr. Palmer said he personally knew of at least 60 Indian workers doing contract work on B-1 visas.
Mr. Palmer still works at Infosys. He feels isolated and besieged within the company, according to Kenneth Mendelsohn, his lawyer in Montgomery, who has instructed him not to speak publicly about his experience.
''I'm protecting him as best I can so Infosys doesn't fire him,'' Mr. Mendelsohn said. But Mr. Mendelsohn provided documents and e-mails that he said Mr. Palmer has shared with investigators from the State Department Bureau of Diplomatic Security, the Department of Homeland Security and the Justice Department.
In one e-mail, another Infosys manager confirmed to Mr. Palmer that three Indians on B-1 visas were ''working on client sites'' on a contract with Baker Hughes, an oil services company in Houston.
In an e-mail exchange with Jeffrey Friedel, a top lawyer for Infosys, Mr. Palmer described the work assigned to one B-1 visa holder on a project for Heidrick & Struggles, an executive search company in Chicago. ''His project task consists of reviewing designs and then to physically create and write test scripts,'' Mr. Palmer wrote. ''This process is repeated over many weeks.''
Referring to the same employee, another manager wrote that he was ''working on a B-1 visa'' and cautioned his colleagues not to include the man's name in any contracts. ''We can't put name on B-1 people for contract,'' the manager wrote.
In an e-mail in December, Mr. Friedel assured Mr. Palmer that the issues he had raised ''have made it clear to management that certain changes need to be made to our systems.'' Mr. Friedel enumerated seven steps the company would take to prevent misuse of visitor visas.
But only this month, another Infosys manager became alarmed after discovering by chance that B-1 workers were among the team members on a project under the manager's supervision. ''There was no significant difference between the B-1 and the H-1B employees in the type of work they did,'' the manager, who was granted anonymity out of fears of retaliation by the company, said in an interview.
At least one of Infosys' major clients, Wal-Mart, has been contacted by investigators about its contracts with Infosys. Greg Rossiter, a Wal-Mart spokesman, declined to comment. There has been no suggestion of wrongdoing by any Infosys client mentioned in the visa investigations.
A State Department official in India said Infosys and other Indian companies had made use in recent years of an exception in the complex visa guidelines that allows them to send workers to the United States on B-1 visas for up to six months for certain short-term projects that might otherwise have required an H-1B visa. Since last year, the State Department has clamped down on the use of that exception and is considering whether to eliminate it, the official and several outsourcing executives in India said.
Mr. Palmer, who is known as Jay, filed his lawsuit claiming that Infosys had failed to protect him from threats from within the company he received after submitting his whistle-blower report, and had unfairly withheld more than $100,000 in bonuses he was owed. Described by his lawyer, Mr. Mendelsohn, as ''on an emotional roller coaster,'' Mr. Palmer has reported receiving a new death threat against himself and his family as recently as April.
While denying Mr. Palmer's claims, Infosys has noted that Indian employees with business visitor visas are a small part -- less than 2 percent -- of its teams in the United States. The company reports a total of 15,500 employees in this country, including 10,100 on H-1B visas. North American clients account for 65 percent of the company's revenue.
At least one top Indian executive overseeing United States immigration procedures has resigned from the company, Infosys said.
But Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee who closely monitors United States visa programs, said he remained skeptical of Infosys's intentions.
''It appears the B-1 visa program has become a subterfuge for companies wanting to avoid the cap-and-wage requirements of the H-1B visa,'' Mr. Grassley said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: N. R. Narayana Murthy, a founder and recently retired chairman of Infosys. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AIJAZ RAHI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Employees in 2008 at Infosys in Bangalore, India. The company's visa practices are under scrutiny. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NAMAS BHOJANI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)                                             
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); SUBPOENAS (91%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WHISTLEBLOWERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); JUDGES (76%); GRAND JURY (73%); LEGISLATION (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); PROJECT MANAGEMENT (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (67%); WAGE GROWTH (66%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (94%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (94%); INFY (NYSE) (94%); INFY (NSE) (94%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (94%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%)

Person: ZOE LOFGREN (58%)

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: June 22, 2011


End of Document
What's on Sunday
The New York Times
March 19, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section SP; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 8
Length: 507 words
Byline: By JOSHUA BARONE
Body


''The Circus,'' Showtime's documentary series that captured the 2016 election in real time, returns to cover the early days of the Trump administration. And Woody Allen's nostalgic film ''Radio Days'' is on Hulu.
What's on TV 
  THE CIRCUS 8 p.m. on Showtime. The first season of this newsy documentary series, presented by Mark McKinnon and the ''Game Change'' authors Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, provided real-time glimpses inside the wild 2016 election. Season 2 will focus on the early days of the Trump administration and the stories behind the daily barrage of newspaper headlines and tweets.
  60 MINUTES 7 p.m. on CBS. Bill Whitaker explores the H-1B visa program, which was devised to help American companies recruit tech talent from around the world, in ''You're Fired.'' Then, Scott Pelley reports on the civil war in South Sudan in ''Fighting Famine,'' and Lesley Stahl visits the set of ''Sesame Street'' in ''New Kid on the Street.''
  IT FOLLOWS (2015) 8 p.m. on TMC. David Robert Mitchell's slick teenage horror film is both a homage to the genre's tropes and a refreshingly original story full of haunting mystery. To explain the terrifying plot would be both difficult and unfair to those who aren't familiar with it. '''It Follows' abides by a principle that few horror movies have the courage to embrace: The unknown is the unknown,'' Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. ''Clues to the source and motives of this menace are dropped, but they don't add up. Like the evil in a David Lynch horror film, it is out there in the night, waiting to get you.''
  BIG LITTLE LIES 9 p.m. on HBO. David E. Kelley's mini-series, gorgeously directed by Jean-Marc Vallée, continues with its fifth of seven installments. Among this week's drama: Madeline receives encouraging but still worrisome news about the play, while Dr. Reisman tries to understand Celeste's relationship with Perry. Then on ''Girls,'' at 10, Hannah gets some advice from her dad about a big life decision (no spoilers here). At 10:30, Pete Holmes's comedy ''Crashing,'' presented in part by Judd Apatow, returns with Pete's parents coming to New York. He begs Jess to tag along to pretend they are still married. But a tense dinner puts the charade to a test. Stick around at 11 for the latest episode of ''Last Week Tonight With John Oliver.'' All these are also streaming on HBO Go and HBO Now.
  What's Streaming
  RADIO DAYS (1987) on Hulu. The Times critic Vincent Canby (1924-2000), in his review of this nostalgic movie, lyrically recalled its era, the 1930s and '40s: ''Radio wasn't outside our lives. It coincided with -- and helped to shape -- our childhood and adolescence. As we slogged toward maturity, it also grew up and turned into television, leaving behind, like dead skin, transistorized talk-radio and nonstop music shows.'' This brief and ''enchanted'' period, Mr. Canby continued, is what ''Woody Allen remembers in his most buoyant, comic and poignantly expressed of memoirs, titled, with his unflagging, poetic exactitude, 'Radio Days.'''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/19/arts/television/whats-on-tv-sunday-the-circus-and-radio-days.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: President Trump in ''The Circus.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHOWTIME)
Maika Monroe in ''It Follows.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY RADIUS TWC)
 Diane Keaton in ''Radio Days.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY ORION PICTURES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Schedule

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); HORROR FILMS (89%); SPOILERS & TEASERS (77%); WRITERS (76%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); NEWS BRIEFS (69%); CIVIL WAR (67%); FAMINE (67%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (54%)

Industry: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); HORROR FILMS (89%); STREAMING MEDIA (89%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES (78%); WRITERS (76%); FAMINE (67%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (54%)

Person: JOHN OLIVER (79%)

Geographic: SOUTH SUDAN (79%); SUDAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: March 19, 2017


End of Document
Is Anyone Good Enough for an H1-B Visa?
The New York Times
November 24, 2017 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Length: 858 words
Byline: By FRIDA YU
Frida Yu is a lawyer and entrepreneur.
Body


Six months ago I won the lottery -- the H-1B visa processing lottery for skilled foreign workers. I called my thrilled parents and celebrated with friends. I'm from northeastern China and have an M.B.A. from Stanford, and was planning to stay in Silicon Valley to help start a company based on a promising new technology to improve the use of data. I was overjoyed because, historically, being selected in the lottery was a near guarantee that an applicant could remain in this country at least three more years.
But at the end of July, I received the dreaded Request for Further Evidence from immigration authorities. I provided the extra information that United States Citizenship and Immigration Services asked for. In September, I got another request. I complied again. Finally, on Oct. 11, half a year after my celebration, I learned I had been denied a visa. 
  After earning law degrees in China and at Oxford, after having worked in Hong Kong as a lawyer at a top international firm, after coming to United States three years ago for an M.B.A. and graduating and joining a start-up, I was given just 60 days to leave the country. I have 17 days left.
  In the past, it was fairly safe to assume that once you were selected in the lottery, your H-1B petition would be accepted by immigration officials. In 2016, this happened about 87 percent of the time. But things began to change in April when the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice announced measures to increase scrutiny of the highly skilled applicants who use the H-1B program, and President Trump signed an executive order calling for federal agencies to suggest reforms to the program.
  While it's unclear exactly what percentage of petitions have been approved so far in 2017, requests for evidence like the ones I received have increased by 44 percent compared with last year, according to immigration statistics, strongly suggesting that more people are being denied than before Mr. Trump took office.
  Many of my fellow international students are in situations similar to mine. Some had job offers from companies like Google, Apple and PwC when they learned that their applications had been denied or did not even make it into the lottery. For those whose employers have only United States offices, losing the lottery meant losing jobs and going home, with no real way to use the skills they were on the verge of contributing to the American economy.
  And some classmates who, like me, were picked in the H-1B lottery last spring are still waiting for an answer. The Trump administration on April 3 announced that it would  suspend the ''premium processing'' service that, for a fee, guaranteed applicants responses to their petitions within 15 days. This has caused problems for students who needed a quick decision because their work authorization expired over the summer or because they wanted to plan overseas trips that they couldn't make while their status was in limbo. My mom had surgery for cancer in July, but I simply couldn't go back to China to be with her and risk being denied at the border upon my return because I didn't have H-1B approval.
  My two requests for evidence asked me to prove my job was a ''specialty occupation'' -- that is, work that only someone with a bachelor's degree or higher can do. My work involves artificial intelligence and big data, and my letters of support came from an authority in my industry and veteran start-up investor, and a Nobel Prize winner. But it wasn't enough to convince the government that my job requires advanced skills.
  While I gave up my law job and used my savings and my parents' to pay my Stanford graduate school tuition, in the grand scheme of things, I know my situation is much better than that of many immigrants who are forced to leave this country: Just this week, thousands of Haitians in the United States learned that they may have to return to Haiti as a result of the administration's decision to strip them of the Temporary Protected Status they were granted while their country recovered from disasters.
  It's true that I'm brokenhearted about missing the chance to return to China to care for my mother (she insisted that I stay and pursue the visa that was her dream for me), but I'm not looking for sympathy. As much as I hate to leave, I know I will be fine.
  Rather, I'm frustrated, because I know I'm part of a pattern: America is losing many very skilled workers because of its anti-immigrant sentiment, and while this is a disappointing blow to me and my classmates, it will also be a blow to the United States' competitiveness in the global economy. Tech giants such as Google and Tesla were founded by immigrants.
  I can't make sense of why an administration that claims to want this country to be strong would be so eager to get rid of us. We are losing our dreams, and America is losing the value we bring.
  As I make plans to go back to China, I find myself wondering: If I am not qualified to stay in the United States, then who is?
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/23/opinion/immigration-visa-h1b-trump-.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); PETITIONS (86%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (78%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (74%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (73%); LAWYERS (71%); APPROVALS (69%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (69%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (68%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (50%); NATIONAL SECURITY (50%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (57%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (56%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); LOTTERIES (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (77%); LAWYERS (71%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (78%); HONG KONG, CHINA (79%); NORTHEAST CHINA (73%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (92%)

Load-Date: November 24, 2017


End of Document
Biden Expected to Build On Relations With India, Affirming Human Rights
The New York Times
December 25, 2020 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2020 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1358 words
Byline: By Pranshu Verma and Jeffrey Gettleman
Body


Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India's relationship with Washington changes in a Biden administration.
WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration has significantly invested in its relationship with India over the past four years, seeing the country as a crucial partner in counterbalancing the rise of China. 
  Military cooperation and a personal friendship between President Trump and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India -- both domineering nationalists -- have pushed New Delhi and Washington closer.
  Now, as President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. is set to move into the White House, American diplomats, Indian officials and security experts are resetting their expectations for relations between the world's two largest democracies.
  On one hand, experts said, Mr. Biden's administration will most likely pay more attention to India's contentious domestic developments, where Mr. Modi's right-wing party has been steadily consolidating power and becoming overtly hostile toward Muslim minorities. Mr. Trump has largely turned a blind eye.
  Others believe that the United States cannot afford to drastically alter its policy toward New Delhi because the United States needs its help to counter China and increasingly values India as a military and trade partner.
  ''The real opening between the United States and India began under President Clinton, it accelerated under President Bush, it continued under President Obama, and it's accelerating again under our president, President Trump,'' Stephen Biegun, the deputy secretary of state, said in October. ''One of the constants in U.S.-India relations has been that every presidential administration here in the United States has left the relationship in even better shape than the one it inherited.''
  Most experts agree that China will be the driving force behind how India's relationship with Washington morphs in a Biden administration.
  ''We need India for various reasons,'' said Ashley J. Tellis, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington. ''Most important of which is balancing Chinese power in Asia.''
  This year, 20 Indian soldiers were killed in the worst border clash between India and China in decades. As relations between New Delhi and Beijing soured, India strengthened its commitment to a multilateral partnership with the United States, India, Japan and Australia -- known as the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue, or Quad.
  China has castigated this forum as an Asian version of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, one that is directly aimed at counterbalancing its interests. India, leery of formal alliances and upsetting trade relations with Beijing, was initially hesitant to fully engage.
  Mr. Biden, who once spoke optimistically of China's emergence ''as a great power,'' has become increasingly tough on Beijing, and some analysts said his administration would most likely use the Quad as a way to ensure that the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific region does not tilt too far toward China.
  ''They'll keep the Quad going,'' said Richard Fontaine, the chief executive of the Center for a New American Security, adding that the partnership had gone from largely being considered ''a meeting in search of an agenda to something real that is doing things.''
  But some Indian officials are concerned that the next administration will not be as tough on China as the current one and that Mr. Biden will adopt a more nuanced and less favorable position toward India, analysts said.
  ''If he's seen as pursuing a softer approach with China, it will make New Delhi have second thoughts about a soft alliance,'' said Brahma Chellaney, a professor of strategic studies at the Center for Policy Research, a think tank in New Delhi.
  Mr. Biden's administration will inherit a growing military relationship with India. In recent months, the United States and India have shared more intelligence and conducted more coordinated military training exercises. The military cooperation is closest among the navies of the two countries; Kenneth J. Braithwaite, the Navy secretary, visited India last week.
  The United States has been trying to increase arms sales to India, but the country's history of buying weapons from nations such as France, Israel and Russia, has complicated that effort. American officials are concerned about providing equipment to India if there is a risk that members of the Russian military or other foreign agents would then have access to it. American and Indian officials signed an agreement to share real-time geographical data through satellite images when Secretary of State Mike Pompeo visited India in October.
  Despite the warming ties, though, Indian officials also worry that Mr. Biden might be less critical of Pakistan, the country's archrival, than Mr. Trump has been. Mr. Biden may even reach out to Islamabad for support as the United States draws down troops in Afghanistan. Early in his presidency, Mr. Trump suspended military aid to Pakistan, accusing it of supporting terrorists and giving the United States ''nothing but lies and deceit.''
  In contrast, Mr. Trump has said little about the increasing hostility toward Muslims in India and the divisive politics of Mr. Modi's Hindu nationalist party. The Trump administration has kept largely quiet about Mr. Modi's crackdown on Kashmir last year and the passage of a new, blatantly anti-Muslim citizenship law. And Mr. Modi's recent pro-market agricultural policies have fueled a farmer rebellion that has snarled daily life in the capital and stirred up more anti-government feeling.
  Both Mr. Biden -- who is considered a strong friend of India since his days as a senator, when he worked to approve the country's landmark civil nuclear agreement in 2008 -- and Vice President-elect Kamala Harris are likely to be more critical of India's human rights record, both in private and in public, experts said.
  Ms. Harris, whose mother was Indian and who has remained close to that side of her family, has already indicated that she is concerned about Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim area that has long been a flash point between India and Pakistan.
  Mr. Biden's campaign documents specifically called on the Indian government to ''take all necessary steps to restore rights for all the people'' in Kashmir. His campaign added that he was also ''disappointed'' in Mr. Modi's citizenship law.
  Some activists in the United States want the Biden administration to go even further and warn Indian officials that discontent over some of its current policies could imperil how strong a partner India might be for the United States.
  ''Human rights first is equally important,'' said Simran Noor, the chairwoman of South Asian Americans Leading Together, an advocacy group in the United States. ''The impacts of not addressing it now could lead to a lot worse conditions in the future.''
  Another challenging issue is visas. Mr. Trump this year suspended H-1B visas for high-skilled workers, a major setback for American technology companies, which employ many Indians, and the wider Indian diaspora in the United States.
  The two countries have also struggled to sign a comprehensive trade agreement, with talks hung up over imports of American dairy products and medical devices such as coronary stents. After two decades of India loosening its trade restrictions, Western officials say the country has been tightening them over the past two years, embracing Mr. Modi's push for a ''self-reliant India.''
  And many of Mr. Biden's priorities -- including climate change -- will most likely require India's cooperation, ensuring that New Delhi remains front of mind for Mr. Biden's chief diplomats.
  ''There is no relationship today between any two countries that is as important as the relationship between the U.S. and India,'' said Nisha D. Biswal, Mr. Obama's assistant secretary of state for South and Central Asian affairs. ''Neither of us can go it alone.''
  Pranshu Verma reported from Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mumbai, India.Pranshu Verma reported from Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Mumbai, India.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/24/world/asia/biden-india.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The Biden administration is likely to focus on domestic issues in India, where policies fueled a farmer rebellion. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANINDITO MUKHERJEE/GETTY IMAGES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (76%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (76%); INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS (73%); DEMOCRACIES (72%); MINORITY GROUPS (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (71%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (71%); NATIONALISM (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (62%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (60%)

Industry: INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (76%); ARMED FORCES (71%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); DONALD TRUMP (90%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); NARENDRA MODI (79%); BILL CLINTON (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (93%); BEIJING, CHINA (88%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); INDIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (95%); ASIA (79%); JAPAN (79%)

Load-Date: December 25, 2020


End of Document
Whistle-Blower Claiming Visa Fraud Keeps His Job, but Not His Work
The New York Times
April 13, 2012 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2012 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 1253 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


It has been 17 months since Jack B. Palmer first made a quiet complaint through internal channels at Infosys, the giant Indian outsourcing company he works for, saying he suspected some managers were committing visa fraud. Since then, Mr. Palmer says, he has been harassed by superiors and co-workers, sidelined with no work assignment, shut out of the company's computers, denied bonuses and hounded by death threats.
But what has driven him nearly crazy, with bouts of depression alternating with rage, Mr. Palmer said, is the silence. Since last April, Mr. Palmer has been stewing day after day in his home near Montgomery, Ala., contemplating a blank Infosys screen on his computer and agonizing over whether his whistle-blowing was worth it.
''They did the worst thing they could do to someone who is used to working 80 hours a week,'' Mr. Palmer said. ''They sit me at home and cut me off from everything. My life is floating in Infosys purgatory.''
Mr. Palmer's experience since he filed his first report in October 2010 alleging misuse of business visitor visas for Indian workers is a cautionary tale about the perils of confronting a big corporation. Mr. Palmer's travails have been compounded because he is in a small minority of Americans employed by the huge company, which has $6.8 billion in annual revenues and about 15,000 employees in the United States alone, most from India.
A lawsuit Mr. Palmer filed against Infosys in February 2011 prompted federal prosecutors in Plano, Tex., where the company has offices, to open a criminal investigation that is still expanding. Federal investigators are looking into whether the company used workers from India for certain kinds of jobs here that were not allowed under their temporary visas, known as B-1. They are also examining numerous irregularities in the company's hiring practices and documents, federal officials said.
Infosys, a fast-growing global business that has carefully built a reputation for integrity, vigorously denies Mr. Palmer's accusations and is fighting his lawsuit in federal court in Montgomery.
''Any allegation or assertion that there is or was a corporate policy of evading the law in conjunction with the B-1 visa program is simply not accurate,'' Ted Bockius, an Infosys spokesman, said Thursday. Infosys has been in discussions with the federal authorities, he said, and has complied with a subpoena they issued. He added that fewer than 2 percent of the company's workers in the United States at any time are on B-1 visitor visas.
Mr. Palmer, 44, a software project manager for Infosys since August 2008, said he decided to sue the company, claiming he was punished for reporting corporate misdeeds, after executives pressured him to drop his complaints. But even as the months have crawled by, Mr. Palmer has not quit his Infosys job, fearing he will not get another one now that he is known as the guy who went up against the Indian company.
''The mental and physical challenge one takes on after blowing the whistle is excruciating,'' Mr. Palmer, who is known as Jay, wrote in a recent e-mail. After what he has seen, he said, ''It will be hard for me to advise anyone to blow the whistle.''
In Senate testimony and court documents, Mr. Palmer charged that Infosys brought Indian workers on short-term visitor visas, known as B-1, instead of longer-term temporary visas, known as H-1B, which are more costly and time-consuming to obtain. Infosys and other Indian technology outsourcing companies are consistently among the top users of H-1B visas, but in recent years intensified scrutiny by the State Department has made those visas more difficult to get.
The B-1 is for foreigners coming for conferences or to conduct training, consulting or contract negotiations who continue as employees of the company abroad. They are paid at the generally lower wage rates of the home country.
''This was totally about profit and not hiring Americans for jobs in the U.S. due to higher salary requirements,'' Mr. Palmer told the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on immigration in July. Besides Mr. Palmer, at least two other Infosys managers have provided information to investigators about alleged visa abuses.
Mr. Palmer is still on the Infosys payroll, but with no work and little communication from the company, and his moods swing erratically, he said. He has struggled with drinking, gained and lost 20 pounds and taken medication for anger and depression.
''You're around people every day, and then all of a sudden you are staring at four walls,'' Mr. Palmer wrote in an e-mail. ''No one will hire me and I can't quit, so they just torture me. I have become numb and cumbersome to this world.''
Menacing calls to his home and his mother's nearby prompted him to buy a handgun, which he straps to his ankle whenever he goes out. Always on edge, he drew the gun in February on a salesman who tried to approach his house to offer cleaning goods.
His lawyer, Kenneth J. Mendelsohn of Montgomery, has been both counsel and counselor, taking Mr. Palmer to baseball games and often speaking with him several times a day to keep his spirits from plunging.
Mr. Palmer said his troubles started soon after he filed his first report through an internal whistle-blower channel designated by Jeffrey Friedel, a senior Infosys lawyer. The company had asked Mr. Palmer to write ''welcome letters'' for B-1 visa workers from India. He refused.
''Basically, these letters falsely claim the foreign employee is coming to visit rather than to work,'' Mr. Palmer said. ''Past events started to click in my mind.'' Indian employees he had placed as full-time programmers on projects he managed told him they were struggling to survive in the United States on Indian wages. ''The B-1 workers were fully employed in this country, and Infosys was charging its customers full-time wages,'' he said.
Within days of his report, Mr. Palmer said, it leaked within the company. One manager threatened to fire him, he said, and he received angry calls from co-workers. In November 2010, according to court documents, he found a death threat, neatly printed, on the chair in his office.
At first undaunted, Mr. Palmer sent barrages of e-mails describing apparent visa violations. But in December, he said, he received only about $3,000 of a $45,000 bonus he believed he had earned. Since Infosys has assigned him no work at all since last April, he received no bonus for 2011, losing one-third of his income.
A problem for Mr. Palmer is that the rules governing B-1 visas are so complex that skilled immigration lawyers can disagree on them. Infosys has argued that its practices were legal under a provision that sometimes allows foreign employees to come on B-1 instead of H-1B visas.
Mr. Bockius, the Infosys spokesman, denied any harassment of Mr. Palmer: ''We have not retaliated in any way.''
But the judge in Alabama gave the first round of the whistle-blower lawsuit to Mr. Palmer, denying Infosys's effort to force the matter into binding arbitration.
Mr. Palmer said his friends at Infosys now shun him. ''You start to feel like you are the one who has done everything wrong,'' he said. He continues to receive explicit death threats.
''It is people like you that make us Indians angry,'' said one he received by e-mail. ''Why must you drag us down into poverty. You fat lazy greddy American.''
But Mr. Palmer said: ''My only worry is that Infosys will be slapped on the wrist and will continue to thwart our laws. As much as I need my life back, I will not let this happen.''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Infosys offices in Bangalore, India, above, and Plano, Tex., right. Jack B. Palmer, an employee, says he has suffered repercussions since accusing the company of misusing visas for employees from India who work in the United States. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAGADEESH NV/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
BRANDON THIBODEAUX FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 CARY NORTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); WHISTLEBLOWERS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (86%); SUBPOENAS (86%); CORPORATE WRONGDOING (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); BUSINESS TORTS (77%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); PROJECT MANAGEMENT (72%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (72%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (64%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (64%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (63%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (91%);  HUGE CO INC (67%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (91%); INFY (NYSE) (91%); INFY (NSE) (91%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); NAICS325320 PESTICIDE & OTHER AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (67%); SIC2879 PESTICIDES & OTHER AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS (67%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (71%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (64%)

Geographic: MONTGOMERY, AL, USA (79%); PLANO, TX, USA (79%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: April 13, 2012


End of Document
California Today: Talking to the ‘Water Czar’ About the Drought; California Today
The New York Times 
March 27, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1017 words
Byline: JONAH ENGEL BROMWICH
Highlight: Monday: A conversation with the head of the Water Resources Control Board, a potential legal battle with the White House and a grisly anniversary.
Body


 Good morning.
(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
I’m Jonah Engel Bromwich, filling in this week for Mike McPhate, who is on vacation. Today’s introduction comes to us from Adam Nagourney, Los Angeles bureau chief.
LOS ANGELES – By every wet indication, California is about to lift the drought state of emergency order imposed in January 2014. So we thought this would be a good time to talk to Felicia Marcus, the chairwoman of California’s Water Resources Control Board (you can call her the Water Czar.) This interview has been edited and condensed.
Do you think these past three years have produced permanent changes in how Californians use water?
With respect to urban water use, 50 percent of which on average is used on outdoor ornamental landscapes, folks have learned how much they can save outdoors, and how hard it actually can be to kill a lawn. But, we’ve got to value and learn to water our trees separately. With climate change coming, we’ll need more trees and less nonfunctional lawn. We’ve had quite a few conversions to drought-tolerant landscaping.
Just as encouraging are the stepped-up efforts to capture urban storm water. In agriculture, we’ve seen even greater implementation of efficiency in water, pesticide, and fertilizer targeting.
What else have you learned from this drought emergency? We learned even more than we had before about just how precarious the water picture is for small, disadvantaged communities. We learned just how much more we really needed to know to prepare for the next time. There will be a next time, and this time isn’t over yet for a lot of Californians. Certainly isn’t for fish and wildlife.
What did you do right?
We acted early and employed a “rather be safe than sorry” approach rather than just hoping it would rain and snow. The most fortunate and foresighted thing we did was develop a water action plan at the governor’s request to prepare for the nightmare of climate change coming at us.
Are there things you would have done differently?
We cut it too close on saving cold water in northern reservoirs for winter run salmon and lost a painful number of them at their earliest and most vulnerable stages two years in a row. We’re in motion on helping disadvantaged communities on the water supply and water quality side, but we need to find a stable long term funding source to help.
California Online
(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)
 California’s decision to push ahead with stricter auto emissions standards sets up a potential legal battle with the Trump administration. [The New York Times]
 A brawl broke out at a rally for President Trump in Huntington Beach after protesters disrupted the event. Four people were arrested. [The Orange County Register]
 In an interview on “Meet the Press,” Gov. Jerry Brown said that the federal government doesn’t “want to mess with California.” [NBC News]
 Mark Davis, the owner of the Oakland Raiders, wants to move the team to Las Vegas At their annual meeting in Phoenix on Monday, the owners could vote to grant him his wish. [The New York Times]
 Despite his coolness toward California, Mr. Trump has largely sidestepped opportunities for open conflict with the state. [Politico]
 Uber said it would suspend testing on its self-driving vehicles after one of the vehicles was involved in a collision in Tempe, Ariz. [The New York Times]
 City officials in Oakland are looking for a site to use as an officially sanctioned campground for the homeless. [San Francisco Chronicle]
 Kirsten Green, a woman in a male-dominated venture capital field, has parlayed her knowledge of retail into her new endeavors and found success. [The New York Times]
 In the new Zach Braff-directed heist comedy “Going in Style,” out April 7, the performer Ann-Margret, 75, stars as Annie, a supermarket employee. We caught up with the actress near her house in Beverly Hills. [The New York Times]
 The Sea Otters of Morro Bay have made a comeback. [Los Angeles Times]
 Last month, Long Beach cracked a list of the 10 U.S. cities with the steepest rent increases over the past year. Four other California cities were atop the list. [Long Beach Press Telegram]
Coming Up This Week
 On Monday, Representative Darrell Issa, the San Diego Republican, is discussing “Reforming the H-1B Visa System” in Washington.
The Sonoma International Film Festival, featuring dozens of feature films begins Wednesday.
Redwood Coast Jazz Festival starts Thursday, with performances from blues veterans like Duke Robillard, James Harman, Michael Doucet and Kenny Neal.
 The Whiskies of the World Expo, one of the largest whisky tasting events in the country, arrives in San Jose on Thursday and kicks off on in San Francisco on Friday.
And Finally ...
Twenty years ago this week, 39 people were found dead in a suburb north of San Diego.
They were members of the religious group Heaven’s Gate and had committed mass suicide, believing they were destined to go to a better world.
The discovery of their bodies set off a media furor, with cult experts summoned to television studios and reporters racing to learn more about the group’s leader, Marshall Herff Applewhite, who was found among the dead.
Mr. Applewhite had been a music professor in Houston. But in the early 1970s, he began to believe he was a higher being from another dimension. He and the group’s co-founder, a nurse named Bonnie Lu Nettles, started convincing others of their way of thinking.
Though Mr. Applewhite’s views were extreme, his confidence in them may have helped to win him the faith of his followers.
“He said a presence had given him all the knowledge of where the human race had come from and where it was going,” a friend, Hayes Parker, told The Times. “It made you laugh to hear it, but Herff was serious.”
Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.
California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: DROUGHT (90%); NATURAL RESOURCES (90%); WATER RESOURCES (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (89%); DISASTER RELIEF (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); WATER QUALITY (89%); ANNIVERSARIES (78%); WATER SUPPLY (78%); NATURAL DISASTERS (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); ENVIRONMENTAL LAW (73%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (72%); WILDLIFE (72%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (71%); FISHES (68%); EMISSIONS (67%); PESTICIDES (66%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (61%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (60%); VEHICLE EMISSIONS STANDARDS (50%); California Today (%)

Industry: FERTILIZERS (68%); EMISSIONS (67%); PESTICIDES (66%); VEHICLE EMISSIONS STANDARDS (50%)

Person: JERRY BROWN (59%); DONALD TRUMP (58%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

Load-Date: March 28, 2017


End of Document
As Trump Tightens Legal Immigration, Canada Woos Tech Firms
The New York Times 
December 19, 2017 Tuesday 09:59 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NYREGION
Length: 1375 words
Byline: LIZ ROBBINS
Highlight: In an industry relying heavily on workers from overseas, the administration’s efforts to limit visas have companies looking to relocate north.
Body


A Flatiron district artificial intelligence start-up was recently looking to expand, adding new engineers who happened to know a niche computer language.
The people it hired hail from Morocco, Belarus, France, Georgia and Canada. But they are not working in New York. They are in Montreal, where immigration policies make it possible to get work permits within two weeks, and the Canadian tech industry is aggressively trying to woo foreign companies.
“It’s becoming less and less sexy to be going to the United States,” said Tim Delisle, 26, a founder of the start-up Datalogue, which uses artificial intelligence to prepare and synthesize data for other businesses. He added that skilled foreign workers crave the greater stability that he said immigrants have in Canada compared with the United States.
While much attention has been paid to President Trump’s policies cracking down on illegal immigration, the administration has also moved to restrict legal immigration, especially in the tech industry, which draws many workers from abroad. In April, Mr. Trump introduced an executive order, Buy American and Hire American, which included requests to reform a visa program known as H-1B as a way to benefit American workers.
The program awards 85,000 temporary visas annually to highly skilled foreign workers in what are deemed “specialty” occupations through a lottery. Between application and legal fees, the process of applying for one H-1B visa can cost a company up to $6,000, lawyers say, and can take months; it is also as uncertain as roulette, with hundreds of thousands of applicants for the spots.
Last week, the Department of Homeland Security published a set of proposed rule changes that would make the visas even harder to qualify for, to ensure that only “the best and brightest” foreign workers were selected. It also hoped to eliminate a work permit for spouses of some of these visa holders.
In contrast, Canada’s immigration agency in June started the Global Skills Strategy for high-skilled workers from abroad to get a work permit in two weeks.
“That is, excuse my English, goddamn fast,” said Hubert Bolduc, the chief executive of Montreal International, a public-private partnership that recruits foreign companies to move to Canada and offers support once they arrive in Montreal. “We’ve been loving government on this because we know it’s a talent game.”
In 2017, the organization conducted eight international recruiting missions, in London, Paris, San Francisco and Los Angeles. Its directors have made several informal visits to New York, where it came this month to woo a video game company.
With the Trump administration’s immigration policies, “We’re almost saying, ‘Don’t come,’” said Sunil Hirani, the co-founder of trueEx, an electronic global interest rates exchange, also in the Flatiron neighborhood. He came to New York as a child 40 years ago from India. “How can you have a ‘Come to New York City’ program if the people of New York City are going to get kicked out? How do you sell that?”
Last year, trueEx’s chief executive and president, Karen O’Connor, was looking at options to expand the company’s computer engineer group. A consortium related to Montreal International invited her to Canada for a visit that made her feel like a foreign dignitary, she said. There was the elegant lunch, the precisely coordinated meetings with potential business partners and a visit to the Montreal Stock Exchange.
Ms. O’Connor said the 50-person company could save more than $1 million in wages if it hired engineers based in Montreal. In part, that was because the cost of living was far less compared with New York and because the company could qualify for certain tax benefits.
But after Mr. Trump was elected, trueEx hesitated, to gauge the climate; now, it is again considering expanding north of the border in 2018, Ms. O’Connor said, in part because it got a spot site visit from the Department of Homeland Security this summer to verify employment records for its H-1B visa holders. They were in order, but the company’s executives found the process nerve-racking.
“My advice to other companies would be: Hold on for dear life, but explore other options,” Mr. Hirani said.
But John Miano, a lawyer who represents American workers who say that they have lost jobs unfairly to low-skilled H-1B visa holders, thought it was “posturing” for companies to say they are moving north of the border to find the best talent. “The problem is, you got to go to Canada,” Mr. Miano said. “The reality is, the place to do business is still the United States.”
Datalogue’s expansion to Montreal, Mr. Delisle’s hometown, evolved swiftly. He and a partner founded Datalogue in 2016 at Cornell Tech in Manhattan and were lucky when a tech mogul, Charles E. Phillips Jr., the chief executive of Infor, gave him two desks on the fifth floor of Infor’s elegantly restored Flatiron headquarters.
By spring 2017, Datalogue had grown to five employees and had raised $1.5 million in seed funding. But to bring in more engineers would have cost thousands of dollars in visa fees, Mr. Delisle said, and even then, the process would not be guaranteed. Canada has a burgeoning artificial intelligence sector, and the company opened its Montreal office in April in the trendy Mile End neighborhood; it raised another $1.5 million in seed funding by November.
Still, Mr. Delisle said that his company has better access to customers in New York, and for that reason he has kept seven employees there for sales and marketing.
While tech is still thriving in New York, where it is the fastest-growing industry in the city, losing offices or whole companies to Canada could be a concern, said Kevin Ryan, an entrepreneur who had founded a half-dozen start-ups. The multiplier effect of the start-up world is a powerful one.
“When someone decides not to come here to join a start-up, and they go to Toronto, some of them may break off and start a new company across the street,” he said. “The wider impact will be felt, literally, for decades.”
Mr. Delisle agreed. “I’m not necessarily scared for New York; there’s phenomenal programs there,” he said. “I am more scared for the broader policies being applied right now.”
According to the Partnership for New York City, a business advocacy group, immigration has always been central to the economy of New York. Forty-eight percent of the city’s small-business owners are immigrants, and 45 percent of the work force in the city is foreign-born.
“The No. 1 priority of business today is where they can get the talent they need from the global talent pool,” said Kathryn S. Wylde, the chief executive of the group. “There’s not much a locality can do to incentivize, but we can try to keep the global pipeline open.”
Stimulating the city economy was the impetus for New York City’s Economic Development Corporation to create a program called International Innovators Initiative, or IN2NYC. The idea was to provide H-1B visas that were exempt from the government-imposed cap because entrepreneurs would work in partnership with city universities.
The program was announcedin the spring of 2016 and received 144 applications in the first round. The second round, coming on the heels of the Trump administration’s travel ban, attracted half that number. The program received only 41 this fall.
Perhaps even more telling is the small number of foreign entrepreneurs who received visas: six. The IN2NYC program had envisioned at least 25 working at once, but the process, officials say, has been delayed by government challenges to the visas.
One company that was initially rejected has appealed — and set up shop in Canada while it is waiting for a decision.
PHOTOS: Datalogue, a New York City start-up, decided to open a Montreal office, above, rather than go through the expensive and uncertain process of trying to get visas for immigrant workers in the United States. Datalogue’s founders, Tim Delisle, at far left, and Bryan Russett, in the company’s office in Montreal. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RENAUD PHILIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • America’s Competitors Angle for Silicon Valley’s Business
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
    • CUNY Schools to Lure Foreign Entrepreneurs With New Visa Program
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); RELOCATIONS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LICENSES & PERMITS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES (71%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (68%); EXECUTIVES (68%); PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); COMPUTER GAMES (60%); INTEREST RATES (50%); Canada (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Visas (%); Entrepreneurship (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Start-ups (%); Engineering and Engineers (%); New York City (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Ticker: Homeland Security Department

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); COMPUTER GAMES (60%); INTEREST RATES (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (93%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (58%); NEW YORK, USA (95%); UNITED STATES (96%); CANADA (95%); FRANCE (79%); INDIA (79%); MOROCCO (79%); BELARUS (78%)

Load-Date: December 21, 2017


End of Document
The Reality Behind Biden’s Plan to Legalize 11 Million Immigrants
The New York Times 
January 27, 2021 Wednesday 07:17 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1989 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: The proposal for a path to citizenship for undocumented residents has been called “the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations.” But is it possible?
Body


The proposal for a path to citizenship for undocumented residents has been called “the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations.” But is it possible?
LOS ANGELES — Maria Elena Hernandez recently retrieved a flowery box tucked in her closet and dusted it off. For more than a decade, she has used it to store tax returns, lease agreements and other documents that she has collected to prove her family’s long years of residence in the United States.
“We have been waiting for the day when we can apply for legal status. In this box is, hopefully, all the evidence we’ll need,” said Ms. Hernandez, 55, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who arrived in this country with three small children in 2000.
She had just learned of President Biden’s plan to offer a pathway to U.S. citizenship for nearly 11 million undocumented people, announced as part of a sweeping proposal to overhaul the nation’s immigration system.
The bill would allow undocumented immigrants who were in the United States before Jan. 1 to apply for temporary legal status after passing background checks and paying taxes. As newly minted “lawful prospective immigrants,” they would be authorized to work, join the military and travel without fear of deportation. After five years, they could apply for green cards.
The president’s proposal would be perhaps the most ambitious immigration redesign passed since 1986, when President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which legalized three million people.
Converting more than three times that many people into full citizens could open the door to one of the most significant demographic shifts in modern U.S. history, lifting millions out of the shadows and potentially into higher-paying jobs, providing them with welfare benefits, health coverage and Social Security eligibility while eventually creating many new voters.
“This is the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations,” said Muzaffar Chishti, senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. “But given that the Democrats have razor-thin majorities in Congress, the administration needs to have its expectations tempered.” Legalizing just one group at first — say, farmworkers — might be “more realistic,” he said.
In a sign of the hurdles ahead, another one of Mr. Biden’s early immigration initiatives, a 100-day freeze on deportations, was temporarily blocked by a federal judge on Tuesday after a lawsuit by the Texas attorney general, who argued that his state faced enormous costs for services to undocumented immigrants who are not removed.
Immigration reform has stalled in Congress time and again, over border security, guest workers and whether to tackle legislation one piece at a time. But the big stumbling block remains whether providing amnesty to those who have broken the law will encourage more people to try their luck.
Even with beefed-up border enforcement and some employer sanctions, Mr. Reagan’s overhaul failed to curb the arrival of unauthorized immigrants.
Meanwhile, those immigrants have continued to live, work and raise families. More than 60 percent have resided in the country for more than a decade, and they have more than four million U.S.-born children. They account for 5 percent of the work force, representing the backbone of the agriculture, construction and hospitality sectors.
About four in 10 did not enter the United States through the southwestern border. Rather they are visa overstays — tourists, students or temporary skilled workers who never left.
The family of Denise Panaligan, 27, came to the United States from the Philippines in 2002 after her father, a financial analyst, obtained an H-1B visa. They remained after their temporary legal status ran out.
“When people look at us, they don’t think undocumented because we are Asians,” said Ms. Panaligan, a middle school teacher in Los Angeles. “We’re invisible to enforcement.”
But their decision led to other indignities, she said. Her mother had to work as a housekeeper despite having a college education. Denise’s father, Art, died two years ago of brain cancer without ever returning to see his own parents because he would not have been allowed back into the United States.
“The Biden plan would fulfill our hope of keeping the family together,” Ms. Panaligan said.
The largest share of unauthorized immigrants is from Mexico. Having survived treacherous river and desert crossings to reach the United States, they found a nation willing to look past laws that prohibit hiring them, to employ them in fields and factories, and in homes as nannies and housekeepers.
Maribel Ramirez and Eusebio Gomez of Mexico have toiled in California’s vineyards since crossing the border 19 years ago. They have managed to buy a home and raise two sons. Their oldest plans to enlist in the Marines. But Ms. Ramirez said she asked herself, “Why should my son give his life to a country that doesn’t value his parents?”
Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama both championed comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to legalization for undocumented people. But the immigration packages that were debated in Congress — in 2006, 2007 and 2013 — all stalled.
Among the concerns raised by opponents are that new citizens will vote as a solid Democratic bloc, displace American workers and become a burden on public services. Some predict that any legalization program would encourage more people to make the trek north.
“Legalizing countless millions of illegal aliens — even discussing it — rings the bell for millions more to illegally enter the U.S. to await their green card,” said Lora Ries, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation.
Others argue there are benefits to legalization. Opening a pathway to citizenship for nearly 11 million people, seven to eight million of whom participate in the labor force, is tantamount to “an economic stimulus,” according to Giovanni Peri, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis.
Between 2005 and 2015, new immigrants accounted for nearly half of the growth in the working-age population, and in the next two decades, immigrants will be key to replacing retirees. Demographers say a shortage of blue-collar workers highlights the need for immigrants, in ever larger numbers, to perform low-skilled jobs. About five million of them work in jobs designated as “essential” by the government.
Among the biggest backers of the Biden initiative are employers who rely on immigrants. Through the years, dairies, packing plants and other worksites have been caught up in immigration raids targeting unauthorized workers.
The Reagan-era amnesty in 1986 caused only a temporary drop in the number of undocumented immigrants because it was not accompanied by a robust system for legally bringing in low-skilled workers. Employers faced fines for knowingly hiring undocumented immigrants but were not responsible for vetting documents presented by job applicants, spawning a huge industry of fake Social Security numbers.
“The principle is simple: If you carry out a broad legalization, it doesn’t freeze undocumented migration flows as long as labor demand persists,” said Wayne Cornelius, director emeritus of the Center for Comparative Immigration Studies at the University of California, San Diego.
The illegal influx began to swell again in the early 1990s.
Economic imperatives prevailed, driving illegal immigration up year after year. A building boom in Sun Belt states drew hundreds of thousands of undocumented construction workers. And as farm workers who had benefited from the amnesty aged and exited the fields, young undocumented labor arrived to replace them.
From 1986 to 2008 the country’s undocumented population swelled to 12 million from three million despite an exponential increase in funding for border security, including boots on the ground. The militarization did not reduce illegal entries. Instead, it turned a seasonal migration of mainly men who returned home each year to Mexico into a settled population of families.
The 2007 recession ultimately reduced the flow of immigrants. Despite successive waves of Central American migration, illegal entries remain substantially lower than in the early 2000s.
It has been about two decades since Ms. Hernandez stuffed a change of clothes in a bag, grabbed her three young children and slipped across the border.
“We didn’t have papers, but I was determined to head north for a better life,” she said. “I had relatives who had benefited from a 1986 amnesty and I figured our day would come.”
Ms. Hernandez got a job in Los Angeles packing CDs. Her husband, Pedro Hernandez, joined them shortly after and found work at a nursery. Their children, Luis, then 7, and Elitania and Juan, then 4-year-old twins, thrived in school. They lived modestly, in apartments where the children slept in the bedrooms and the couple in the living room.
Their hopes were lifted, dashed and revived as Congress took up various immigration bills.
“Every president gave us hope that something good was coming, and then nothing. Again maybe. Then nothing,” Ms. Hernandez recalled.
“We tried to do everything right, according to the law, in a country that had not opened its doors to us, but that we had entered anyway,” she said.
Things got more challenging when Mr. Hernandez lost his job in 2006. His employer, concerned about government audits, had asked him to prove he was in the country legally.
When Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents began showing up in their neighborhood, the family avoided going out for days at a time. Mr. Hernandez rode his bike to a new job, figuring he would be less likely to encounter law enforcement than while driving his old Mazda. Ms. Hernandez signed up for adult English classes. As the children got older, she advised them to always be on their best behavior.
“I grew up hearing that you have to be an extra good citizen,” said Luis Hernandez, her oldest child, now 28. “Mom always said that: ‘People who have papers can make mistakes, but you can’t,’” he said.
Because of their undocumented status, Luis, who played club soccer, and Juan, a varsity football player, skipped games that required travel.
When Mr. Obama created a program known as DACA in 2012 to temporarily shield undocumented immigrants who had been brought into the country as children, Luis Hernandez and his siblings, then teenagers, applied immediately. It enabled them to work legally. They got their driver’s licenses.
But President Donald J. Trump’s incendiary anti-immigrant rhetoric and his administration’s attempt to rescind DACA generated deep anxiety in the Hernandez household. When Mr. Biden took office, the family rejoiced.
After the inauguration, Ms. Hernandez was at her dining room table thinking about the imminent birth of her second grandchild, who will be an American citizen. She and her husband planned to drive to Utah to meet the baby, and she worried about making a trip across state lines without legal status, lest law enforcement stop them.
When she learned that the president had unveiled a blueprint for legalization, she said, she was stunned at first. Then she went to retrieve the box of documents.
PHOTOS: Maribel Ramirez and her sons, Eusebio and Jesus Gomez. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNA SCHOENEFELD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1); A New York rally for immigration reform in November, after President Biden was elected. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS); Luis Alfonso Hernandez with his parents, Maria and Pedro, who are undocumented. Luis and his two siblings are DACA recipients, and the family rejoiced when President Biden took office.; Maria Hernandez has stored documents, above, attesting to her family’s U.S. residence for decades. Her husband, Pedro, left, rides a bicycle to work instead of driving his car to decrease his chances of running into the police. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JESSICA PONS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (97%); IMMIGRATION (95%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (90%); DEPORTATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); AGREEMENTS (78%); AMNESTY (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIAL SECURITY (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); COINS & COINAGE (76%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (73%); FARM LABOR (73%); LITIGATION (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (72%); HISTORY (71%); LEASE AGREEMENTS (71%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (68%); SOCIAL ASSISTANCE REGULATION & POLICY (67%); NATIONAL SECURITY (66%); WELFARE BENEFITS (66%); JUDGES (63%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Foreign Workers (%); Migrant Labor (Agriculture) (%); Migrant Labor (Non-Agriculture) (%); Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (%); United States Politics and Government (%); United States (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); COINS & COINAGE (76%); FARM LABOR (73%); LEASE AGREEMENTS (71%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); Biden, Joseph R Jr

Geographic: TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: February 18, 2021


End of Document
Senators Offer A New Blueprint For Immigration
The New York Times
January 28, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1356 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


A bipartisan group of senators has agreed on a set of principles for a sweeping overhaul of the immigration system, including a pathway to American citizenship for 11 million illegal immigrants that would hinge on progress in securing the borders and ensuring that foreigners leave the country when their visas expire.
The senators were able to reach a deal by incorporating the Democrats' insistence on a single comprehensive bill that would not deny eventual citizenship to illegal immigrants, with Republican demands that strong border and interior enforcement had to be clearly in place before Congress could consider legal status for illegal immigrants.
Their blueprint, unveiled on Monday, will allow them to stake out their position one day before President Obama outlines his immigration proposals in a speech on Tuesday in Las Vegas, in the opening moves of what lawmakers expect will be a protracted and contentious debate in Congress this year.
Lawmakers said they were optimistic that the political mood had changed since a similar effort collapsed in acrimony in 2010. Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and one of the negotiators, said he saw ''a new appreciation'' among Republicans of the need for an overhaul.
''Look at the last election,'' Mr. McCain said Sunday morning on ABC's ''This Week With George Stephanopoulos.'' ''We are losing dramatically the Hispanic vote, which we think should be ours.'' The senator also said he had seen ''significant improvements'' in border enforcement, although ''we've still got a ways to go.''
He added, ''We can't go on forever with 11 million people living in this country in the shadows in an illegal status.''
According to a five-page draft of the plan obtained by The New York Times on Sunday, the eight senators -- including Mr. McCain; Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York; and Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina -- have agreed to address the failings of the immigration system in one comprehensive measure, rather than in smaller pieces, and to offer a ''tough, fair and practical road map'' that would eventually lead to a chance at citizenship for nearly all of the immigrants here illegally.
''We on the Democratic side have said that we are flexible and we want to get a bill,'' Mr. Schumer told reporters in New York on Sunday. ''But there's a bottom line, and that's a path to citizenship for the 11 or so million people who qualify. We've made great, great progress with our Republican colleagues.''
Under the senators' plan, most illegal immigrants would be able to apply to become permanent residents -- a crucial first step toward citizenship -- but only after certain border enforcement measures had been accomplished.
Among the plan's new proposals is the creation of a commission of governors, law enforcement officials and community leaders from border states that would assess when border security measures had been completed. A proposal would also require that an exit system be in place for tracking departures of foreigners who entered the country through airports or seaports, before any illegal immigrants could start on a path to citizenship.
The lawmakers intend for their proposals to frame the debate in the Senate, which is expected to take up immigration this spring, ahead of the House of Representatives. Compared with an immigration blueprint from 2011 that White House officials have said is the basis for the president's position, the senators' proposals appear to include tougher enforcement and a less direct path for illegal immigrants than Mr. Obama is considering.
In a parallel effort, a separate group of four senators will introduce a bill this week dealing with another thorny issue that is likely to be addressed in a comprehensive measure: visas for legal immigrants with advanced skills in technology and science. The bill, written primarily by Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, a Republican, and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, a Democrat, would nearly double the number of temporary visas, known as an H-1B, available each year to highly skilled immigrants. It would also free up more permanent resident visas, known as green cards, so those immigrants could eventually settle in the United States and go on to become citizens.
In a sign of the rapidly changing mood in Washington on immigration, the two groups of senators and the White House have been vying in recent days to see who would unveil their proposals first.
Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey, a Democrat who was one of those negotiating the comprehensive principles, said the senators finally agreed that any legislation should include a pathway to citizenship.
''First of all, Americans support it, in poll after poll,'' said Mr. Menendez, who was interviewed along with Mr. McCain by Martha Raddatz on Sunday. ''Secondly, Latino voters expect it. Thirdly, Democrats want it. And fourth, Republicans need it.''
Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a Republican, also joined the group of eight senators in recent weeks and endorsed its principles.
Mr. Rubio, a Cuban-American who is a fast-rising figure in his party, had insisted on including the exit tracking system as one of the triggers for opening the path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. Mr. Rubio cited estimates that as many as 40 percent of immigrants in the country illegally had overstayed their visas.
Mr. Rubio also insisted that any immigrants who gained legal status under the legislation would ''be required to go to the back of the line'' behind other immigrants who applied to come through legal channels.
Under the senators' proposal, border security would be immediately strengthened with new technology, including aerial drones, for border patrol agents, while the Department of Homeland Security would work to expand the exit control system. The United States currently has some exit controls to track departures of foreigners at most airports and seaports, but it does not track exits by land.
At the same time, immigrants here illegally would ''simultaneously'' be required ''to register with the government.'' After passing background checks and paying back taxes and fines, those immigrants would receive a ''probationary legal status'' that would allow them to live and work legally in the United States. Immigrants with that status would not be eligible for most federal public benefits.
The senators also called for a mandatory nationwide program to verify the legal status of new hires, although the details of whether that would include some form of identity card remained vague.
The senators would require that ''our proposed enforcement measures be complete before any immigrant on probationary status can earn a green card,'' according to the draft principles. The group also includes Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, both Democrats, and another Republican, Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona.
The proposals would offer major exemptions from the requirements for citizenship to young immigrants here illegally who came to United States as children, giving them a faster path to become Americans.
Immigrant farmworkers would also be given a separate and faster path to citizenship, according to the principles.
Still ahead are difficult negotiations over how long immigrants who gain provisional status would have to wait before they could become citizens. Mr. Rubio's ideas are for a far longer and less direct pathway than Democrats would like. The senators also anticipate a fight over how to bring in low-wage workers in the future. Many labor organizations are skeptical of the temporary guest worker programs that employers favor, and the principles are vague on that point.
Considerable resistance remains among Republicans in the House of Representatives to granting any kind of legal status to illegal immigrants.
Mr. Rubio was also a sponsor of the bill to offer more visas to highly educated technology workers, along with Senator Chris Coons, a Democrat from Delaware. Senator Klobuchar, also a sponsor, said on Sunday that she expected the bill would become part of the comprehensive measure the other senators were preparing.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/28/us/politics/senators-agree-on-blueprint-for-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Senator John McCain, also one of the eight, was optimistic about the plan's prospects. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROSS D. FRANKLIN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Senators Lindsey Graham, left, and Charles E. Schumer, shown in 2011, are two of the eight lawmakers behind the proposal. (PHOTOGRAPH BY J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (A10)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (96%); CITIZENSHIP (91%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (73%); POLITICAL DEBATES (73%); VOTERS & VOTING (50%)

Person: JOHN MCCAIN (78%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (92%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: January 29, 2013


End of Document
Donald Trump’s Parrot; Op-Ed Columnist
The New York Times 
March 31, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 876 words
Byline: ROGER COHEN
Highlight: Trump’s embrace of Putin is a moral abdication so great it has stripped America’s alliances of their foundation.
Body


A parrot flies out the window in Soviet Russia. The owner rushes to the Moscow offices of the K.G.B., where he tells an agent: “I just want to make clear that any views my parrot expresses are exclusively its own.”
We are not yet worrying about what our parrots might blurt out in Donald Trump’s America. But there are disturbing signs. This presidency is about the fear-driven closing of borders and minds.
In his magisterial novel “Humboldt’s Gift,” Saul Bellow quotes Samuel Daniel: “While timorous knowledge stands considering, audacious ignorance hath done the deed.”
Audacious ignorance is hard at work in the White House. The only solace is that, with Trump, it’s accompanied by paralyzing incompetence.
In 1987, Trump took out a full-page ad in The New York Times. It said: “The world is laughing at America’s politicians as we protect ships we don’t own, carrying oil we don’t need, destined for allies who won’t help.” It concluded: “Let America’s economy grow unencumbered by the cost of defending those who can easily afford to pay us for the defense of their freedom. Let’s not let our great country be laughed at anymore.”
That was three decades ago. Trump won’t change. At 70 he’s what he was at 40 in crankier and bulkier form. His political formula was already clear: mythical American humiliation calls for muscular American nationalism led by a macho American savior. It was not very original, but then forked human nature does not change.
Trump is still demanding that allies pay up. Life has never been more than a zero-sum game for him. He has not grasped that the stability and prosperity of Asian and European allies of the United States contribute to American well-being (like some $1.1 trillion of annual trade between the United States and the            European Union supporting about 2.6 million American jobs           in 2014).
That same day in 1987, The Times ran a story headlined “Trump Gives a Vague Hint of Candidacy.” America-first economic and military nationalism was always going to be his theme. It will define his presidency.
The few adults in his circle, already weary of putting out fires caused by foolishness, may be able to temper excesses here and there, but the president sets the course. Time to start thinking about what a post-American Europe and a post-American Asia will look like. One certainty: They will be less stable. Another: Russia and China will assert broader, more exclusive spheres of influence.
Trump sees moral equivalency between the United States and a Russian regime that murders dissenting politicians in broad daylight, brutalizes its opponents, hacks into the American election, and traffics in the whopping lie. He is so beholden to, or seduced by, Vladimir Putin’s Russia that he will not murmur criticism. Enough said. This is a moral abdication of such proportions that America’s alliances are left without ideological foundation. They must then wither.
At night in the ghostly White House, when Ivanka and Jared have gone home, and Trump’s consiglieri have retired to their Russian salads, the gold-robed president — crazed as Lear on the cliffs “fantastically dressed with wildflowers” — wanders from room to room staring at TV screens, cursing in frustration when he cannot find the remote, hurling abuse at the “enemies of the people” who fail to genuflect daily before his genius, adjusting his hair, making random calls to aides to ensure they have scheduled his next play dates with truckers and coal miners.
It might almost be funny. Almost. But the day will come when the Dow plunges and what the former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan is said to have feared most in politics — “events, dear boy, events” — occurs, perhaps in ghastly terrorist form, and an incoherent administration will be confronted by its first crisis. All that can be said for now is that, in such a moment, illiberalism and xenophobia in the hands of a would-be autocrat will make for a dangerous brew.
Already, in countless small ways, America is narrowing in ways that hurt it. Foreign applications to U.S. colleges have dropped. USA Today reports that “an inhospitable political climate could punch an $18 billion hole in U.S. tourism by international visitors over the next two years.”
A German associate professor of history at Indiana University who has been in the country a couple of years on an H-1B work visa told me the other day how alarmed her 10-year-old son had become because one of the three Muslim children in his class had talked about the possibility of having to leave. Her normally easygoing son had become anxious. Would his family be next? When the class was given an assignment to complete a sentence beginning “Keep calm” he wrote, “Keep calm and don’t kill Donald Trump.”
A “Foreigners Unwelcome” sign now hangs over Trump’s United States. It causes fears even in children. It will not boost American jobs; on the contrary.
A parrot flew in my window and said, “America First! America First!” Its views were exclusively its own, of course. Still, the parrot was so agitated I decided to report the owner.
You can follow me on Twitter (           @NYTimesCohen) or join me on            Facebook.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and            Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the            Opinion Today newsletter. 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (89%); POLITICS (88%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); WRITERS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); ELECTIONS (73%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (72%); Foreign Workers (%); European Union (%); Russia (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Putin, Vladimir V (%)

Ticker: European Union

Industry: WRITERS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (89%); Trump, Donald J; Putin, Vladimir V

Geographic: MOSCOW, RUSSIA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); EUROPE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%); RUSSIA (91%); ASIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 1, 2017


End of Document
As U.S. Tightens Visas for Tech, Canada Opens for Business
The New York Times
December 20, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 23
Length: 1295 words
Byline: By LIZ ROBBINS
Body


A Flatiron district artificial intelligence start-up was recently looking to expand, adding new engineers who happened to know a niche computer language.
The people it hired hail from Morocco, Belarus, France, Georgia and Canada. But they are not working in New York. They are in Montreal, where immigration policies make it possible to get work permits within two weeks, and the Canadian tech industry is aggressively trying to woo foreign companies. 
  ''It's becoming less and less sexy to be going to the United States,'' said Tim Delisle, 26, a founder of the start-up Datalogue, which uses artificial intelligence to prepare and synthesize data for other businesses. He added that skilled foreign workers crave the greater stability that he said immigrants have in Canada compared with the United States.
  While much attention has been paid to President Trump's policies cracking down on illegal immigration, the administration has also moved to restrict legal immigration, especially in the tech industry, which draws many workers from abroad. In April, Mr. Trump introduced an executive order, Buy American and Hire American, which included requests to reform a visa program known as H-1B as a way to benefit American workers.
  The program awards 85,000 temporary visas annually to highly skilled foreign workers in what are deemed ''specialty'' occupations through a lottery. Between application and legal fees, the process of applying for one H-1B visa can cost a company up to $6,000, lawyers say, and can take months; it is also as uncertain as roulette, with hundreds of thousands of applicants for the spots.
  Last week, the Department of Homeland Security published a set of proposed rule changes that would make the visas even harder to qualify for, to ensure that only ''the best and brightest'' foreign workers were selected. It also hoped to eliminate a work permit for spouses of some of these visa holders.
  In contrast, Canada's immigration agency in June started the Global Skills Strategy for high-skilled workers from abroad to get a work permit in two weeks.
  ''That is, excuse my English, goddamn fast,'' said Hubert Bolduc, the chief executive of Montreal International, a public-private partnership that recruits foreign companies to move to Canada and offers support once they arrive in Montreal. ''We've been loving government on this because we know it's a talent game.''
  In 2017, the organization conducted eight international recruiting missions, in London, Paris, San Francisco and Los Angeles. Its directors have made several informal visits to New York, where it came this month to woo a video game company.
  With the Trump administration's immigration policies, ''We're almost saying, 'Don't come,''' said Sunil Hirani, the co-founder of trueEx, an electronic global interest rates exchange, also in the Flatiron neighborhood. He came to New York as a child 40 years ago from India. ''How can you have a 'Come to New York City' program if the people of New York City are going to get kicked out? How do you sell that?''
  Last year, trueEx's chief executive and president, Karen O'Connor, was looking at options to expand the company's computer engineer group. A consortium related to Montreal International invited her to Canada for a visit that made her feel like a foreign dignitary, she said. There was the elegant lunch, the precisely coordinated meetings with potential business partners and a visit to the Montreal Stock Exchange.
  Ms. O'Connor said the 50-person company could save more than $1 million in wages if it hired engineers based in Montreal. In part, that was because the cost of living was far less compared with New York and because the company could qualify for certain tax benefits.
  But after Mr. Trump was elected, trueEx hesitated, to gauge the climate; now, it is again considering expanding north of the border in 2018, Ms. O'Connor said, in part because it got a spot site visit from the Department of Homeland Security this summer to verify employment records for its H-1B visa holders. They were in order, but the company's executives found the process nerve-racking.
  ''My advice to other companies would be: Hold on for dear life, but explore other options,'' Mr. Hirani said.
  But John Miano, a lawyer who represents American workers who say that they have lost jobs unfairly to low-skilled H-1B visa holders, thought it was ''posturing'' for companies to say they are moving north of the border to find the best talent. ''The problem is, you got to go to Canada,'' Mr. Miano said. ''The reality is, the place to do business is still the United States.''
  Datalogue's expansion to Montreal, Mr. Delisle's hometown, evolved swiftly. He and a partner founded Datalogue in 2016 at Cornell Tech in Manhattan and were lucky when a tech mogul, Charles E. Phillips Jr., the chief executive of Infor, gave him two desks on the fifth floor of Infor's elegantly restored Flatiron headquarters.
  By spring 2017, Datalogue had grown to five employees and had raised $1.5 million in seed funding. But to bring in more engineers would have cost thousands of dollars in visa fees, Mr. Delisle said, and even then, the process would not be guaranteed. Canada has a burgeoning artificial intelligence sector, and the company opened its Montreal office in April in the trendy Mile End neighborhood; it raised another $1.5 million in seed funding by November.
  Still, Mr. Delisle said that his company has better access to customers in New York, and for that reason he has kept seven employees there for sales and marketing.
  While tech is still thriving in New York, where it is the fastest-growing industry in the city, losing offices or whole companies to Canada could be a concern, said Kevin Ryan, an entrepreneur who had founded a half-dozen start-ups. The multiplier effect of the start-up world is a powerful one.
  ''When someone decides not to come here to join a start-up, and they go to Toronto, some of them may break off and start a new company across the street,'' he said. ''The wider impact will be felt, literally, for decades.''
  Mr. Delisle agreed. ''I'm not necessarily scared for New York; there's phenomenal programs there,'' he said. ''I am more scared for the broader policies being applied right now.''
  According to the Partnership for New York City, a business advocacy group, immigration has always been central to the economy of New York. Forty-eight percent of the city's small-business owners are immigrants, and 45 percent of the work force in the city is foreign-born.
  ''The No. 1 priority of business today is where they can get the talent they need from the global talent pool,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, the chief executive of the group. ''There's not much a locality can do to incentivize, but we can try to keep the global pipeline open.''
  Stimulating the city economy was the impetus for New York City's Economic Development Corporation to create a program called International Innovators Initiative, or IN2NYC. The idea was to provide H-1B visas that were exempt from the government-imposed cap because entrepreneurs would work in partnership with city universities.
  The program was announced in the spring of 2016 and received 144 applications in the first round. The second round, coming on the heels of the Trump administration's travel ban, attracted half that number. The program received only 41 this fall.
  Perhaps even more telling is the small number of foreign entrepreneurs who received visas: six. The IN2NYC program had envisioned at least 25 working at once, but the process, officials say, has been delayed by government challenges to the visas.
  One company that was initially rejected has appealed -- and set up shop in Canada while it is waiting for a decision.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/19/nyregion/trump-legal-immigration-canada-tech-jobs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Datalogue, a New York City start-up, decided to open a Montreal office, above, rather than go through the expensive and uncertain process of trying to get visas for immigrant workers in the United States. Datalogue's founders, Tim Delisle, at far left, and Bryan Russett, in the company's office in Montreal. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RENAUD PHILIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LICENSES & PERMITS (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (72%); COSTS & ATTORNEY FEES (71%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (68%); EXECUTIVES (68%); PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); COMPUTER GAMES (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); COMPUTER GAMES (60%)

Geographic: MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (93%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (71%); PARIS, FRANCE (58%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); CANADA (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); FRANCE (79%); MOROCCO (73%); BELARUS (58%)

Load-Date: December 20, 2017


End of Document
Immigration Plan Raises Hope, But Reality Cools Expectations
The New York Times
January 28, 2021 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1889 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


The proposal for a path to citizenship for undocumented residents has been called ''the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations.'' But is it possible?
LOS ANGELES -- Maria Elena Hernandez recently retrieved a flowery box tucked in her closet and dusted it off. For more than a decade, she has used it to store tax returns, lease agreements and other documents that she has collected to prove her family's long years of residence in the United States. 
  ''We have been waiting for the day when we can apply for legal status. In this box is, hopefully, all the evidence we'll need,'' said Ms. Hernandez, 55, an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who arrived in this country with three small children in 2000.
  She had just learned of President Biden's plan to offer a pathway to U.S. citizenship for nearly 11 million undocumented people, announced as part of a sweeping proposal to overhaul the nation's immigration system.
  The bill would allow undocumented immigrants who were in the United States before Jan. 1 to apply for temporary legal status after passing background checks and paying taxes. As newly minted ''lawful prospective immigrants,'' they would be authorized to work, join the military and travel without fear of deportation. After five years, they could apply for green cards.
  The president's proposal would be perhaps the most ambitious immigration redesign passed since 1986, when President Ronald Reagan signed the Immigration Reform and Control Act, which legalized three million people.
  Converting more than three times that many people into full citizens could open the door to one of the most significant demographic shifts in modern U.S. history, lifting millions out of the shadows and potentially into higher-paying jobs, providing them with welfare benefits, health coverage and Social Security eligibility while eventually creating many new voters.
  ''This is the boldest immigration agenda any administration has put forward in generations,'' said Muzaffar Chishti, senior fellow at the Migration Policy Institute. ''But given that the Democrats have razor-thin majorities in Congress, the administration needs to have its expectations tempered.'' Legalizing just one group at first -- say, farmworkers -- might be ''more realistic,'' he said.
  In a sign of the hurdles ahead, another one of Mr. Biden's early immigration initiatives, a 100-day freeze on deportations, was temporarily blocked by a federal judge on Tuesday after a lawsuit by the Texas attorney general, who argued that his state faced enormous costs for services to undocumented immigrants who are not removed.
  Immigration reform has stalled in Congress time and again, over border security, guest workers and whether to tackle legislation one piece at a time. But the big stumbling block remains whether providing amnesty to those who have broken the law will encourage more people to try their luck.
  Even with beefed-up border enforcement and some employer sanctions, Mr. Reagan's overhaul failed to curb the arrival of unauthorized immigrants.
  Meanwhile, those immigrants have continued to live, work and raise families. More than 60 percent have resided in the country for more than a decade, and they have more than four million U.S.-born children. They account for 5 percent of the work force, representing the backbone of the agriculture, construction and hospitality sectors.
  About four in 10 did not enter the United States through the southwestern border. Rather they are visa overstays -- tourists, students or temporary skilled workers who never left.
  The family of Denise Panaligan, 27, came to the United States from the Philippines in 2002 after her father, a financial analyst, obtained an H-1B visa. They remained after their temporary legal status ran out.
  ''When people look at us, they don't think undocumented because we are Asians,'' said Ms. Panaligan, a middle school teacher in Los Angeles. ''We're invisible to enforcement.''
  But their decision led to other indignities, she said. Her mother had to work as a housekeeper despite having a college education. Denise's father, Art, died two years ago of brain cancer without ever returning to see his own parents because he would not have been allowed back into the United States.
  ''The Biden plan would fulfill our hope of keeping the family together,'' Ms. Panaligan said.
  The largest share of unauthorized immigrants is from Mexico. Having survived treacherous river and desert crossings to reach the United States, they found a nation willing to look past laws that prohibit hiring them, to employ them in fields and factories, and in homes as nannies and housekeepers.
  Maribel Ramirez and Eusebio Gomez of Mexico have toiled in California's vineyards since crossing the border 19 years ago. They have managed to buy a home and raise two sons. Their oldest plans to enlist in the Marines. But Ms. Ramirez said she asked herself, ''Why should my son give his life to a country that doesn't value his parents?''
  Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama both championed comprehensive immigration reform with a pathway to legalization for undocumented people. But the immigration packages that were debated in Congress -- in 2006, 2007 and 2013 -- all stalled.
  Among the concerns raised by opponents are that new citizens will vote as a solid Democratic bloc, displace American workers and become a burden on public services. Some predict that any legalization program would encourage more people to make the trek north.
  ''Legalizing countless millions of illegal aliens -- even discussing it -- rings the bell for millions more to illegally enter the U.S. to await their green card,'' said Lora Ries, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation.
  Others argue there are benefits to legalization. Opening a pathway to citizenship for nearly 11 million people, seven to eight million of whom participate in the labor force, is tantamount to ''an economic stimulus,'' according to Giovanni Peri, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis.
  Between 2005 and 2015, new immigrants accounted for nearly half of the growth in the working-age population, and in the next two decades, immigrants will be key to replacing retirees. Demographers say a shortage of blue-collar workers highlights the need for immigrants, in ever larger numbers, to perform low-skilled jobs. About five million of them work in jobs designated as ''essential'' by the government.
  Among the biggest backers of the Biden initiative are employers who rely on immigrants. Through the years, dairies, packing plants and other worksites have been caught up in immigration raids targeting unauthorized workers.
  The Reagan-era amnesty in 1986 caused only a temporary drop in the number of undocumented immigrants because it was not accompanied by a robust system for legally bringing in low-skilled workers. Employers faced fines for knowingly hiring undocumented immigrants but were not responsible for vetting documents presented by job applicants, spawning a huge industry of fake Social Security numbers.
  ''The principle is simple: If you carry out a broad legalization, it doesn't freeze undocumented migration flows as long as labor demand persists,'' said Wayne Cornelius, director emeritus of the Center for Comparative Immigration Studies at the University of California, San Diego.
  The illegal influx began to swell again in the early 1990s.
  Economic imperatives prevailed, driving illegal immigration up year after year. A building boom in Sun Belt states drew hundreds of thousands of undocumented construction workers. And as farm workers who had benefited from the amnesty aged and exited the fields, young undocumented labor arrived to replace them.
  From 1986 to 2008 the country's undocumented population swelled to 12 million from three million despite an exponential increase in funding for border security, including boots on the ground. The militarization did not reduce illegal entries. Instead, it turned a seasonal migration of mainly men who returned home each year to Mexico into a settled population of families.
  The 2007 recession ultimately reduced the flow of immigrants. Despite successive waves of Central American migration, illegal entries remain substantially lower than in the early 2000s.
  It has been about two decades since Ms. Hernandez stuffed a change of clothes in a bag, grabbed her three young children and slipped across the border.
  ''We didn't have papers, but I was determined to head north for a better life,'' she said. ''I had relatives who had benefited from a 1986 amnesty and I figured our day would come.''
  Ms. Hernandez got a job in Los Angeles packing CDs. Her husband, Pedro Hernandez, joined them shortly after and found work at a nursery. Their children, Luis, then 7, and Elitania and Juan, then 4-year-old twins, thrived in school. They lived modestly, in apartments where the children slept in the bedrooms and the couple in the living room.
  Their hopes were lifted, dashed and revived as Congress took up various immigration bills.
  ''Every president gave us hope that something good was coming, and then nothing. Again maybe. Then nothing,'' Ms. Hernandez recalled.
  ''We tried to do everything right, according to the law, in a country that had not opened its doors to us, but that we had entered anyway,'' she said.
  Things got more challenging when Mr. Hernandez lost his job in 2006. His employer, concerned about government audits, had asked him to prove he was in the country legally.
  When Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents began showing up in their neighborhood, the family avoided going out for days at a time. Mr. Hernandez rode his bike to a new job, figuring he would be less likely to encounter law enforcement than while driving his old Mazda. Ms. Hernandez signed up for adult English classes. As the children got older, she advised them to always be on their best behavior.
  ''I grew up hearing that you have to be an extra good citizen,'' said Luis Hernandez, her oldest child, now 28. ''Mom always said that: 'People who have papers can make mistakes, but you can't,''' he said.
  Because of their undocumented status, Luis, who played club soccer, and Juan, a varsity football player, skipped games that required travel.
  When Mr. Obama created a program known as DACA in 2012 to temporarily shield undocumented immigrants who had been brought into the country as children, Luis Hernandez and his siblings, then teenagers, applied immediately. It enabled them to work legally. They got their driver's licenses.
  But President Donald J. Trump's incendiary anti-immigrant rhetoric and his administration's attempt to rescind DACA generated deep anxiety in the Hernandez household. When Mr. Biden took office, the family rejoiced.
  After the inauguration, Ms. Hernandez was at her dining room table thinking about the imminent birth of her second grandchild, who will be an American citizen. She and her husband planned to drive to Utah to meet the baby, and she worried about making a trip across state lines without legal status, lest law enforcement stop them.
  When she learned that the president had unveiled a blueprint for legalization, she said, she was stunned at first. Then she went to retrieve the box of documents.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/27/us/biden-undocumented-immigrants-citizenship.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Maribel Ramirez and her sons, Eusebio and Jesus Gomez. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JENNA SCHOENEFELD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A1)
A New York rally for immigration reform in November, after President Biden was elected. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
Luis Alfonso Hernandez with his parents, Maria and Pedro, who are undocumented. Luis and his two siblings are DACA recipients, and the family rejoiced when President Biden took office.
 Maria Hernandez has stored documents, above, attesting to her family's U.S. residence for decades. Her husband, Pedro, left, rides a bicycle to work instead of driving his car to decrease his chances of running into the police. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JESSICA PONS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A21)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (97%); IMMIGRATION (95%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (90%); DEPORTATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); COINS & COINAGE (76%); SOCIAL SECURITY (76%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); AMNESTY (72%); HISTORY (71%); LEASE AGREEMENTS (71%); BORDER CONTROL (70%); BACKGROUND CHECKS (68%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (68%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); SOCIAL ASSISTANCE REGULATION & POLICY (67%); WELFARE BENEFITS (66%); FARM LABOR (63%); JUDGES (62%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%); LITIGATION (60%); SUITS & CLAIMS (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); COINS & COINAGE (76%); LEASE AGREEMENTS (71%); FARM LABOR (63%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (60%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (79%); RONALD REAGAN (79%)

Geographic: TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: January 28, 2021


End of Document
Skilled Science Workers at Focus of Second Senate Proposal on Immigration
The New York Times
January 29, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 967 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


As one bipartisan group of senators released its blueprint on Monday for a comprehensive overhaul of the immigration laws, another group in the Senate was ready to present a proposal addressing one dysfunctional aspect of the system: a shortage of visas for highly skilled immigrants working in science and technology fields.
Four senators, led by Orrin G. Hatch, a Republican from Utah, will introduce a bill on Tuesday that would greatly increase the number of temporary visas available for those immigrants, and would also free up permanent resident visas, known as green cards, so more of those immigrants could settle in the United States and eventually become citizens.
The bill will be the first legislation introduced in Congress on immigration in a year when the once-toxic issue has gathered surprising political momentum. Lawmakers who have shied away from it in recent years are now offering proposals that they are framing as practical solutions to fix a failing system.
Major technology employers like Microsoft, Oracle and others have been calling for years for more visas for foreigners with computer, engineering and mathematics skills, saying they have more jobs than they can fill with Americans who are graduating in those fields from American universities. White House officials and lawmakers on both sides of the aisle acknowledge that a broad overhaul, including a pathway to citizenship for 11 million illegal immigrants, would have a better chance at attracting votes for passage, especially among Republicans, if it had vigorous support from business.
A group of eight senators, led by Charles E. Schumer of New York, a Democrat, and John McCain of Arizona, a Republican, on Monday unveiled principles for an overhaul that focused on solving illegal immigration, with increased border security and measures to give legal status to illegal immigrants. Their blueprint referred to changes for highly skilled immigrants, without specifics.
The bill by Mr. Hatch's smaller group, by contrast, is a detailed plan to recalibrate the high-skilled visa system. It would immediately increase the cap on temporary visas for those immigrants, known as an H-1B, to 115,000 a year from the current maximum of 65,000. It would also create, for the first time, a ''market-based'' system that would rapidly increase the numbers of those visas if the supply ran out, to a maximum of 300,000 H-1B visas in one year.
In the boom before the recession took hold in 2008, there were several years when businesses snatched up all the available H-1B visas in a few days. The market mechanism in Mr. Hatch's bill would lower the cap on temporary visas if demand from employers declined.
Also sponsoring the bill are Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, a Republican who was among the eight senators endorsing the broader blueprint, and Senators Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Chris Coons of Delaware, both Democrats.
In a statement on Monday, Brad Smith, general counsel and executive vice president of Microsoft, said the company ''strongly supports efforts to permanently reform our high-skilled immigration system and enact broad immigration reform in 2013.'' He enumerated measures the company would like to see in any legislation, including all those in Mr. Hatch's bill.
Randel K. Johnson, senior vice president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, said his organization had worked closely with the senators on the bill and would send ''a letter of strong support.''
Ms. Klobuchar said immigrants had brought new ideas and businesses to the United States. ''I truly believe we have to be a country that makes stuff again, that exports to the world,'' she said in an interview. ''To do that, we have to have innovation.''
''Sadly,'' Ms. Klobuchar said, under the current system ''we have been training our competition,'' because many skilled immigrants were forced to return home after studying and working in the United States.
Mr. Hatch, who fought off a re-election challenge from the right last year, has not said whether he would support comprehensive legislation including legal status for illegal immigrants. Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Coons said they expected their bill would become part of the broader overhaul.
The bill would allow spouses of temporary immigrants to work, a change that would bring relief to many foreigners -- many of them educated women from Asian countries like India -- whose careers languished when their spouses came to work in this country. The bill would make it easier for temporary immigrants who are tied to one employer to find a new job if their first job did not work out.
It would also tinker with the system to make more permanent resident green cards available for immigrants in science and technology fields, but without increasing the number of green cards over all, something many Republican lawmakers are loath to do. It would allow the immigration authorities to distribute as many as 300,000 green cards that went unused over the years because of twists in the system.
The bill would make changes to ensure that a much higher percentage of 140,000 employment green cards available each year would go to the skilled immigrants, and not to their family members, as happens now.
Responding to insistent demands from universities, the bill would make an unlimited number of green cards available for foreigners graduating from American universities with advanced science and technology degrees. It would increase visa fees and use the money for training programs for Americans.
Some employee groups said they would oppose the bill, saying the large number of temporary immigrants would undercut wages for Americans. ''America is a nation of immigrants, not of guest workers,'' said Keith Grzelak, vice president of the IEEE-USA, which represents more than 400,000 engineers.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/29/us/politics/science-workers-focus-of-second-bipartisan-immigration-plan.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Orrin G. Hatch led a group of four senators who developed the bill. Bill Gates, above in 2008, has pushed for more working visas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY WIN MCNAMEE
 ALEX WONG/GETTY IMAGES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (96%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); ENGINEERING (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (67%); BORDER CONTROL (65%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (56%)

Organization: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (54%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (56%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (56%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (73%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (72%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (67%)

Person: ORRIN HATCH (78%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (58%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); CHRIS COONS (58%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%); MARCO RUBIO (58%)

Geographic: ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: January 29, 2013


End of Document
The Parrot in Trump's America
The New York Times
April 1, 2017 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23; OP-ED COLUMNIST
Length: 887 words
Byline: By ROGER COHEN
Body


A parrot flies out the window in Soviet Russia. The owner rushes to the Moscow offices of the K.G.B., where he tells an agent: ''I just want to make clear that any views my parrot expresses are exclusively its own.''
We are not yet worrying about what our parrots might blurt out in Donald Trump's America. But there are disturbing signs. This presidency is about the fear-driven closing of borders and minds. 
  In his magisterial novel ''Humboldt's Gift,'' Saul Bellow quotes Samuel Daniel: ''While timorous knowledge stands considering, audacious ignorance hath done the deed.''
  Audacious ignorance is hard at work in the White House. The only solace is that, with Trump, it's accompanied by paralyzing incompetence.
  In 1987, Trump took out a full-page ad in The New York Times. It said: ''The world is laughing at America's politicians as we protect ships we don't own, carrying oil we don't need, destined for allies who won't help.'' It concluded: ''Let America's economy grow unencumbered by the cost of defending those who can easily afford to pay us for the defense of their freedom. Let's not let our great country be laughed at anymore.''
  That was three decades ago. Trump won't change. At 70 he's what he was at 40 in crankier and bulkier form. His political formula was already clear: mythical American humiliation calls for muscular American nationalism led by a macho American savior. It was not very original, but then forked human nature does not change.
  Trump is still demanding that allies pay up. Life has never been more than a zero-sum game for him. He has not grasped that the stability and prosperity of Asian and European allies of the United States contribute to American well-being (like some $1.1 trillion of annual trade between the United States and the European Union supporting about 2.6 million American jobs in 2014).
  That same day in 1987, The Times ran a story headlined ''Trump Gives a Vague Hint of Candidacy.'' America-first economic and military nationalism was always going to be his theme. It will define his presidency.
  The few adults in his circle, already weary of putting out fires caused by foolishness, may be able to temper excesses here and there, but the president sets the course. Time to start thinking about what a post-American Europe and a post-American Asia will look like. One certainty: They will be less stable. Another: Russia and China will assert broader, more exclusive spheres of influence.
  Trump sees moral equivalency between the United States and a Russian regime that murders dissenting politicians in broad daylight, brutalizes its opponents, hacks into the American election, and traffics in the whopping lie. He is so beholden to, or seduced by, Vladimir Putin's Russia that he will not murmur criticism. Enough said. This is a moral abdication of such proportions that America's alliances are left without ideological foundation. They must then wither.
  At night in the ghostly White House, when Ivanka and Jared have gone home, and Trump's consiglieri have retired to their Russian salads, the gold-robed president -- crazed as Lear on the cliffs ''fantastically dressed with wildflowers'' -- wanders from room to room staring at TV screens, cursing in frustration when he cannot find the remote, hurling abuse at the ''enemies of the people'' who fail to genuflect daily before his genius, adjusting his hair, making random calls to aides to ensure they have scheduled his next play dates with truckers and coal miners.
  It might almost be funny. Almost. But the day will come when the Dow plunges and what the former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan is said to have feared most in politics -- ''events, dear boy, events'' -- occurs, perhaps in ghastly terrorist form, and an incoherent administration will be confronted by its first crisis. All that can be said for now is that, in such a moment, illiberalism and xenophobia in the hands of a would-be autocrat will make for a dangerous brew.
  Already, in countless small ways, America is narrowing in ways that hurt it. Foreign applications to U.S. colleges have dropped. USA Today reports that ''an inhospitable political climate could punch an $18 billion hole in U.S. tourism by international visitors over the next two years.''
  A German associate professor of history at Indiana University who has been in the country a couple of years on an H-1B work visa told me the other day how alarmed her 10-year-old son had become because one of the three Muslim children in his class had talked about the possibility of having to leave. Her normally easygoing son had become anxious. Would his family be next? When the class was given an assignment to complete a sentence beginning ''Keep calm'' he wrote, ''Keep calm and don't kill Donald Trump.''
  A ''Foreigners Unwelcome'' sign now hangs over Trump's United States. It causes fears even in children. It will not boost American jobs; on the contrary.
  A parrot flew in my window and said, ''America First! America First!'' Its views were exclusively its own, of course. Still, the parrot was so agitated I decided to report the owner.
  You can follow me on Twitter (@NYTimesCohen) or join me on Facebook.
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter. 

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/31/opinion/donald-trumps-parrot.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (87%); POLITICS (87%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (71%); EUROPEAN UNION (68%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: MOSCOW, RUSSIA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (93%); RUSSIA (90%); ASIA (79%); CHINA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (77%)

Load-Date: April 1, 2017


End of Document
Without New Laws or Walls, Trump Presses the Brake on Legal Immigration
The New York Times 
December 20, 2017 Wednesday 15:15 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1696 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: The administration says its tougher stand on visa and green card applications will protect Americans from terrorism and job loss, but some call it arbitrary.
Body


A scientist recruited by the renowned Cleveland Clinic is stuck in India because his visa is delayed. An entrepreneur courted by Silicon Valley companies had his application denied. Many green card applicants have new interviews to pass.
The Trump administration has pursued its immigration agenda loudly and noticeably, ramping up arrests of undocumented immigrants,            barring most travel from several majority-Muslim countries and pressing the case for            a border wall.
But it has also quietly, and with much less resistance, slowed many forms of legal immigration without the need for Congress to rescind a single visa program enshrined in the law.
Immigration and State Department officials are more closely scrutinizing, and have started more frequently denying, visas for people seeking to visit the United States on business, as well as for those recruited by American companies, according to lawyers representing visa seekers. Foreigners already in the United States whose employers wish to extend their stays are also facing new hurdles.
“I call this the real wall,” said Anastasia Tonello, the president-elect of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. “The wall is being built.”
The changes show how the Trump administration has managed to carry out the least attention-grabbing, but perhaps farthest-reaching, portion of the president’s immigration plans: cutting the number of people entering the United States each year as temporary workers or permanent residents.
The administration has put into practice the philosophy President Trump laid out in a pair of executive orders billed as protecting the nation from terrorism and its workers from foreign competition.
One of them, the “Buy American, Hire American” order, singles out the H-1B visa program for skilled workers who otherwise would not be allowed into the country. Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, H-1Bs have also been derided as a way to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor; in one highly publicized case, some Disney employees were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments.
Each year, 85,000 H-1Bs, which are valid for three to six years, are available to companies, according to a ceiling set by Congress. Demand far outstrips supply when the economy is healthy, prompting the government to hold a lottery.
But now even applicants lucky enough to be chosen are drawing more scrutiny.
Officials are asking for extra details about applicants’ education and work history, the position to be filled and the employer, requiring the company to amass many additional documents, which can postpone a decision by several months.
For H-1Bs, the number of such “requests for evidence” from January to August this year jumped 44 percent compared with the same period last year, according to the most recent data from United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
So far, the government is still greenlighting most H-1B applications that survive the lottery, but the approval rate is inching down.
For the first two months of this fiscal year, October and November, 86 percent and 82 percent of H-1B applications were approved. That compares with 93 percent and 92 percent for the same months last year. The data does not reflect companies that give up after receiving requests for more evidence.
Once a company has spent thousands of dollars in legal fees to petition for a worker, “there is huge discouragement after an R.F.E. is issued,” said Roxanne Levine, an immigration lawyer in New York, “because of the massive extra time, effort and money required to respond.”
L. Francis Cissna, the immigration agency’s new director, said in an interview that if there are more requests for evidence, “that is perfectly rational and perfectly appropriate.”
“We are looking at the entire program to ensure the entire thing is administered well and in conformity with congressional intent,” he said.
He recently met with a group of displaced American workers in Florida, including some laid off by Disney. The meeting was arranged by Sara Blackwell, an employment lawyer who leads a group called Protect U.S. Workers. “The administration has done much more for American workers, but I hope to see much more soon,” Ms. Blackwell said.
Immigration lawyers and companies seeking the visas say that some of the decisions appear arbitrary.
After responding to requests for evidence, a consulting firm that applied for an H-1B for an energy expert from Britain received a denial stating that the skills for the position “do not appear to be of such complexity, uniqueness or specialization as to require the attainment of a bachelor’s degree,” a prerequisite for the visa.
Kristen Albertson, the operations manager at the firm, called the outcome “egregious.”
“We apply only when it’s a strong case and essential to our business,” she said of the applicant, who is a graduate of the University of Chicago.
An H-1B visa for an Indian scientist recruited by the Cleveland Clinic for his expertise in cellular biology is stuck in “administrative processing” in New Delhi, meaning it is undergoing further review that could stretch into months. “His team’s projects are now on hold due to the delay,” said Janice Bianco, an official at the Cleveland Clinic who handles applications for foreigners.
She said a visa for a pediatric geneticist hired in the spring took three months to be issued — in the past, it would have taken about three weeks — forcing the hospital to reroute some patients to other facilities.
The State Department, which has handled the Cleveland Clinic visa requests, said in a statement that “consular officers have the discretion to request additional screening in any case.”
Other types of visas are also tougher to get now. During trips to Silicon Valley, Vladimir Eremeev of Russia was encouraged to establish a branch of his cloud-based technology company, Ivideon, in the United States. In Europe, Ivideon employs 150 people, and Philips, the Dutch multinational, sells a camera powered by its technology.
Mr. Eremeev drew up plans, which his lawyer in New York detailed in a 347-page visa application. He was applying for an L-1A visa, awarded to executives transferring to the United States.
“Sounds and looks great, but it didn’t help me obtain a visa,” Mr. Eremeev said in a phone interview.
Among other things, the immigration agency stated that the office leased by Mr. Eremeev did not appear to be suited for a “business that would require the employment of a manager or executive.” His lawyer provided details and pictures of the space.
Ultimately, the government denied the petition, stating that the “organizational structure” presented did not support the “managerial or executive position” that Mr. Eremeev was to fill.
“You are going in circles,” said the lawyer, Oksana Bandrivska, “and it’s getting harder to win cases.”
Russell Harrison, director of government relations for IEEE-USA, a society of technology professionals, applauded the administration’s efforts to tackle visa abuse. However, he said, a blanket approach could stifle American competitiveness.
“They seem to be against anyone coming in, which is a simplistic view,” Mr. Harrison said. “There are some incredibly talented people not born in this country, and they are being treated just like other workers who are cheap.”
Some lawyers said they had also seen more scrutiny of H-2B visas, the seasonal work permits that Mr. Trump uses to staff his Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. Jeff Joseph, a lawyer in Aurora, Colo., said the government was more often denying visas for companies that sought the visas season after season. (Mar-a-Lago uses them only during winters.)
The government’s argument, Mr. Joseph said, is that those companies are trying to import temporary workers to fill permanent jobs that should go to Americans. But he said his clients faced a shortage of local labor year after year to fill jobs in construction, lodging, landscaping and amusement parks.
Other changes affect foreigners already working or living in the United States on H-1Bs or other temporary permits.
Those sponsored by their employers for a green card, or legal permanent residency, must pass in-person interviews, a reversal of a 20-year-old policy that is likely to exacerbate a long backlog in green card applications. A memo from the immigration agency said the change was in line with the executive order to safeguard the nation from terrorism.
The administration said this month that it planned to eliminate a program established during the Obama administration that allows international entrepreneurs to stay in the United States for up to five years. The administration also said it would eliminate a two-year-old program that granted work permits for spouses of H-1B workers. And it recently announced plans to restrict the ability of foreign students to work temporarily in the United States after they graduate.
Another change affects green card holders who enlist in the military. Since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, military service has provided a faster path to citizenship than applying as a civilian, typically taking just 10 weeks.
In October, the Pentagon enacted new procedures that substantially slow the process by adding several layers of vetting. The change affects thousands of immigrants who have already enlisted because they cannot start training before clearing the background checks.
The Pentagon said the new measures were needed to ensure that terrorists do not infiltrate the military. But Margaret Stock, an immigration lawyer and retired lieutenant colonel in the Army, said the military would suffer. “They are turning away green card holders with language, cybersecurity and other skills that the United States military needs,” she said.
PHOTO: The Cleveland Clinic has struggled to secure visas for foreign-born specialists. It has had to delay projects and reroute some patients. (PHOTOGRAPH BY T.J. KIRKPATRICK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • With Ally in Oval Office, Immigration Hard-Liners Ascend to Power
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); STATISTICS (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (56%); SEVERANCE PAY (50%); Trump, Donald J (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Cleveland Clinic (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Ticker: Cleveland Clinic

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LAWYERS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (93%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (73%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: January 3, 2018


End of Document
There Is No Rung on the Ladder That Protects You From Hate; News Analysis
The New York Times 
March 20, 2021 Saturday 16:41 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY; personaltech
Length: 1744 words
Byline: Brian X. Chen
Highlight: Asian-Americans are reeling from the killings in Georgia and a rising number of attacks nationwide. Could confronting racism bring solidarity across their class divides?
Body


Asian-Americans are reeling from the killings in Georgia and a rising number of attacks nationwide. Could confronting racism bring solidarity across their class divides?
The Asian-American experience is a tale of contrast.
We are immigrants, or descendants of immigrants, from more than 20 countries in East, South and Southeast Asia. We speak different languages and eat different food. Some lead America’s most successful companies, like Google and Zoom. Others run small businesses, like Chinese restaurants and spas, which have been the hardest hit by the pandemic. We also have the nation’s largest wealth gap: While some Asians earn household incomes that far exceed the national average, others consistently have the highest poverty rates.
The endless list of disparities and nuances has made solidarity elusive for Asian-Americans, even as activist groups demand that our issues be recognized. While Asian-Americans are the nation’s fastest-growing racial group — now 6 percent of the population — not everyone’s priorities are the same, far from it in some cases, so increasing numbers haven’t led to increasing power, politically or culturally.
The events of the past year — from the former president’s racial slurs to the series of attacks on Asians, leading up to the Tuesday shootings of eight people, including six women of Asian descent, at massage parlors in Atlanta — could be uniting people for a new reason: fear.
In a country with hate crimes at their highest levelin more than a decade, the professional status that many Asian-Americans enjoy, conferred by competing and succeeding in the most elite educational and professional institutions in America, doesn’t help.
Anna Mok, a Chinese-American executive at the consulting firm Deloitte, who lives in San Francisco and acknowledged that she was in a position of privilege, said hate crimes against Asian-Americans over the last year had prompted friends to urge her to not even go outside for a walk.
“I don’t think I’ve ever felt that degree of physical vulnerability,” Ms. Mok said.
She added that many other Asian-Americans working for big companies had described similar magnitudes of stress to her: “There’s no buffer, there’s no isolation. No matter how much money one makes, no matter how successful one is, it’s the reality of being an Asian in the U.S.”
Asian-Americans are also becoming the most economically divided demographic in the country. In 2016, their incomes ranged from about $12,000 at the 10th percentile to roughly $133,500 at the 90th percentile, with a median of about $51,000, according to the Pew Research Center. That compares with about $15,100 and $118,000 for whites.
The income disparity is, in part, driven by immigrants, who accounted for 81 percent of the growth in the Asian adult population over the past five decades. Many who arrived under the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which gave priority to people with family ties, and after the Vietnam War ended in 1975 were relatively low-skilled workers. Later, the Immigration Act of 1990 brought in a new wave of higher-skilled immigrants under the H-1B visa program, which helped American companies hire foreigners with exceptional skills.
Many Asian immigrants have higher levels of education than native-born Americans, which is largely why they settle in at the top of the income ladder. At the same time, Asians at the bottom of the ladder have lower education levels.
In nearly a dozen conversations this past week with scholars, activists and historians, the sadness and grief around this inflection point was clear — as was the recognition of how starkly divided two professional paths for Asian immigrants in this country have been.
The Asian-American story has been a complicated narrative. There are the restaurant workers and massage therapists nested in metropolitan enclaves, but there are also the high achievers attending elite schools who end up in well-compensated careers. Often one generation of immigrants in service jobs raises the next generation of corporate strivers. In this moment, though, as the population grows, the groups are becoming increasingly isolated from one another.
In the aftermath of a summer of protests for racial justice and increasing awareness of the Black Lives Matter movement, corporate employees of color, including Asians, are demanding equity and inclusion, which would put an end to a white-dominated culture. The workers in spas and nail salons don’t have the luxury to even think about that; they are more vulnerable to the whims of their white clientele. In a nation already divided by politics, religion and income, here is a community divided within itself.
But the “kung flu” pandemic — the xenophobic language, fueled by President Donald J. Trump, that added hate crimes to a deadly disease and the rest of the list of things for Asian-Americans to fear this past year — may be gradually bringing people together.
Last year, reported hate crimes against people of Asian descent in New York City jumped 833 percent from 2019. Nearly 3,800 hate incidents, which range from name-calling to assault, against Asian-Americans and Pacific Islanders were reported to Stop AAPI Hate, a group that has collected data for the last year. (The number could be higher because not all incidents were reported.) Sixty-eight percent of those incidents were reported by women.
As the country reeled from the all-too-familiar scenes of mass shootings in Atlanta, especially killings that may have targeted people because of their race and gender, some scholars recalled an earlier death. In 1982, Vincent Chin, a Chinese-American, was beaten to death by two white men at a time of rising tensions over Japanese dominance in the auto market. The killers, who insisted the attack was not racially motivated, were sentenced to three years of probation.
The fact that the men did not serve jail time sent tremors through Asian communities. Activists formed civil rights groups to protest.
“We know that the Vincent Chin murder really did help communities across different ethnic groups come together,” said Nancy Yuen, a sociologist at Biola University in California.
Yet for decades, policymakers and government leaders have historically treated Asian-Americans as if they were invisible. That was in part because of the diverse makeup and smaller size of the group, which made it challenging to gain influence and attention. Ellen Wu, a history professor at Indiana University, said Asian-Americans had to compile data just to prove that they were minorities who suffered from issues like discrimination. Being recognized has been an uphill battle ever since.
The shared pain and disrespect could finally be giving Asians grounds for solidarity — and a platform to be visible. On Twitter, the hashtag #stopasianhate went viral, and all over the country, crowds gathered in the streets this past week, lighting candles for the Atlanta victims and holding signs proclaiming “Asian Lives Matter.”
Asian-American professionals in journalism, medicine and technology reflected on a year of swelling anxiety and pain from microaggressions. On my social media feeds and in conversations, fellow Asian-Americans recounted being chastised by a white person at a grocery store to keep a distance, enduring a road-rage encounter that felt ambiguously racist and being ignored by a worker at a store who was happy to help white shoppers. For Asian-American women, the nature of the Atlanta attack sparked a conversation about racism and sexism — times they had heard men yell lines like “Me so horny” while walking down the street.
Doctors who were usually booked full with appointments found that their calendars were empty, which tracks with the broader trends of how discrimination has manifested in the past year like patients refusing medical care from doctors and nurses of Asian descent. Some doctors even reported verbal abuse by their patients.
Stop AAPI Hate, the organization documenting reports of Asian hate incidents, noted sharp upticks in verbal harassment, shunning and physical assaults over the last year.
For those working remotely during the pandemic, who could mostly stay home and felt less vulnerable, their fear began to manifest when they saw photos posted online of Asian elders — people who looked like their parents — beaten to a pulp. Ms. Mok, the Deloitte executive, moved to San Francisco in January from Palo Alto, Calif., to be closer to her father, who is 88 and lives alone there.
“My own sense of helplessness when I told him, ‘Please don’t go out, not even to get your newspaper,’ was very difficult for me to handle,” Ms. Mok said.
Ms. Wu said she had noticed unity in the last year even among Asian activists who usually butted heads. She mentioned groups that have been fighting fiercely over the future of affirmative action in higher education. Both sides published statements condemning Mr. Trump’s racial slurs about Asians spreading the coronavirus.
“There’s something about the Covid issue and the anti-Asian hate issue that presents this common denominator, a point of convergence,” Ms. Wu said. “There is a certain baseline where, across the board, there does seem to be recognition and fear that bad things are happening to people of Asian ancestry, undeniably.”
Jo-Ann Yoo, the executive director of the Asian American Federation, a nonprofit network of community groups, has spent the last year producing videos about small Asian-American businesses hit hard by the pandemic and speaking at rallies and news conferences about hate crimes against Asians.
It has been devastating and infuriating, Ms. Yoo said. But she is hopeful, in a way, that the year of increasing attacks and now the violence in Atlanta will begin to bridge the class divide by creating a dialogue among people of Asian descent. The victims at the spas, like the 16 percent of Asian workers in the service industry, had to leave home to make a living during the pandemic.
When most people are vaccinated and white-collar workers are fully back out in the world — commuting, stopping for coffee and heading to offices — the way the world has changed in the past year could further force solidarity: Any Asian could be targeted.
PHOTO: Eight people were killed at three businesses in the Atlanta area last week, including six women of Asian descent. There has been a surge in attacks against Asian-Americans over the past year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU6)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: ASIAN AMERICANS (96%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (93%); NEGATIVE NEWS (91%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (89%); ECONOMIC INEQUALITY (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (79%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); MASSAGE SERVICES (78%); POOR POPULATION (78%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (77%); ACTIVISM (73%); PERSONAL & FAMILY INCOME (73%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (72%); IMMIGRATION LAW (72%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (72%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (72%); POVERTY RATES (69%); ADULTS (67%); Asian-Americans (%); Discrimination (%); Hate Crimes (%); Income Inequality (%); Chinese-Americans (%); Atlanta Spa Shootings (2021) (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%); United States (%)

Company:  GOOGLE LLC (57%);  DELOITTE LLP (53%)

Industry: NAICS519290 WEB SEARCH PORTALS AND ALL OTHER INFORMATION SERVICES (57%); NAICS541211 OFFICES OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS (53%); SIC8721 ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING SERVICES (53%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); MASSAGE SERVICES (78%); SEX INDUSTRY (73%); RESTAURANTS (71%); CONSULTING SERVICES (63%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (92%); GEORGIA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%)

Load-Date: June 23, 2023


End of Document
America's Genius Glut
The New York Times
February 8, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Length: 781 words
Byline: By ROSS EISENBREY
Ross Eisenbrey is the vice president of the Economic Policy Institute.
Body


WASHINGTON
WHILE genuine immigration reform has the potential to fix a seriously broken system, four senators have introduced a bill to solve a problem we don't have: the supply of high-tech workers.
The bill's authors, led by Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, argue that America would benefit from letting more immigrants trained in science, technology, engineering and math work in the country, with the sponsorship of high-tech companies like Microsoft and I.B.M.
But the opposite is the case: the bill would flood the job market with indentured foreign workers, people who could not switch employers to improve their wages or working conditions; damage the employment prospects of hundreds of thousands of skilled Americans; and narrow the educational pipeline that produces these skilled workers domestically.
The impetus for the bill, which would give six-year visas to as many as 300,000 foreign high-tech workers a year, is the longstanding lament by business leaders that they cannot find the talent they need in the American labor market. In their version, there is a shortage of scientists and engineers, and the United States is failing to keep substantial numbers of foreign students in the country. As a result, our position as the world's leading high-tech economy is in danger.
Fortunately, they argue, H-1B visas -- our guest-worker program for high-tech workers -- brings us ''the best and the brightest'' in the world. We just don't give out enough of them.
But America's technology leadership is not, in fact, endangered. According to the economist Richard B. Freeman, the United States, with just 5 percent of the world's population, employs a third of its high-tech researchers, accounts for 40 percent of its research and development, and publishes over a third of its science and engineering articles. And a marked new crop of billion-dollar high-tech companies has sprung up in Silicon Valley recently, without the help of an expanded guest-worker program.
Nor are we turning away foreign students, or forcing them to leave once they've graduated. According to the Congressional Research Service, the number of full-time foreign graduate students in science, engineering and health fields has grown by more than 50 percent, from 91,150 in 1990 to 148,900 in 2009. And over the 2000s, the United States granted permanent residence to almost 300,000 high-tech workers, in addition to granting temporary work permits (for up to six years) to hundreds of thousands more.
The bill's proponents argue that for the sake of our global competitiveness, we shouldn't train and then return the tens of thousands of Chinese and Indian students who come here every year. But almost 90 percent of the Chinese students who earn science and technology doctorates in America stay here; the number is only slightly lower for Indians. If they're talented enough to get a job here, they're already almost guaranteed a visa.
If anything, we have too many high-tech workers: more than nine million people have degrees in a science, technology, engineering or math field, but only about three million have a job in one. That's largely because pay levels don't reward their skills. Salaries in computer- and math-related fields for workers with a college degree rose only 4.5 percent between 2000 and 2011. If these skills are so valuable and in such short supply, salaries should at least keep pace with the tech companies' profits, which have exploded.
And while unemployment for high-tech workers may seem low -- currently 3.7 percent -- that's more than twice as high as it was before the recession.
If there is no shortage of high-tech workers, why would companies be pushing for more? Simple: workers under the H-1B program aren't like domestic workers -- because they have to be sponsored by an employer, they are more or less indentured, tied to their job and whatever wage the employer decides to give them.
Moreover, too many are paid at wages below the average for their occupation and location: over half of all H-1B guest workers are certified for wages in the bottom quarter of the wage scale.
Bringing over more -- there are already 500,000 workers on H-1B visas -- would obviously darken job prospects for America's struggling young scientists and engineers. But it would also hurt our efforts to produce more: if the message to American students is, ''Don't bother working hard for a high-tech degree, because we can import someone to do the job for less,'' we could do significant long-term damage to the high-tech educational system we value so dearly.
There is no question that the immigration system needs major reform. But let's not break anything else in the process.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/08/opinion/americas-genius-glut.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (91%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LABOR MARKET (90%); ENGINEERING (89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT (78%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (77%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (77%); ECONOMICS (76%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (76%); POPULATION SIZE (76%); STEM EDUCATION (76%); LABOR SHORTAGES (72%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (72%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (71%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (69%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (66%)

Company:  NATIONAL TECHNICAL SYSTEMS INC (84%);  MICROSOFT CORP (57%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS561320 TEMPORARY HELP SERVICES (84%); NAICS541380 TESTING LABORATORIES (84%); SIC8734 TESTING LABORATORIES (84%); SIC7363 HELP SUPPLY SERVICES (84%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (57%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (57%); ENGINEERING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); DIGITAL ECONOMY (77%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (71%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (66%)

Person: ORRIN HATCH (58%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: February 8, 2013


End of Document
Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
The New York Times 
April 3, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1397 words
Byline: MIRIAM JORDAN
Highlight: Possible changes to a program that allows technology companies to import foreign workers may be adding to an even heavier rush than usual this year.
Body


LAGUNA NIGUEL, Calif. — The delivery trucks began arriving with their precious parcels before daybreak, lining up outside a massive government edifice that rises above Orange County’s suburban sprawl.
On Monday, the starting gun went off on application season for skilled-worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which allow employers, primarily technology companies, to bring in foreign workers for three years at a time. For the last few years, the federal government has been so overwhelmed by applications that it has stopped accepting them within a week of opening day, hence the line of trucks trying to deliver applications before the doors close on the program for another year.
And this year, the rush has escalated to an all-out scramble because the future of the H-1B program is unclear.
Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized as a scheme to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. President Trump has vowed to overhaul it, and lawmakers from both parties have drafted bills to alter it.
At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors at companies that included Disney. “We won’t let this happen anymore,” he thundered in one stump speech about the practice, which he has called “outrageous” and “demeaning.”
This past weekend, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced a technical change that could make it harder for entry-level programmers to receive the visas, and on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would investigate companies that it believed had overlooked qualified American workers.
“The Justice Department will not tolerate employers’ misusing the H-1B visa process to discriminate against U.S. workers,” Thomas Wheeler, the head of the department’s civil rights division, said in a statement.
Each year, 65,000 H-1B visas are made available to workers with bachelor’s degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master’s degrees or higher.
When the gates swung open at the government processing center here on Monday, the first truck in line, a FedEx rig, carried 15,000 packages, said a courier, Andrew Langyo.
“We’re loaded, and we have more trucks coming,” said Mr. Langyo, who would return two hours later in the same truck with another haul.
Last year, the government received 236,000 applications in the first week before deciding it would accept no more. A computer randomly chooses the winners.
The average H-1B petition, a collection of forms and documents attesting to the bona fides of a job offer and the person chosen to fill it, is about two inches thick. But some files are six inches thick and weigh several pounds, according to Bill Yates, a former director of the Vermont Service Center, which also processes H-1B applications.
Mr. Yates recalled some mishaps, like the time a driver bound for the center in Vermont drove 50 miles unaware that his truck’s back door had swung open, spilling its cargo onto the road.
The visas are attractive not only to the companies that file the applications, but also to the workers themselves, who can become eligible for a green card while working on an H-1B.
Among the petitions expected to land in California’s center is that of Minh Nguyen, a software-design engineer from Vietnam who was sponsored for an H-1B by BitTitan, a cloud software company in Kirkland, Wash. It is his second attempt at a visa.
“In America, you’re in the center of new technology and cutting-edge changes in the I.T. industry,” said Mr. Nguyen, 25. “I would contribute directly to the company and to software development in the U.S.”
In 2014, the last year for which information is available, just 13 outsourcing firms accounted for a third of all granted visas. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all based in India.
The companies, which subcontract their employees to banks, retailers and other businesses in the United States to do programming, accounting and other work, often inundate the immigration service with tens of thousands of applications.
BitTitan, a growing company that hopes to hire 60 engineers in the next 12 months, is submitting six applications. “We are trying to fill specific positions around cloud and artificial intelligence,” the chief executive, Geeman Yip, said. “If we can’t fill them, our innovation suffers.”
Several bipartisan bills in the Senate and the House seek to make companies give more priority to American workers before they fill jobs with H-1B visas. They also seek to raise the minimum pay for the jobs, which depend on skill level and location: A computer systems analyst in Pittsburgh, for example, must make at least $49,000 under current regulations. The theory is that higher pay will eliminate some of the rationale for importing workers.
A draft of a presidential executive order on “protecting American jobs and workers by strengthening the integrity of foreign worker visa programs” was distributed widely in late January but never signed. Then, without warning, Citizenship and Immigration Services published a memo on its website over the weekend that could affect many applications.
Specifically, companies seeking to import computer programmers at the lowest pay levels will have to prove that the work they perform qualifies as “specialty” labor, which is what the H-1B visas were created for. “There will be greater scrutiny of the role the company wants to fill,” said Lynden Melmed, a lawyer in Washington and a former chief counsel for the immigration service.
The measure appears to be directed mainly at outsourcing firms, rather than the big technology companies, which tend to hire workers at higher skill and pay levels.
In a statement, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, the main trade group for India’s outsourcing industry, said, “The H-1B visa system exists specifically because the U.S. has a persistent shortage of high-skilled I.T. talent.”
The group said that its members followed all the program’s rules, and that the change would have little impact. “It is aimed at screening out less-qualified workers, whereas our members tend to provide well-credentialed workers to help U.S. companies fill their skills gaps and compete globally,” it said.
Even before the memo and the Justice Department’s warning, fears about the future of the H-1B program were making this year more pressure-packed than most. “Just to make sure the petitions get in, almost every client demanded that theirs arrive on the first day,” said Greg McCall, a lawyer at Perkins Coie in Seattle who prepared 150 applications.
Inside the federal building, a formidable structure that has provided backdrops for movies including “Coma” and “Outbreak,” the logistical dance unfolded over two floors. In the mailroom, about 40 people wearing blue gloves sat around tables opening packages that arrived nonstop in six-foot-high bins. In a huge warehouse, those same packages were separated according to whether the applicants had bachelor’s or master’s degrees.
All told, 1,500 workers were involved, with a second shift expected to stretch past normal business hours.
“This is the day we prepare for months and months in advance,” said Donna P. Campagnolo, the center’s deputy director.
Trucks came and went all day, with some couriers, including from FedEx, staggering their deliveries to avoid having dozens of trucks backed up at the gate.
Some smaller delivery companies received a piece of the action, too. One courier, Fernando Salas, pulled up in a red Suzuki station wagon stuffed with 10 boxes. “I have 109 envelopes,” he said. “That is all that fits in here.”
It was all surprisingly low-tech for a program used primarily for high-tech jobs. Asked why the government had not digitized the process, Ms. Campagnolo said: “There’s obviously a lot of paper. There’s no denying it.”
The biggest challenge, she said, is “trash overflow.”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Nick Wingfield from Seattle.
PHOTO: Couriers delivered visa petitions Monday to a federal processing center in Laguna Niguel, Calif. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)
Related Articles
    • Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
    • Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (79%); IMMIGRATION (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (79%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (72%); SUBURBS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (69%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Outsourcing (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Computers and the Internet (%)

Ticker: Citizenship and Immigration Services (US)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document
Under Trump, Wall of Red Tape Hinders Legal Immigration
The New York Times
December 21, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20
Length: 1650 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


A scientist recruited by the renowned Cleveland Clinic is stuck in India because his visa is delayed. An entrepreneur courted by Silicon Valley companies had his application denied. Many green card applicants have new interviews to pass.
The Trump administration has pursued its immigration agenda loudly and noticeably, ramping up arrests of undocumented immigrants, barring most travel from several majority-Muslim countries and pressing the case for a border wall. 
  But it has also quietly, and with much less resistance, slowed many forms of legal immigration without the need for Congress to rescind a single visa program enshrined in the law.
  Immigration and State Department officials are more closely scrutinizing, and have started more frequently denying, visas for people seeking to visit the United States on business, as well as for those recruited by American companies, according to lawyers representing visa seekers. Foreigners already in the United States whose employers wish to extend their stays are also facing new hurdles.
  ''I call this the real wall,'' said Anastasia Tonello, the president-elect of the American Immigration Lawyers Association. ''The wall is being built.''
  The changes show how the Trump administration has managed to carry out the least attention-grabbing, but perhaps farthest-reaching, portion of the president's immigration plans: cutting the number of people entering the United States each year as temporary workers or permanent residents.
  The administration has put into practice the philosophy President Trump laid out in a pair of executive orders billed as protecting the nation from terrorism and its workers from foreign competition.
  One of them, the ''Buy American, Hire American'' order, singles out the H-1B visa program for skilled workers who otherwise would not be allowed into the country. Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, H-1Bs have also been derided as a way to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor; in one highly publicized case, some Disney employees were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments.
  Each year, 85,000 H-1Bs, which are valid for three to six years, are available to companies, according to a ceiling set by Congress. Demand far outstrips supply when the economy is healthy, prompting the government to hold a lottery.
  But now even applicants lucky enough to be chosen are drawing more scrutiny.
  Officials are asking for extra details about applicants' education and work history, the position to be filled and the employer, requiring the company to amass many additional documents, which can postpone a decision by several months.
  For H-1Bs, the number of such ''requests for evidence'' from January to August this year jumped 44 percent compared with the same period last year, according to the most recent data from United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  So far, the government is still greenlighting most H-1B applications that survive the lottery, but the approval rate is inching down.
  For the first two months of this fiscal year, October and November, 86 percent and 82 percent of H-1B applications were approved. That compares with 93 percent and 92 percent for the same months last year. The data does not reflect companies that give up after receiving requests for more evidence.
  Once a company has spent thousands of dollars in legal fees to petition for a worker, ''there is huge discouragement after an R.F.E. is issued,'' said Roxanne Levine, an immigration lawyer in New York, ''because of the massive extra time, effort and money required to respond.''
  L. Francis Cissna, the immigration agency's new director, said in an interview that if there are more requests for evidence, ''that is perfectly rational and perfectly appropriate.''
  ''We are looking at the entire program to ensure the entire thing is administered well and in conformity with congressional intent,'' he said.
  He recently met with a group of displaced American workers in Florida, including some laid off by Disney. The meeting was arranged by Sara Blackwell, an employment lawyer who leads a group called Protect U.S. Workers. ''The administration has done much more for American workers, but I hope to see much more soon,'' Ms. Blackwell said.
  Immigration lawyers and companies seeking the visas say that some of the decisions appear arbitrary.
  After responding to requests for evidence, a consulting firm that applied for an H-1B for an energy expert from Britain received a denial stating that the skills for the position ''do not appear to be of such complexity, uniqueness or specialization as to require the attainment of a bachelor's degree,'' a prerequisite for the visa.
  Kristen Albertson, the operations manager at the firm, called the outcome ''egregious.''
  ''We apply only when it's a strong case and essential to our business,'' she said of the applicant, who is a graduate of the University of Chicago.
  An H-1B visa for an Indian scientist recruited by the Cleveland Clinic for his expertise in cellular biology is stuck in ''administrative processing'' in New Delhi, meaning it is undergoing further review that could stretch into months. ''His team's projects are now on hold due to the delay,'' said Janice Bianco, an official at the Cleveland Clinic who handles applications for foreigners.
  She said a visa for a pediatric geneticist hired in the spring took three months to be issued -- in the past, it would have taken about three weeks -- forcing the hospital to reroute some patients to other facilities.
  The State Department, which has handled the Cleveland Clinic visa requests, said in a statement that ''consular officers have the discretion to request additional screening in any case.''
  Other types of visas are also tougher to get now. During trips to Silicon Valley, Vladimir Eremeev of Russia was encouraged to establish a branch of his cloud-based technology company, Ivideon, in the United States. In Europe, Ivideon employs 150 people, and Philips, the Dutch multinational, sells a camera powered by its technology.
  Mr. Eremeev drew up plans, which his lawyer in New York detailed in a 347-page visa application. He was applying for an L-1A visa, awarded to executives transferring to the United States.
  ''Sounds and looks great, but it didn't help me obtain a visa,'' Mr. Eremeev said in a phone interview.
  Among other things, the immigration agency stated that the office leased by Mr. Eremeev did not appear to be suited for a ''business that would require the employment of a manager or executive.'' His lawyer provided details and pictures of the space.
  Ultimately, the government denied the petition, stating that the ''organizational structure'' presented did not support the ''managerial or executive position'' that Mr. Eremeev was to fill.
  ''You are going in circles,'' said the lawyer, Oksana Bandrivska, ''and it's getting harder to win cases.''
  Russell Harrison, director of government relations for IEEE-USA, a society of technology professionals, applauded the administration's efforts to tackle visa abuse. However, he said, a blanket approach could stifle American competitiveness.
  ''They seem to be against anyone coming in, which is a simplistic view,'' Mr. Harrison said. ''There are some incredibly talented people not born in this country, and they are being treated just like other workers who are cheap.''
  Some lawyers said they had also seen more scrutiny of H-2B visas, the seasonal work permits that Mr. Trump uses to staff his Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. Jeff Joseph, a lawyer in Aurora, Colo., said the government was more often denying visas for companies that sought the visas season after season. (Mar-a-Lago uses them only during winters.)
  The government's argument, Mr. Joseph said, is that those companies are trying to import temporary workers to fill permanent jobs that should go to Americans. But he said his clients faced a shortage of local labor year after year to fill jobs in construction, lodging, landscaping and amusement parks.
  Other changes affect foreigners already working or living in the United States on H-1Bs or other temporary permits.
  Those sponsored by their employers for a green card, or legal permanent residency, must pass in-person interviews, a reversal of a 20-year-old policy that is likely to exacerbate a long backlog in green card applications. A memo from the immigration agency said the change was in line with the executive order to safeguard the nation from terrorism.
  The administration said this month that it planned to eliminate a program established during the Obama administration that allows international entrepreneurs to stay in the United States for up to five years. The administration also said it would eliminate a two-year-old program that granted work permits for spouses of H-1B workers. And it recently announced plans to restrict the ability of foreign students to work temporarily in the United States after they graduate.
  Another change affects green card holders who enlist in the military. Since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, military service has provided a faster path to citizenship than applying as a civilian, typically taking just 10 weeks.
  In October, the Pentagon enacted new procedures that substantially slow the process by adding several layers of vetting. The change affects thousands of immigrants who have already enlisted because they cannot start training before clearing the background checks.
  The Pentagon said the new measures were needed to ensure that terrorists do not infiltrate the military. But Margaret Stock, an immigration lawyer and retired lieutenant colonel in the Army, said the military would suffer. ''They are turning away green card holders with language, cybersecurity and other skills that the United States military needs,'' she said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/20/us/trump-immigration-slowdown.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The Cleveland Clinic has struggled to secure visas for foreign-born specialists. It has had to delay projects and reroute some patients. (PHOTOGRAPH BY T.J. KIRKPATRICK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); STATISTICS (77%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (76%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (76%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (75%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); ARRESTS (72%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (56%); SEVERANCE PAY (50%); TERRORISM (50%)

Organization: AMERICAN IMMIGRATION LAWYERS ASSOCIATION (55%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LAWYERS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%)

Geographic: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (73%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: December 21, 2017


End of Document
Will Asian-Americans Unite Across Class Divides?
The New York Times
March 21, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1; NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 1717 words
Byline: By Brian X. Chen
Body


Asian-Americans are reeling from the killings in Georgia and a rising number of attacks nationwide. Could confronting racism bring solidarity across their class divides?
The Asian-American experience is a tale of contrast. 
  We are immigrants, or descendants of immigrants, from more than 20 countries in East, South and Southeast Asia. We speak different languages and eat different food. Some lead America's most successful companies, like Google and Zoom. Others run small businesses, like Chinese restaurants and spas, which have been the hardest hit by the pandemic. We also have the nation's largest wealth gap: While some Asians earn household incomes that far exceed the national average, others consistently have the highest poverty rates.
  The endless list of disparities and nuances has made solidarity elusive for Asian-Americans, even as activist groups demand that our issues be recognized. While Asian-Americans are the nation's fastest-growing racial group -- now 6 percent of the population -- not everyone's priorities are the same, far from it in some cases, so increasing numbers haven't led to increasing power, politically or culturally.
  The events of the past year -- from the former president's racial slurs to the series of attacks on Asians, leading up to the Tuesday shootings of eight people, including six women of Asian descent, at massage parlors in Atlanta -- could be uniting people for a new reason: fear.
  In a country with hate crimes at their highest level in more than a decade, the professional status that many Asian-Americans enjoy, conferred by competing and succeeding in the most elite educational and professional institutions in America, doesn't help.
  Anna Mok, a Chinese-American executive at the consulting firm Deloitte, who lives in San Francisco and acknowledged that she was in a position of privilege, said hate crimes against Asian-Americans over the last year had prompted friends to urge her to not even go outside for a walk.
  ''I don't think I've ever felt that degree of physical vulnerability,'' Ms. Mok said.
  She added that many other Asian-Americans working for big companies had described similar magnitudes of stress to her: ''There's no buffer, there's no isolation. No matter how much money one makes, no matter how successful one is, it's the reality of being an Asian in the U.S.''
  Asian-Americans are also becoming the most economically divided demographic in the country. In 2016, their incomes ranged from about $12,000 at the 10th percentile to roughly $133,500 at the 90th percentile, with a median of about $51,000, according to the Pew Research Center. That compares with about $15,100 and $118,000 for whites.
  The income disparity is, in part, driven by immigrants, who accounted for 81 percent of the growth in the Asian adult population over the past five decades. Many who arrived under the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which gave priority to people with family ties, and after the Vietnam War ended in 1975 were relatively low-skilled workers. Later, the Immigration Act of 1990 brought in a new wave of higher-skilled immigrants under the H-1B visa program, which helped American companies hire foreigners with exceptional skills.
  Many Asian immigrants have higher levels of education than native-born Americans, which is largely why they settle in at the top of the income ladder. At the same time, Asians at the bottom of the ladder have lower education levels.
  In nearly a dozen conversations this past week with scholars, activists and historians, the sadness and grief around this inflection point was clear -- as was the recognition of how starkly divided two professional paths for Asian immigrants in this country have been.
  The Asian-American story has been a complicated narrative. There are the restaurant workers and massage therapists nested in metropolitan enclaves, but there are also the high achievers attending elite schools who end up in well-compensated careers. Often one generation of immigrants in service jobs raises the next generation of corporate strivers. In this moment, though, as the population grows, the groups are becoming increasingly isolated from one another.
  In the aftermath of a summer of protests for racial justice and increasing awareness of the Black Lives Matter movement, corporate employees of color, including Asians, are demanding equity and inclusion, which would put an end to a white-dominated culture. The workers in spas and nail salons don't have the luxury to even think about that; they are more vulnerable to the whims of their white clientele. In a nation already divided by politics, religion and income, here is a community divided within itself.
  But the ''kung flu'' pandemic -- the xenophobic language, fueled by President Donald J. Trump, that added hate crimes to a deadly disease and the rest of the list of things for Asian-Americans to fear this past year -- may be gradually bringing people together.
  Last year, reported hate crimes against people of Asian descent in New York City jumped 833 percent from 2019. Nearly 3,800 hate incidents, which range from name-calling to assault, against Asian-Americans and Pacific Islanders were reported to Stop AAPI Hate, a group that has collected data for the last year. (The number could be higher because not all incidents were reported.) Sixty-eight percent of those incidents were reported by women.
  As the country reeled from the all-too-familiar scenes of mass shootings in Atlanta, especially killings that may have targeted people because of their race and gender, some scholars recalled an earlier death. In 1982, Vincent Chin, a Chinese-American, was beaten to death by two white men at a time of rising tensions over Japanese dominance in the auto market. The killers, who insisted the attack was not racially motivated, were sentenced to three years of probation.
  The fact that the men did not serve jail time sent tremors through Asian communities. Activists formed civil rights groups to protest.
  ''We know that the Vincent Chin murder really did help communities across different ethnic groups come together,'' said Nancy Yuen, a sociologist at Biola University in California.
  Yet for decades, policymakers and government leaders have historically treated Asian-Americans as if they were invisible. That was in part because of the diverse makeup and smaller size of the group, which made it challenging to gain influence and attention. Ellen Wu, a history professor at Indiana University, said Asian-Americans had to compile data just to prove that they were minorities who suffered from issues like discrimination. Being recognized has been an uphill battle ever since.
  The shared pain and disrespect could finally be giving Asians grounds for solidarity -- and a platform to be visible. On Twitter, the hashtag #stopasianhate went viral, and all over the country, crowds gathered in the streets this past week, lighting candles for the Atlanta victims and holding signs proclaiming ''Asian Lives Matter.''
  Asian-American professionals in journalism, medicine and technology reflected on a year of swelling anxiety and pain from microaggressions. On my social media feeds and in conversations, fellow Asian-Americans recounted being chastised by a white person at a grocery store to keep a distance, enduring a road-rage encounter that felt ambiguously racist and being ignored by a worker at a store who was happy to help white shoppers. For Asian-American women, the nature of the Atlanta attack sparked a conversation about racism and sexism -- times they had heard men yell lines like ''Me so horny'' while walking down the street.
  Doctors who were usually booked full with appointments found that their calendars were empty, which tracks with the broader trends of how discrimination has manifested in the past year like patients refusing medical care from doctors and nurses of Asian descent. Some doctors even reported verbal abuse by their patients.
  Stop AAPI Hate, the organization documenting reports of Asian hate incidents, noted sharp upticks in verbal harassment, shunning and physical assaults over the last year.
  For those working remotely during the pandemic, who could mostly stay home and felt less vulnerable, their fear began to manifest when they saw photos posted online of Asian elders -- people who looked like their parents -- beaten to a pulp. Ms. Mok, the Deloitte executive, moved to San Francisco in January from Palo Alto, Calif., to be closer to her father, who is 88 and lives alone there.
  ''My own sense of helplessness when I told him, 'Please don't go out, not even to get your newspaper,' was very difficult for me to handle,'' Ms. Mok said.
  Ms. Wu said she had noticed unity in the last year even among Asian activists who usually butted heads. She mentioned groups that have been fighting fiercely over the future of affirmative action in higher education. Both sides published statements condemning Mr. Trump's racial slurs about Asians spreading the coronavirus.
  ''There's something about the Covid issue and the anti-Asian hate issue that presents this common denominator, a point of convergence,'' Ms. Wu said. ''There is a certain baseline where, across the board, there does seem to be recognition and fear that bad things are happening to people of Asian ancestry, undeniably.''
  Jo-Ann Yoo, the executive director of the Asian American Federation, a nonprofit network of community groups, has spent the last year producing videos about small Asian-American businesses hit hard by the pandemic and speaking at rallies and news conferences about hate crimes against Asians.
  It has been devastating and infuriating, Ms. Yoo said. But she is hopeful, in a way, that the year of increasing attacks and now the violence in Atlanta will begin to bridge the class divide by creating a dialogue among people of Asian descent. The victims at the spas, like the 16 percent of Asian workers in the service industry, had to leave home to make a living during the pandemic.
  When most people are vaccinated and white-collar workers are fully back out in the world -- commuting, stopping for coffee and heading to offices -- the way the world has changed in the past year could further force solidarity: Any Asian could be targeted.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/20/technology/personaltech/asian-american-wealth-gap.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Eight people were killed at three businesses in the Atlanta area last week, including six women of Asian descent. There has been a surge in attacks against Asian-Americans over the past year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEENAH MOON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (BU6)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ASIAN AMERICANS (96%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (89%); ECONOMIC INEQUALITY (89%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (79%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); MASSAGE SERVICES (75%); POOR POPULATION (74%); SMALL BUSINESS (73%); ACTIVISM (72%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (72%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (72%); PERSONAL & FAMILY INCOME (69%); POVERTY RATES (69%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (50%)

Company: GOOGLE LLC (57%);  DELOITTE LLP (53%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); NAICS541211 OFFICES OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS (53%); SIC8721 ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING SERVICES (53%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); MASSAGE SERVICES (75%); SEX INDUSTRY (73%); RESTAURANTS (71%); CONSULTING SERVICES (62%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%)

Load-Date: March 21, 2021


End of Document
Tech Firms Join Bid for Easing Of Immigration
The New York Times
February 13, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1246 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Julia Preston contributed reporting from New York.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- What do computer programmers and illegal immigrants have to do with each other?
When it comes to the sweeping overhaul of the nation's immigration laws that Congress is considering this year, the answer is everything.
Silicon Valley executives, who have long pressed the government to provide more visas for foreign-born math and science brains, are joining forces with an array of immigration groups seeking comprehensive changes in the law. And as momentum builds in Washington for a broad revamping, the tech industry has more hope than ever that it will finally achieve its goal: the expanded access to visas that it says is critical to its own continued growth and that of the economy as a whole.
Signs of the industry's stepped-up engagement on the issue are visible everywhere. Prominent executives met with President Obama last week. Start-up founders who rarely abandon their computers have flown across the country to meet with lawmakers.
This Tuesday, the Technology CEO Council, an advocacy organization representing companies like Dell, Intel and Motorola, had meetings on Capitol Hill. On Wednesday, Steve Case, a founder of AOL, is scheduled to testify at the first Senate hearing this year on immigration legislation, alongside the head of the deportation agents' union and the leader of a Latino civil rights group.
''The odds of high-skilled passing without comprehensive is close to zero, and the odds of comprehensive passing without high-skilled passing is close to zero,'' said Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a nonpartisan research group based in Washington.
The push comes as a clutch of powerful Senate Republicans and Democrats have reached a long-elusive agreement on some basic principles of a ''comprehensive'' revamping of immigration law. Separately, a bipartisan bill introduced in the Senate in late January focuses directly on the visa issue.
The industry's argument for more so-called high-skilled visas has already persuaded the president.
''Real reform means fixing the legal immigration system to cut waiting periods, reduce bureaucracy, and attract the highly-skilled entrepreneurs and engineers that will help create jobs and grow our economy,'' Mr. Obama said in Tuesday's State of the Union speech.
In a speech in Las Vegas in January in which he introduced his own blueprint for overhauling immigration law, Mr. Obama embraced the idea that granting more visas was essential to maintaining innovation and job growth. He talked about foreigners studying at American universities, figuring out how to turn their ideas into businesses.
In part, the new alliance between the tech industry and immigration groups was born out of the 2012 elections and the rising influence of Hispanic voters.
''The world has changed since the election,'' said Peter J. Muller, director of government relations at Intel, pointing out that the defeat of many Republican candidates had led to a softening of the party's position on broad changes to immigration law. ''There is a focus on comprehensive. We're thrilled by it.''
''At this point,'' he added, ''our best hope for immigration reform lies with comprehensive reform.''
Mr. Case, the AOL co-founder, who now runs an investment fund, echoed that sentiment after meeting with the president last Tuesday.
''I look forward to doing whatever I can to help pass comprehensive immigration reform in the months ahead,'' he said, ''and ensure it includes strong provisions regarding high-skilled immigration, so we are positioned to win the global battle for talent.''
That sort of sentiment delights immigrants' rights advocates who have banged their heads against the wall for years to rally a majority of Congress around their agenda.
''The stars are aligning here,'' said Ali Noorani, executive director of the National Immigration Forum. ''You've got the politics of immigration reform changing. You've got tech leaders leaning in not just for high-skilled but for broader immigration reform.''
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, who is co-sponsoring the bill to increase the number of visas available for highly skilled immigrants, said the cooperation went both ways.
''All the talk about the STEM field -- science, technology, engineering, mathematics -- has awakened even those who aren't all that interested in the high-tech world,'' he said.
While the growing momentum has surprised many in Washington, comprehensive change is still not a sure thing, especially in the Republican-controlled House.
Mr. Hatch said he would push forward with his measure even if the broader efforts foundered. But his Democratic co-sponsor, Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, said she would press for the bill to be part of the comprehensive package.
Last year, technology executives had a taste of what could happen with stand-alone legislation.
In November the House passed a bill, sponsored by Representative Lamar S. Smith, Republican of Texas, that would have provided 55,000 visas for foreigners graduating from American universities with advanced degrees in STEM fields. Mr. Smith, then the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, brought considerable clout, and the tech industry rallied behind the bill.
But the legislation died in the Senate, because Democrats wanted any technology-specific measure to be part of a broader bargain that would include more visas for family members.
In pressing its case, the industry has used some vivid examples to sway lawmakers, arguing that if skilled workers cannot get visas, tech companies will simply move the jobs overseas.
Facebook was the latest to make this case. It said it had to place nearly 80 engineers in its office in Dublin in 2011 because it could not obtain even temporary work visas to employ them at the company's headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. Those temporary visas, called H-1B visas, are capped at 65,000 a year and usually run out within a couple of months. The bill proposed by Mr. Hatch and Ms. Klobuchar would more than double that number.
Microsoft has also argued that the visa backlog takes jobs out of the United States, saying it was forced to open a development office in Vancouver.
Hundreds of thousands of foreigners, the largest share from India and China, come to American universities every year to study science and engineering. But it can take so long for them to get permanent residency that many end up returning home. Mr. Hatch said he was keen to see foreign-born graduates of American universities remain in this country rather than work for competitive firms elsewhere.
''China, India -- they would love to have these Ph.D.'s return to their countries,'' he said. ''They see the benefits. Why can't we?''
There is no dearth of jobs in Silicon Valley. Employment in San Francisco and its southern suburbs grew about 3.6 percent in 2012, twice the growth rate nationally, according to a study released last week by Joint Venture Silicon Valley, a nonpartisan research organization.
But many of those jobs are filled by foreigners. In San Mateo and Santa Clara Counties, nearly two-thirds of those employed in science- and engineering-related jobs were born abroad, compared with about one-fourth nationwide, according to the study.
Industry executives hope to employ many more.
''The issue has truly ripened,'' said Bruce Mehlman, a veteran Washington lobbyist and executive director of the Technology CEO Council. ''Levels of optimism are higher than they've been in a while.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/13/business/tech-companies-and-immigrant-advocates-join-forces.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Steve Case, an AOL founder, has met with President Obama on easing immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSHUA ROBERTS/REUTERS) (A3)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); EXECUTIVES (77%); US CONGRESS (77%); ALLIANCES & PARTNERSHIPS (76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (76%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (74%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); JOB CREATION (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (50%); VOTERS & VOTING (50%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (58%);  MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS INC (55%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); MSI (NYSE) (55%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS334220 RADIO & TELEVISION BROADCASTING & WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (55%); SIC3663 RADIO & TELEVISION BROADCASTING & COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (55%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (73%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (79%); STEVE CASE (51%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: February 15, 2013


End of Document
Changes to Tech Worker Visas Are Cosmetic. For Now.
The New York Times 
April 3, 2017 Monday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 770 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL and NICK WINGFIELD
Highlight: As the application season opens for H-1B visas for foreign workers, the Trump administration warns tech companies they will face more scrutiny.
Body


The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services           announced on Friday that it was reversing its previous guidance that entry-level computer programming jobs automatically qualify as a “specialty occupation” — a basic requirement for receiving an H-1B work visa. And on Monday, the Justice Department            warned that it would look closely at any employer who discriminates against American workers by showing a preference for hiring H-1B workers.
The announcements came as the government began accepting applications on Monday for H-1B visas that will be issued for the next fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1.
How do the announcements change the government’s policies toward foreign workers?
The changes are more cosmetic than substantive. Visas for entry-level computer jobs have already been getting more scrutiny from immigration officials, and the Justice Department is reminding companies to follow the law.
Still, critics of the H-1B program say the Justice Department’s warning to companies not to discriminate against Americans might lead to enforcement action.
“If the Department of Justice concludes that these companies are discriminating against Americans, the entire outsourcing model becomes deeply suspect,” said Russell Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, a group that represents American tech workers.
Why is the H-1B program important? 
H-1B visas are commonly used by companies to bring foreign workers to the United States to fill technical positions like software developers. Some tech companies say they need foreign workers because they cannot find enough Americans with the skills for these jobs.
There’s a lot of controversy around H-1Bs. Some of the biggest users of these work visas are outsourcing firms, many of them based in India. These firms often bring foreign workers to the United States at low wages to fill jobs once held by higher-paid Americans.
How do the new policies affect Microsoft, Facebook and other big American technology companies? 
The large tech companies are unlikely to be affected much in the near term, immigration lawyers and technology executives said. Technology companies usually apply for H-1B visas when they need to fill a job with higher-skilled workers holding bachelor’s or master’s degrees.
William Moss, a spokesman for Intel, said the chip maker does not expect any impact from the change. “Intel’s foreign national population in the U.S. is largely comprised of individuals possessing unique and difficult to find skills which can only be acquired through advanced-degree, university-level education,” Mr. Moss said.
What about the Indian outsourcing firms? 
Indian outsourcing firms like Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Infosys get a large number of H-1B visas, as do outsource companies that are based in America, such as I.B.M. and Cognizant.
Although they do hire some entry-level programmers, they have been shifting their hiring to higher-skilled and better paid workers.
Benjamin Trounson, a spokesman for Tata Consultancy Services, said the company has cut back on its use of H-1B visas in the past few years, receiving only 1,500 in 2016.
Why is this happening now?
On Monday, the federal government began accepting applications for next year’s visas. Demand for the H-1B visas so far exceeds the supply that the government is likely to cut off applications within a week, and visas will be awarded by lottery. Congress allows for 65,000 H-1Bs each year, with an additional 20,000 for workers possessing a master’s degree or higher.
The Trump administration may be using the moment to discourage what its views as abuse of the work visa.
“The timing is not coincidental,” said Ted Ruthizer, an immigration lawyer with Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel in New York. “It’s an attempt to show a mastery of the situation, that they know what companies are up to with H-1Bs and they’re not going to let them get away with any shenanigans.”
Are more changes coming that could affect the technology sector? 
Probably. Companies like Amazon and Expedia took a leading position in opposing President Trump’s first executive order banning travel to the United States from seven majority Muslim countries, saying that it restricted the movement of employees and hindered their ability to attract talent.
The industry is also awaiting a possible executive order from Mr. Trump that could further change how H-1Bs and other visas used by the tech industry are issued.
Related Articles
    • Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
    • Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS (73%); LAWYERS (73%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); India (%)

Ticker: Citizenship and Immigration Services (US)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (89%); BIG TECH (79%); ELECTRONICS (79%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (79%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (78%); LAWYERS (73%); CONSULTING SERVICES (50%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document
Mnuchin Takes on the Dollar at Davos: DealBook Briefing
The New York Times 
January 25, 2018 Thursday 11:33 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 2158 words
Highlight: The Treasury secretary’s advocacy for a weak dollar heightened the sense of conflict between the U.S. and other countries at the World Economic Forum.
Body


Good Thursday. Here’s what we’re watching:
 Steven Mnuchin brought his version of “America First” to Davos with a knock on the value of the dollar.
 G.E.’s string of tough breaks continues.
 Stevie Cohen wants to get closer to the G.O.P.
 Why is SoftBank trying to raise more debt?
Want this in your own email inbox? Here’s the sign-up.
The White House’s curious attack on the dollar at Davos
Davos update of the day: Here at Davos, you can sort of tell the relative power of the individual by how casually they’re dressed. While many attendees wear business suits and snow boots, Jamie Dimon yesterday sported a North Face jacket and dad jeans. (Lloyd Blankfein opted for a more business-casual suit-but-no-tie look.) TPG’s David Bonderman had been known to wear a, shall we say, well-worn fleece.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin yesterday at the World Economic Forum: “Obviously, a weaker dollar is good for us as it relates to trade and opportunities.”
Christine Lagarde’s response: “I really hope that Secretary Mnuchin has a chance to clarify exactly what he said.” (Bob Rubin also            diplomatically rebuked any effort to weaken the dollar to lift trade.)
Today, Mr. Mnuchin said the dollar was “not a concern of mine,” and professed faith in its long-term strength.
The bigger picture, courtesy of Ben White in Politico:
If the U.S. is publicly supporting a weak dollar while also imposing tariffs on foreign imports — as the Trump administration did this week — it could invite retaliation from other countries, potentially sparking both currency and trade wars, economists say.
Said at Davos
Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase told CNBC, “I promise you, we are going to be sitting here in a year and you all will be worrying about inflation and wages going up too high.”
Lloyd Blankfein of Goldman Sachs said of President Trump: “I don’t want to be hypocritical, either. I’ve really liked what he’s done for the economy.”
Sundar Pichai of Google said about taxes: “We are happy to pay a higher amount, whatever the world agrees on as the right framework. It’s not an issue about the amount of tax we pay, as much as how you divide it among various countries.”
Jack Ma of Alibaba said on a panel: “I think globalization cannot be stopped. Nobody can stop globalization. Nobody can stop trade. And I believe, if trade stops, war starts.”
Raymond Nolte of SkyBridge Capital said, “If you take away Trump’s Twitter ridiculousness, it’s actually been a pretty good year for the business community.”
More from the World Economic Forum
 European leaders like Emmanuel Macron (who reportedly persuaded Mr. Trump to come) and Angela Merkel forcefully defended international cooperation and globalization. (NYT)
 Liu He, an influential senior adviser to President Xi Jinping, said China would bring its debt under control within three years. (NYT)
 All of Mr. Trump’s friends and frenemies at Davos. (Bloomberg)
A Davos scheduling bonus
Take a guess: Which former high-powered Wall Street executive who, when bumped into at the bottom of the hill leading up to Mr. Deripaska’s chalet and asked in jest if he was headed to the “oligarch party,” declared that his firm “did not hang out with oligarchs” — and then sauntered up the hill to the party?
CBS and Viacom talked merger.
Shares of Viacom and CBS jumped ahead of the close after Reuters reported that the two companies had held an exploratory discussion about merging, citing sources familiar with the matter.
The boards of both companies are expected to discuss the potential merger at their regularly scheduled meetings in the next couple of weeks, Reuters reports.
The context: Recombining the two companies has been much speculated in recent years as media companies tried to add scale. Shari Redstone, who along with her father, Sumner Redstone, controls the two companies, tried to merge them in 2016. Those efforts faltered over the concerns of CBS’ directors and CBS’s chief executive, Les Moonves. But Walt Disney’s deal for much of 21st Century Fox late last year has sparked much strategic rethinking across the industry.
One celebrity business mogul won’t run for president
It is, of course, Oprah.
Here’s what she told InStyle magazine:
It’s not something that interests me. I don’t have the DNA for it. Gayle—who knows me as well as I know myself practically—has been calling me regularly and texting me things, like a woman in the airport saying, “When’s Oprah going to run?” So Gayle sends me these things, and then she’ll go, “I know, I know, I know! It wouldn’t be good for you—it would be good for everyone else.” I met with someone the other day who said that they would help me with a campaign. That’s not for me.
Completely coincidentally, we’re sure, shares in Weight Watchers International were down 3 percent this morning:
#MeToo meets corporate governance
From a client memo by David Katz and Laura McIntosh of the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz:
A recent study indicates that the topic would be new for most public company boards, notwithstanding the fact that it relates to key elements of board-level governance: company culture, tone-at-the-top, risk management, and crisis management. Sexual misconduct in the workplace can take a devastating human toll. Moreover, the issue implicates gender equality and gender diversity concerns more broadly, and boards that include a meaningful proportion of female directors should be better positioned to address sexual harassment and gender equality issues.
Among the best ways to better address the issue at a company: having more women on corporate boards and in senior management positions.
— Michael J. de la Merced
The race is on to become the first United States company valued at $1 trillion.
Shares of the biggest American technology companies have continued to surge in 2018. The S&P 500 technology sector is up 7.6 percent to start 2018. Amazon.com has risen 17 percent, Alphabet is up 12 percent, and Microsoft has climbed 8.4 percent, writes MoneyBeat’s Ben Eisen. Meanwhile, Apple has lagged a bit in 2018, up just 1.8 percent.
If the rally persists, then the four biggest companies in the Standard & Poor’s 500 index could all soon be flirting with the $1 trillion mark.
Apple: $884 billion.
 Alphabet: $814 billion
Microsoft: $713 billion
Amazon: $656 billion
When will things look up for G.E.?
Bad enough that the embattled industrial giant had to announce that GE Capital would suspend dividends to the group, after a $6.2 billion charge tied to its reinsurance operations.
Now the S.E.C. is taking a look, and questions are being raised about the conglomerate’s            famously opaque accounting. Its shares fell 2.7 percent yesterday.
Critics’ corner
 Spencer Jakab writes, “Sunlight may be the best disinfectant, but General Electric is learning that it can leave some nasty burns — particularly for those who have spent too much time in the shade.” (Heard on the Street)
 Tom Buerkle writes of G.E.’s chief, John Flannery, “Flannery’s time to draw a line under past mistakes is shrinking — and with it the likelihood that he can show that G.E.’s diverse businesses are better together than apart.” (Breakingviews)
Stevie Cohen opens his wallet for the G.O.P.
Point 72 is on the verge of managing outside money and operating as a true hedge fund again. So, it appears, its chief is seeking friends in Washington.
Mr. Cohen donated $2 million to the Senate Leadership Fund and $1 million to the Congressional Leadership Fund, Fox Business reports. That made him the top donor to both Republican super PACs. (He previously gave money to both parties.)
More from Brian Schwartz and Charlie Gasparino:
“Cohen is getting back into the hedge fund business, and he’s making sure he has allies lined up on Capitol Hill given what he went through,” said one financial services lobbyist who spoke on the condition of anonymity. “And it’s not like he’s on a budget.”
The political flyaround
 An immigration bill sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, would permit more H-1B skilled worker visas: 195,000 a year. (Axios)
 Mr. Trump said he was willing to be interviewed under oath for Robert Mueller’s Russia investigation. (NYT)
 Mr. Trump also said he favored offer citizenship to the young immigrants known as Dreamers, days after rejecting a bipartisan bill with that as its centerpiece. (NYT)
 Alex Azar was confirmed yesterday as secretary of health and human services. (NYT)
Is SoftBank looking for even more money?
Its Vision Fund has nearly $100 billion in equity to spend. But here’s how the Japanese conglomerate is reportedly planning to raise yet more capital, according to The Information:
 Borrow as much as $5 billion against its stake in the British chip maker ARM
 Potentially borrow against its new 15 percent stake in Uber
The bigger picture: SoftBank is no stranger to debt, with $103 billion in long-term borrowings on its books as of Sept. 30. But analysts have questioned whether Masa Son’s company is using leverage too aggressively. Some comes due this year — and a huge amount in 2024.
When the Vision Fund’s interest makes life difficult: SoftBank’s deliberations over whether to invest in Wag, a dog-walking app, have elbowed aside other investors, according to The Information — though it isn’t clear whether Mr. Son will follow through.
The deal-making flyaround
 Nearly $30 billion worth of health care deals has been announced this month as drug makers look to acquire new treatments. Some in the industry fear valuations are getting too rich. (FT)
 The hedge funds Corvex Capital Management and 40 North have given up their fight over the chemical maker Clariant, selling their stake to Saudi Arabia’s state-controlled chemical producer. (FT)
 K.K.R. has sold its remaining 12.3 percent of Pets at Home. (FT)
 Sun Basket is raising money despite a bear market for meal-kit companies. It’s promising to limit investors’ risks. (The Information)
 Alibaba and Kroger have had preliminary discussions about a partnership, apparently in a response to Amazon’s grocery moves. (NY Post)
 RPX, a manager of patent-related issues, is considering selling itself and has drawn interest from investment firms, according to unnamed sources. (Reuters)
The downside of the U.S. oil boom
From Javier Blas, in Bloomberg Businessweek’s latest cover story:
It sounds good, but be careful what you wish for. The last three years have been the hottest since record-keeping began in the 19th century, and there’s little room in Trump’s plan for energy sources that treat the planet kindly. Governors of coastal states have already pointed out that an offshore spill could devastate tourism — another trillion-dollar industry — not to mention wreck fragile littoral environments. Florida has already applied for a waiver from such drilling. More supply could lower prices, in turn discouraging investments in renewables such as solar and wind. Those tend to spike when oil prices rise, so enthusiasm for nonpolluting, nonwarming energies of the future could wane.
For now, though, the petroleum train is chugging. And you can thank the resilience of the U.S. shale industry for it.
The misconduct flyaround
 The Presidents Club Charitable Trust has shut down after the FT revealed that participants at its annual men-only dinner groped, harassed and propositioned young women serving them. (FT)
 Hollywood has absorbed the #MeToo critiques — and converted them into digestible branding exercises. (NYT)
 The #MeToo movement is having a harder time in China, including from censors. (NYT)
Revolving door
 Snapchat’s vice president of product, Tom Conrad, is leaving in March. (Evan Spiegel makes the big product decisions.) (Recode)
 Meg Whitman will become the C.E.O. of Jeffrey Katzenberg’s short-form video start-up . (Recode,            The Information)
 Evercore has hired Adam Taetle, most recently the co-head of Barclays’ consumer retail investment banking team, as a senior managing director and head of its retail practice. (Evercore)
The Speed Read
 Marijuana start-ups are largely looking beyond the old-fashioned joint. (NYT)
 Switzerland wants to be a “crypto nation” and its initial coin offering industry is burgeoning. (FT)
 Mr. Trump has offered the coal industry some regulatory relief, but market forces remain against it. (NYT)
 Wall Street isn’t buying Jim Hackett’s plan to reinvigorate Ford Motor. (NYT)
 Last year was the costliest on record for weather disasters. Some struggling insurers are considering selling up. (FT)
 After Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico will not be able to pay down any portion of its more than $70 billion debt over the next five years. (NYT)
 A bank in China found that HNA had put up the same shares as collateral for multiple loans, according to people with knowledge of the matter, and responded by freezing related accounts. (Bloomberg)
 The June mayoral election in San Francisco will be a battle over technology’s influence on the city and its politics. (NYT)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (90%); US DOLLAR (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (89%); GLOBALIZATION (89%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (88%); INFLATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); ECONOMICS (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (73%); TRADE DISPUTES (69%); TAXES & TAXATION (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (58%); International Trade and World Market (%); United States Economy (%); US Dollar (Currency) (%); World Economic Forum (%); Treasury Department (%); Mnuchin, Steven T (%)

Ticker: World Economic Forum; World Economic Forum; Treasury Department

Industry: BUSINESSWEAR (90%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (90%); US DOLLAR (90%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%)

Person: STEVEN MNUCHIN (92%); JACK MA (73%); SUNDAR PICHAI (67%); ANGELA MERKEL (63%); JAMES DIMON (54%); DAVID BONDERMAN (53%); LLOYD BLANKFEIN (53%); Mnuchin, Steven T

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (79%)

Load-Date: January 27, 2018


End of Document
The Biden administration lets a Trump-era ban on some foreign work visas expire.
The New York Times 
March 31, 2021 Wednesday 13:47 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 386 words
Byline: Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Highlight: The change affects computer programmers and engineers who enter the United States on H-1B visas, students on work-study programs and seasonal workers in the hospitality industry.
Body


The change affects computer programmers and engineers who enter the United States on H-1B visas, students on work-study programs and seasonal workers in the hospitality industry.
President Biden will let a ban on certain temporary foreign work visas expire on Wednesday, according to two administration officials, reopening a labor pool that was cut off by his predecessor during the coronavirus pandemic.
Former President Donald J. Trump blocked visas for a variety of jobs in a sweeping order last June, including those for computer programmers and engineers who enter the United States on H-1B visas, students on work-study programs and seasonal workers in the hospitality industry.
The Trump administration said at the time that the ban on temporary work visas, as well as a separate block on green cards, was necessary to protect employment opportunities for Americans who lost their jobs because of the economic toll of the pandemic. But numerous studies have shown that immigrants benefit the economy. Business leaders openly criticized the orders as blocking critically needed employees willing to work jobs that Americans are not willing to do or capable of doing.
After business associations filed a lawsuit against the order on foreign workers, a federal judge in California in October lifted the ban on a large number of the work visas. 
The ruling at the time only applied to members of organizations that sued the administration, including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, National Association of Manufacturers, National Retail Federation, Intrax Inc., which sponsors cultural exchanges, and TechNet, a technology industry group.
Mr. Biden had already revoked Mr. Trump’s ban on new green cards, saying it did not “advance the interests of the United States.” Even during the pandemic, Mr. Biden said the restrictions harmed the nation by “preventing certain family members of United States citizens and lawful permanent residents from joining their families here. It also harms industries in the United States that utilize talent from around the world.”
PHOTO: An I.T. management consultant worked from New Delhi in June after President Donald J. Trump’s executive order suspending H-1B visas prevented him from returning to the United States. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Manish Swarup/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); SEASONAL WORKERS (91%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (90%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); WORKER CATEGORIES (90%); EPIDEMICS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); TECHNOLOGY (78%); PANDEMICS (76%); DISMISSALS (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); CORONAVIRUSES (71%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (71%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (71%); JUDGES (71%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (67%); LITIGATION (66%); VIRUSES (56%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%)

Company:  ASSOCIATED PRESS (51%)

Organization: UNITED STATES CHAMBER OF COMMERCE (54%); NATIONAL RETAIL FEDERATION (54%); NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF MANUFACTURERS (54%)

Industry: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (51%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); MANUFACTURING (73%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (73%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (93%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); Biden, Joseph R Jr

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: March 31, 2021


End of Document
Luring Foreign High-Tech Workers
The New York Times
February 18, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16; LETTERS
Length: 620 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''America's Genius Glut,'' by Ross Eisenbrey (Op-Ed, Feb. 8):
Finally someone has written accurately about the supposed shortage of scientists, engineers and mathematicians in the United States. Organizations clamoring for more H-1B visas for high-tech workers do not need more access to highly skilled workers. As Mr. Eisenbrey points out, plenty of such workers are already available. What these organizations want is ready access to these workers who will work for lower wages.
Further, these organizations do not truly want scientists. Instead, they want highly skilled technicians who are trained to use the latest technologies in exactly the manner dictated by the organization. Five years later when the technology changes, they will be discarded. They will be replaced by the newest crop of workers, who are trained in the latest technologies and, best of all, will work for lower wages than the previous crop.
STEVEN L. VONDERFECHT Monrovia, Calif., Feb. 8, 2013
To the Editor:
Intellectual protectionism, like all forms of protectionism, helps some people at the expense of the rest of society. According to a paper by the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, half of all Silicon Valley start-ups from 1995 to 2005, and one-quarter of all tech companies, were founded by foreign-born workers. One does not need to be one of the geniuses that Ross Eisenbrey would like to keep out of the United States to see that America will benefit from admitting more scientifically gifted people.
MARK L. GREEN Santa Monica, Calif., Feb. 8, 2013
The writer is a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles.
To the Editor:
I read Ross Eisenbrey's article with great interest, having recently spent four years in New York as a foreign student (from Greece) obtaining my Ph.D. in computer science. One of the pillars of Mr. Eisenbrey's argument is that foreign students who obtain advanced degrees in the United States will usually find a way to stay. But many prefer to leave rather than go through a long and painful immigration process. I know, because I am one of them.
Though I'd rather live in New York, upon graduation I moved to Sweden where, as a European citizen, I didn't have to worry about unreasonable immigration rules. As the economic opportunities in China and India continue to improve, more and more foreign students will make the same choice I did and refuse to jump through the hoops of a dysfunctional immigration system.
In the United States, more than a third of doctoral degrees in the sciences and more than half of those in engineering are awarded each year to foreign students. Congress needs to allow American society to reap the benefits of the American higher education system.
Forget about the H-1B program, whose problems are correctly pointed out in Mr. Eisenbrey's article. Simply let science, technology, engineering and mathematics, or STEM, graduates with advanced degrees stay by giving them green cards.
MICHAEL LAMPIS Stockholm, Feb. 8, 2013
To the Editor:
I was frankly amused by Ross Eisenbrey's baseless hypothesis that we have a glut of genius engineers, and that deep-pocketed tech giants like Microsoft and I.B.M. are importing thousands of foreign professionals on H-1B visas only to use them as bonded labor at below-market rates.
Contrary to his view that H-1B visas somehow ''darken job prospects for America's struggling young scientists and engineers,'' American STEM graduates have far better job prospects than their liberal arts counterparts, thank you very much, and they are hardly struggling even in current dismal economic conditions.
AMIT SARKAR Scarsdale, N.Y., Feb. 8, 2013
The writer is a former Wall Street banker.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/18/opinion/luring-foreign-high-tech-workers.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY VINCENT MAHÉ)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (87%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); LABOR SHORTAGES (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); WRITERS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); ENGINEERING (77%); MATHEMATICS (74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (72%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (72%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); IMMIGRATION LAW (64%)

Organization: GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (55%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (87%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); WRITERS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); ENGINEERING (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%); GREECE (53%)

Load-Date: February 18, 2013


End of Document
H-1B Visa Applications Pour In by the Truckload
The New York Times
April 4, 2017 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1342 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN; Vindu Goel contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Nick Wingfield from Seattle.
Body


LAGUNA NIGUEL, Calif. -- The delivery trucks began arriving with their precious parcels before daybreak, lining up outside a massive government edifice that rises above Orange County's suburban sprawl.
On Monday, the starting gun went off on application season for skilled-worker visas, known as H-1B visas, which allow employers, primarily technology companies, to bring in foreign workers for three years at a time. For the last few years, the federal government has been so overwhelmed by applications that it has stopped accepting them within a week of opening day, hence the line of trucks trying to deliver applications before the doors close on the program for another year. 
  And this year, the rush has escalated to an all-out scramble because the future of the H-1B program  is unclear.
  Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized as a scheme to displace United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. President Trump has vowed to overhaul it, and lawmakers from both parties have drafted bills to alter it.
  At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors at companies that included Disney. ''We won't let this happen anymore,'' he thundered in one stump speech about the practice, which he has called ''outrageous'' and ''demeaning.''
  This past weekend, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced a technical change that could make it harder for entry-level programmers to receive the visas, and on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would investigate companies that it believed had overlooked qualified American workers.
  ''The Justice Department will not tolerate employers' misusing the H-1B visa process to discriminate against U.S. workers,'' Thomas Wheeler, the head of the department's civil rights division, said in a statement.
  Each year, 65,000 H-1B visas are made available to workers with bachelor's degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master's degrees or higher.
  When the gates swung open at the government processing center here on Monday, the first truck in line, a FedEx rig, carried 15,000 packages, said a courier, Andrew Langyo.
  ''We're loaded, and we have more trucks coming,'' said Mr. Langyo, who would return two hours later in the same truck with another haul.
  Last year, the government received 236,000 applications in the first week before deciding it would accept no more. A computer randomly chooses the winners.
  The average H-1B petition, a collection of forms and documents attesting to the bona fides of a job offer and the person chosen to fill it, is about two inches thick. But some files are six inches thick and weigh several pounds, according to Bill Yates, a former director of the Vermont Service Center, which also processes H-1B applications.
  Mr. Yates recalled some mishaps, like the time a driver bound for the center in Vermont drove 50 miles unaware that his truck's back door had swung open, spilling its cargo onto the road.
  The visas are attractive not only to the companies that file the applications, but also to the workers themselves, who can become eligible for a green card while working on an H-1B.
  Among the petitions expected to land in California's center is that of Minh Nguyen, a software-design engineer from Vietnam who was sponsored for an H-1B by BitTitan, a cloud software company in Kirkland, Wash. It is his second attempt at a visa.
  ''In America, you're in the center of new technology and cutting-edge changes in the I.T. industry,'' said Mr. Nguyen, 25. ''I would contribute directly to the company and to software development in the U.S.''
  In 2014, the last year for which information is available, just 13 outsourcing firms accounted for a third of all granted visas. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all based in India.
  The companies, which subcontract their employees to banks, retailers and other businesses in the United States to do programming, accounting and other work, often inundate the immigration service with tens of thousands of applications.
  BitTitan, a growing company that hopes to hire 60 engineers in the next 12 months, is submitting six applications. ''We are trying to fill specific positions around cloud and artificial intelligence,'' the chief executive, Geeman Yip, said. ''If we can't fill them, our innovation suffers.''
  Several bipartisan bills in the Senate and the House seek to make companies give more priority to American workers before they fill jobs with H-1B visas. They also seek to raise the minimum pay for the jobs, which depend on skill level and location: A computer systems analyst in Pittsburgh, for example, must make at least $49,000 under current regulations. The theory is that higher pay will eliminate some of the rationale for importing workers.
  A draft of a presidential executive order on ''protecting American jobs and workers by strengthening the integrity of foreign worker visa programs'' was distributed widely in late January but never signed. Then, without warning, Citizenship and Immigration Services published a memo on its website over the weekend that could affect many applications.
  Specifically, companies seeking to import computer programmers at the lowest pay levels will have to prove that the work they perform qualifies as ''specialty'' labor, which is what the H-1B visas were created for. ''There will be greater scrutiny of the role the company wants to fill,'' said Lynden Melmed, a lawyer in Washington and a former chief counsel for the immigration service.
  The measure appears to be directed mainly at outsourcing firms, rather than the big technology companies, which tend to hire workers at higher skill and pay levels.
  In a statement, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, the main trade group for India's outsourcing industry, said, ''The H-1B visa system exists specifically because the U.S. has a persistent shortage of high-skilled I.T. talent.''
  The group said that its members followed all the program's rules, and that the change would have little impact. ''It is aimed at screening out less-qualified workers, whereas our members tend to provide well-credentialed workers to help U.S. companies fill their skills gaps and compete globally,'' it said.
  Even before the memo and the Justice Department's warning, fears about the future of the H-1B program were making this year more pressure-packed than most. ''Just to make sure the petitions get in, almost every client demanded that theirs arrive on the first day,'' said Greg McCall, a lawyer at Perkins Coie in Seattle who prepared 150 applications.
  Inside the federal building, a formidable structure that has provided backdrops for movies including ''Coma'' and ''Outbreak,'' the logistical dance unfolded over two floors. In the mailroom, about 40 people wearing blue gloves sat around tables opening packages that arrived nonstop in six-foot-high bins. In a huge warehouse, those same packages were separated according to whether the applicants had bachelor's or master's degrees.
  All told, 1,500 workers were involved, with a second shift expected to stretch past normal business hours.
  ''This is the day we prepare for months and months in advance,'' said Donna P. Campagnolo, the center's deputy director.
  Trucks came and went all day, with some couriers, including from FedEx, staggering their deliveries to avoid having dozens of trucks backed up at the gate.
  Some smaller delivery companies received a piece of the action, too. One courier, Fernando Salas, pulled up in a red Suzuki station wagon stuffed with 10 boxes. ''I have 109 envelopes,'' he said. ''That is all that fits in here.''
  It was all surprisingly low-tech for a program used primarily for high-tech jobs. Asked why the government had not digitized the process, Ms. Campagnolo said: ''There's obviously a lot of paper. There's no denying it.''
  The biggest challenge, she said, is ''trash overflow.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/us/tech-visa-applications-h1b.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Couriers delivered visa petitions Monday to a federal processing center in Laguna Niguel, Calif. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EROS HOAGLAND FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (72%); SUBURBS (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (54%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 4, 2017


End of Document
Mnuchin Takes on the Dollar at Davos: DealBook Briefing
The New York Times
January 26, 2018 Friday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 
Length: 2198 words
Body


Good Thursday. Here's what we're watching:
Steven Mnuchin brought his version of ''America First'' to Davos with a knock on the value of the dollar. 
   G.E.'s string of tough breaks continues.
   Stevie Cohen wants to get closer to the G.O.P.
   Why is SoftBank trying to raise more debt?
  Want this in your own email inbox? Here's the sign-up.
  The White House's curious attack on the dollar at Davos
  Davos update of the day: Here at Davos, you can sort of tell the relative power of the individual by how casually they're dressed. While many attendees wear business suits and snow boots, Jamie Dimon yesterday sported a North Face jacket and dad jeans. (Lloyd Blankfein opted for a more business-casual suit-but-no-tie look.) TPG's David Bonderman had been known to wear a, shall we say, well-worn fleece.
  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin yesterday at the World Economic Forum: ''Obviously, a weaker dollar is good for us as it relates to trade and opportunities.''
  Christine Lagarde's response: ''I really hope that Secretary Mnuchin has a chance to clarify exactly what he said.'' (Bob Rubin also diplomatically rebuked any effort to weaken the dollar to lift trade.)
  Today, Mr. Mnuchin said the dollar was ''not a concern of mine,'' and professed faith in its long-term strength.
  The bigger picture, courtesy of Ben White in Politico:
  If the U.S. is publicly supporting a weak dollar while also imposing tariffs on foreign imports -- as the Trump administration did this week -- it could invite retaliation from other countries, potentially sparking both currency and trade wars, economists say.
  Said at Davos
   Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase told CNBC, ''I promise you, we are going to be sitting here in a year and you all will be worrying about inflation and wages going up too high.''
   Lloyd Blankfein of Goldman Sachs said of President Trump: ''I don't want to be hypocritical, either. I've really liked what he's done for the economy.''
   Sundar Pichai of Google said about taxes: ''We are happy to pay a higher amount, whatever the world agrees on as the right framework. It's not an issue about the amount of tax we pay, as much as how you divide it among various countries.''
   Jack Ma of Alibaba said on a panel: ''I think globalization cannot be stopped. Nobody can stop globalization. Nobody can stop trade. And I believe, if trade stops, war starts.''
   Raymond Nolte of SkyBridge Capital said, ''If you take away Trump's Twitter ridiculousness, it's actually been a pretty good year for the business community.''
  More from the World Economic Forum
   European leaders like Emmanuel Macron (who reportedly persuaded Mr. Trump to come) and Angela Merkel forcefully defended international cooperation and globalization. (NYT)
   Liu He, an influential senior adviser to President Xi Jinping, said China would bring its debt under control within three years. (NYT)
   All of Mr. Trump's friends and frenemies at Davos. (Bloomberg)
  A Davos scheduling bonus
  Take a guess: Which former high-powered Wall Street executive who, when bumped into at the bottom of the hill leading up to Mr. Deripaska's chalet and asked in jest if he was headed to the ''oligarch party,'' declared that his firm ''did not hang out with oligarchs'' -- and then sauntered up the hill to the party?
  CBS and Viacom talked merger.
  Shares of Viacom and CBS jumped ahead of the close after Reuters reported that the two companies had held an exploratory discussion about merging, citing sources familiar with the matter.
  The boards of both companies are expected to discuss the potential merger at their regularly scheduled meetings in the next couple of weeks, Reuters reports.
  The context: Recombining the two companies has been much speculated in recent years as media companies tried to add scale. Shari Redstone, who along with her father, Sumner Redstone, controls the two companies, tried to merge them in 2016. Those efforts faltered over the concerns of CBS' directors and CBS's chief executive, Les Moonves. But Walt Disney's deal for much of 21st Century Fox late last year has sparked much strategic rethinking across the industry.
  One celebrity business mogul won't run for president
  It is, of course, Oprah.
  Here's what she told InStyle magazine:
  It's not something that interests me. I don't have the DNA for it. Gayle--who knows me as well as I know myself practically--has been calling me regularly and texting me things, like a woman in the airport saying, ''When's Oprah going to run?'' So Gayle sends me these things, and then she'll go, ''I know, I know, I know! It wouldn't be good for you--it would be good for everyone else.'' I met with someone the other day who said that they would help me with a campaign. That's not for me.
  Completely coincidentally, we're sure, shares in Weight Watchers International were down 3 percent this morning:
  #MeToo meets corporate governance
  From a client memo by David Katz and Laura McIntosh of the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz:
  A recent study indicates that the topic would be new for most public company boards, notwithstanding the fact that it relates to key elements of board-level governance: company culture, tone-at-the-top, risk management, and crisis management. Sexual misconduct in the workplace can take a devastating human toll. Moreover, the issue implicates gender equality and gender diversity concerns more broadly, and boards that include a meaningful proportion of female directors should be better positioned to address sexual harassment and gender equality issues.
  Among the best ways to better address the issue at a company: having more women on corporate boards and in senior management positions.
  -- Michael J. de la Merced
  The race is on to become the first United States company valued at $1 trillion.
  Shares of the biggest American technology companies have continued to surge in 2018. The S&P 500 technology sector is up 7.6 percent to start 2018. Amazon.com has risen 17 percent, Alphabet is up 12 percent, and Microsoft has climbed 8.4 percent, writes MoneyBeat's Ben Eisen. Meanwhile, Apple has lagged a bit in 2018, up just 1.8 percent.
  If the rally persists, then the four biggest companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 index could all soon be flirting with the $1 trillion mark.
  Apple: $884 billion.
   Alphabet: $814 billion
  Microsoft: $713 billion
  Amazon: $656 billion
  When will things look up for G.E.?
  Bad enough that the embattled industrial giant had to announce that GE Capital would suspend dividends to the group, after a $6.2 billion charge tied to its reinsurance operations.
  Now the S.E.C. is taking a look, and questions are being raised about the conglomerate's famously opaque accounting. Its shares fell 2.7 percent yesterday.
  Critics' corner
   Spencer Jakab writes, ''Sunlight may be the best disinfectant, but General Electric is learning that it can leave some nasty burns -- particularly for those who have spent too much time in the shade.'' (Heard on the Street)
   Tom Buerkle writes of G.E.'s chief, John Flannery, ''Flannery's time to draw a line under past mistakes is shrinking -- and with it the likelihood that he can show that G.E.'s diverse businesses are better together than apart.'' (Breakingviews)
  Stevie Cohen opens his wallet for the G.O.P.
  Point 72 is on the verge of managing outside money and operating as a true hedge fund again. So, it appears, its chief is seeking friends in Washington.
  Mr. Cohen donated $2 million to the Senate Leadership Fund and $1 million to the Congressional Leadership Fund, Fox Business reports. That made him the top donor to both Republican super PACs. (He previously gave money to both parties.)
  More from Brian Schwartz and Charlie Gasparino:
  ''Cohen is getting back into the hedge fund business, and he's making sure he has allies lined up on Capitol Hill given what he went through,'' said one financial services lobbyist who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''And it's not like he's on a budget.''
  The political flyaround
   An immigration bill sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, would permit more H-1B skilled worker visas: 195,000 a year. (Axios)
   Mr. Trump said he was willing to be interviewed under oath for Robert Mueller's Russia investigation. (NYT)
   Mr. Trump also said he favored offer citizenship to the young immigrants known as Dreamers, days after rejecting a bipartisan bill with that as its centerpiece. (NYT)
   Alex Azar was confirmed yesterday as secretary of health and human services. (NYT)
  Is SoftBank looking for even more money?
  Its Vision Fund has nearly $100 billion in equity to spend. But here's how the Japanese conglomerate is reportedly planning to raise yet more capital, according to The Information:
   Borrow as much as $5 billion against its stake in the British chip maker ARM
   Potentially borrow against its new 15 percent stake in Uber
  The bigger picture: SoftBank is no stranger to debt, with $103 billion in long-term borrowings on its books as of Sept. 30. But analysts have questioned whether Masa Son's company is using leverage too aggressively. Some comes due this year -- and a huge amount in 2024.
  When the Vision Fund's interest makes life difficult: SoftBank's deliberations over whether to invest in Wag, a dog-walking app, have elbowed aside other investors, according to The Information -- though it isn't clear whether Mr. Son will follow through.
  The deal-making flyaround
   Nearly $30 billion worth of health care deals has been announced this month as drug makers look to acquire new treatments. Some in the industry fear valuations are getting too rich. (FT)
   The hedge funds Corvex Capital Management and 40 North have given up their fight over the chemical maker Clariant, selling their stake to Saudi Arabia's state-controlled chemical producer. (FT)
   K.K.R. has sold its remaining 12.3 percent of Pets at Home. (FT)
   Sun Basket is raising money despite a bear market for meal-kit companies. It's promising to limit investors' risks. (The Information)
   Alibaba and Kroger have had preliminary discussions about a partnership, apparently in a response to Amazon's grocery moves. (NY Post)
   RPX, a manager of patent-related issues, is considering selling itself and has drawn interest from investment firms, according to unnamed sources. (Reuters)
  The downside of the U.S. oil boom
  From Javier Blas, in Bloomberg Businessweek's latest cover story:
  It sounds good, but be careful what you wish for. The last three years have been the hottest since record-keeping began in the 19th century, and there's little room in Trump's plan for energy sources that treat the planet kindly. Governors of coastal states have already pointed out that an offshore spill could devastate tourism -- another trillion-dollar industry -- not to mention wreck fragile littoral environments. Florida has already applied for a waiver from such drilling. More supply could lower prices, in turn discouraging investments in renewables such as solar and wind. Those tend to spike when oil prices rise, so enthusiasm for nonpolluting, nonwarming energies of the future could wane.
  For now, though, the petroleum train is chugging. And you can thank the resilience of the U.S. shale industry for it.
  The misconduct flyaround
   The Presidents Club Charitable Trust has shut down after the FT revealed that participants at its annual men-only dinner groped, harassed and propositioned young women serving them. (FT)
   Hollywood has absorbed the #MeToo critiques -- and converted them into digestible branding exercises. (NYT)
   The #MeToo movement is having a harder time in China, including from censors. (NYT)
  Revolving door
   Snapchat's vice president of product, Tom Conrad, is leaving in March. (Evan Spiegel makes the big product decisions.) (Recode)
   Meg Whitman will become the C.E.O. of Jeffrey Katzenberg's short-form video start-up . (Recode, The Information)
   Evercore has hired Adam Taetle, most recently the co-head of Barclays' consumer retail investment banking team, as a senior managing director and head of its retail practice. (Evercore)
  The Speed Read
   Marijuana start-ups are largely looking beyond the old-fashioned joint. (NYT)
   Switzerland wants to be a ''crypto nation'' and its initial coin offering industry is burgeoning. (FT)
   Mr. Trump has offered the coal industry some regulatory relief, but market forces remain against it. (NYT)
   Wall Street isn't buying Jim Hackett's plan to reinvigorate Ford Motor. (NYT)
   Last year was the costliest on record for weather disasters. Some struggling insurers are considering selling up. (FT)
   After Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico will not be able to pay down any portion of its more than $70 billion debt over the next five years. (NYT)
   A bank in China found that HNA had put up the same shares as collateral for multiple loans, according to people with knowledge of the matter, and responded by freezing related accounts. (Bloomberg)
   The June mayoral election in San Francisco will be a battle over technology's influence on the city and its politics. (NYT)
  We'd love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/25/business/dealbook/steven-mnuchin-dollar-davos.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: US DOLLAR (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); ECONOMIC NEWS (87%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (76%); INFLATION (72%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (72%); ECONOMICS (71%); GLOBALIZATION (67%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (67%); TRADE DISPUTES (67%); TAXES & TAXATION (66%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (63%)

Company:  JPMORGAN CHASE & CO (64%);  GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC (58%);  GOOGLE INC (51%)

Organization: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (55%)

Ticker: JPM (NYSE) (64%); JPM (LSE) (64%); GS (NYSE) (58%)

Industry: NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (64%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (64%); NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (64%); NAICS523999 MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES (64%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (64%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (64%); SIC6022 STATE COMMERCIAL BANKS (64%); NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (58%); SIC6798 REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS (58%); SIC6289 SERVICES ALLIED WITH THE EXCHANGE OF SECURITIES OR COMMODITIES, NEC (58%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (51%); US DOLLAR (90%); BUSINESSWEAR (74%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (72%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (67%)

Person: STEVEN MNUCHIN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (75%); JACK MA (72%); SUNDAR PICHAI (66%); JAMES DIMON (53%); LLOYD BLANKFEIN (53%); DAVID BONDERMAN (52%); CHRISTINE LAGARDE (50%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: January 26, 2018


End of Document
Their Lawsuit Prevented 400,000 Deportations. Now It’s Biden’s Call.
The New York Times 
April 7, 2021 Wednesday 14:37 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAGAZINE
Length: 7028 words
Byline: Marcela Valdes
Highlight: Trump tried to end a 30-year program that shielded migrants, many fleeing conditions that U.S. foreign policy helped foster. What does America owe them?
Body


To hear more audio stories from publishers like The New York Times, download Audm for iPhone or Android.
Cristina Morales got the news that she was going to lose her legal right to live and work in the United States via text. The news devastated Morales. But the texts from her friends arrived while Morales, who was then 37, was at the Catholic school where she ran the after-school program. She believed that part of her job was to create a safe place for children, so she said nothing about her despair at work. “You need to have a happy face,” she told me. “No matter how bad you feel.”
Morales kept up the pretense in the car with her family on the way home. As her 11-year-old son and 13-year-old daughter sang in the back seat, she swallowed her tears and tried not to look at her husband. Their children had no idea that Morales was not an American citizen. She and her husband didn’t talk about her status because they didn’t want to taint the kids’ lives with fear. Only a handful of people knew that Morales was a beneficiary of a program called Temporary Protected Status (T.P.S.), which allows some immigrants to reside in the United States while their home countries are in crisis. About 411,000 immigrants had T.P.S. in 2020. More than half of them came from El Salvador, like Morales. The rest emigrated from Haiti, Honduras, Nepal, Nicaragua, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria or Yemen. 
Less than a year after President Donald Trump took office, his administration began to dismantle the program. Over the course of eight months in 2017 and 2018, the Department of Homeland Security ordered the departure of 98 percent of T.P.S. recipients by canceling the designation for every country except Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen. In a January 2018 news release, the Department of Homeland Security announced Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen’s decision to terminate T.P.S. for El Salvador, stating that “the original conditions” that prompted the designation in 2001 “no longer exist.” That’s when Morales received the life-changing texts. 
We need to be positive, Morales’s husband told her that night in January. Maybe it’s a misunderstanding. When he led the family in evening prayer, he asked God to keep families together. After their children went to bed, Morales sat on the couch in the study and wept. This is it, she thought, looking around her home. I’m going to lose everything, just like that.
Morales knew what deportation looked like. In Northern California, where she has lived since she was 12, ICE raids were so frequent under President Barack Obama that many members of her church stopped attending Mass, afraid that they might be arrested en route to services. During the 2016 election, kids at school would tell Morales that they were afraid agents were going to come and take their parents.
For years, Morales met with local police and government officials to advocate for the undocumented parishioners in her church. Now, faced with the possibility of her own deportation, she decided it was time to advocate for herself. Days after Nielsen’s decision, Morales contacted a local committee of the National T.P.S. Alliance, a grass-roots organization that began advocating for T.P.S. holders during the final months of the Obama administration. Soon she and her daughter, Crista Ramos, became the lead plaintiffs in Ramos v. Nielsen, a suit with 14 plaintiffs representing T.P.S. holders from El Salvador, Nicaragua, Haiti and Sudan as well as their U.S.-citizen children.
Ramos v. Nielsen kept T.P.S. holders safe from deportation during Trump’s presidency. Put together by four organizations — the National Day Laborers Organizing Network, the Central American Resource Center, the National T.P.S. Alliance and the American Civil Liberties Union — this lawsuit won a preliminary injunction in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California in fall 2018. The injunction suspended the termination of T.P.S. for six countries. During the discovery process, the plaintiffs’ attorneys turned up documents that revealed how Trump officials disregarded the recommendations of America’s own foreign ambassadors as well as the advice of senior officials in the State Department. Ending T.P.S. for El Salvador in particular, many of these experts warned, could damage America’s national security by undermining efforts to curtail illegal immigration and transnational gangs.
But last September, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decided that the District Court had no jurisdiction to overturn the Trump administration’s decision, a ruling that is likely to affect legal cases involving Honduras and Nepal as well. The plaintiffs may continue to litigate that decision. But unless Congress passes legislation that grants T.P.S. holders permanent status or President Biden’s administration issues new T.P.S. designations for the six countries, the forced removal of 402,000 T.P.S. holders could begin as soon as October. Because they are the parents of some 273,000 U.S. citizens — most of them under the age of 21, like Morales’s children — it could also turn into the largest family-separation operation in American history. 
For 20 years, the T.P.S. program allowed Morales to be a taxpaying, homeowning legal resident. But it also made her every achievement precarious. “The Trump administration terrorized those with T.P.S. and DACA, threatening massive deportation,” Morales said during a Zoom meeting with leaders of the National T.P.S. Alliance in February, referring to both her own program and the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy, which protects undocumented people who arrived as minors. If Biden and the Democrats can’t provide permanent solutions for these two groups — whose regular background checks make them the most-vetted immigrants in America — Morales wonders how anyone can trust them to help the millions of other immigrants whose fates currently hang in the balance.
We often speak of immigration as if it were one unified issue. But though Democrats hold the presidency and Congress, they will find it exceptionally difficult to solve the many problems of our byzantine system. In the United States, immigration has a separate legal system with separate courts and separate laws, where some of the fundamental principles of our normal judicial system — like independent judges, the right to legal representation and the right to a trial by jury — simply do not exist. Immigration policy is decided by several different parts of the federal bureaucracy, including the Justice Department, the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Immigration enforcement involves an enormous apparatus that may include federal Border Patrol officers, ICE agents and local police departments, as well as detention centers that range in quality from canvas tents to refurbished prisons. Immigration is a legal issue, a labor issue, a security issue and a foreign-policy issue. 
To speak of reforming this entire system with one comprehensive bill is mystifying, but that’s exactly what several major national immigration rights organizations have been doing for decades. That certainly seemed to be the new administration’s strategy when, hours after Biden was inaugurated as president, it released a four-page “fact sheet” detailing a bold plan for comprehensive immigration reform. Among its dozens of provisions, the plan would allow undocumented people to apply for a kind of temporary legal status, would make it easier for students with advanced STEM degrees to remain in the United States, would shield workers who report labor violations from deportation and would make many T.P.S. holders immediately eligible for legal permanent residency. 
The fact sheet read like an immigration advocate’s wish list, yet all the T.P.S. activists I spoke with in January greeted it with more skepticism than joy. No comprehensive immigration-reform bill involving legalization has made it through Congress since 1986, and the repeated failure of such bills left T.P.S. holders vulnerable when Trump won the presidency in 2016. “T.P.S. holders have been held hostage to the idea of comprehensive immigration reform,” said Pablo Alvarado, a founder of the National T.P.S. Alliance and a longtime immigration rights activist. In the 1990s and 2000s, when Salvadoran T.P.S. holders spoke of their desire for permanent residency, they knew that their history as political refugees made them almost as sympathetic as undocumented minors. But national organizations based in Washington, hoping for a bill that might help all undocumented immigrants, urged them not to advocate for themselves. “We were told you have to wait because we’re going for the whole enchilada,” Alvarado said. 
Homeland Security may use T.P.S. to grant foreign residents temporary legal status when they cannot return home safely because of an armed conflict, a natural disaster or any other kind of humanitarian crisis. For each country, the department issues a new decision every six to 18 months about whether its T.P.S. designation will be prolonged. If it is, beneficiaries like Morales can apply to renew their T.P.S. cards by paying another fee and going through another background check. T.P.S. sets a precise window for eligibility: When Morales received her status in 2001, only Salvadorans already living in the United States when several earthquakes struck El Salvador could receive the benefit. A Salvadoran who arrived a month later could not. 
Most T.P.S. holders have lived for decades in a kind of immigration purgatory. In a 2006 paper about the “liminal legality” of T.P.S. holders, the U.C.L.A. sociologist Cecilia Menjívar explains that “the process itself is fraught with anxiety — especially around expiration and renewal time — because any wrong step, missed deadline, lack of information or an error on a form may result in denial and deportation.” Most T.P.S. holders, she said in a 2017 report, work in construction, painting, cleaning, driving, cooking and child care. Nearly 90 percent have jobs, and 90 percent file income taxes every year. In effect, T.P.S. holders are what DACA recipients will look like if they’re kept in immigration purgatory another 15 years. 
When Donald Trump was elected, his administration enacted its own kind of immigration reform with remarkable efficiency. Under the guidance of his first attorney general, Jeff Sessions, and his senior adviser Stephen Miller, officials changed more than 1,000 rules, interpretations and directives throughout the immigration system, making it harder for immigrants to enter legally and easier for them to be removed. Democrats sometimes seem less knowledgeable about the intricate details of immigration policy. When members of the T.P.S. Alliance went to Capitol Hill in 2017 to lobby for the American Dream and Promise Act, which would have allowed permanent residency to both DACA and T.P.S. recipients, they discovered that most members of Congress had never heard of T.P.S. “The ones who knew the least about T.P.S. weren’t the Republicans,” Alvarado noted. “It was the Democrats. The Republicans had it very clear. They wanted to terminate T.P.S. together with Trump.”
While some components of our immigration system, like H-1B and farmworker visas, are primarily designed to help American businesses, others spring from less mercenary impulses. DACA, T.P.S. and political asylum all fit into this altruistic category, and all drew special ire from Trump officials, who viewed them as forms of “amnesty” that attracted undesirable immigrants. They deliberately tried to roll back 40 years of immigration policy. “All the policies that are being adopted by the Trump administration,” Lucas Guttentag, a professor of law at Stanford and Yale, told me last year, “and its dismantling of the Southern-border asylum system, are in complete disregard of the human suffering and of the legal rights that apply.” In recent months, as thousands of Central Americans have traveled to America’s Southern border, hoping that Biden’s administration might let them in, some members of Congress have begun to suggest that any immigration reform must wait until this migration pattern ends. But this rhetorical ultimatum elides the responsibility Americans have for this humanitarian crisis. Many of these would-be immigrants are trying to escape genuinely life-threatening conditions, and they have an internationally recognized right to apply for asylum and to have their claims considered. In many cases, the violence that they flee has its roots in more than a decade of American foreign policy.
In fact, T.P.S. was created precisely because the asylum process failed in the United States during the 1980s. For Representative Jim McGovern, a Democrat from Massachusetts, the argument for granting T.P.S. holders permanent residency extends beyond any benefit they provide to America. “We have a moral obligation to the people of El Salvador,” he told me. As a congressional staff member in the 1980s, McGovern worked on the creation the original T.P.S. statute. Unlike many politicos, he remembers that T.P.S. was a response to America’s foreign policy in El Salvador and to its discrimination against Salvadoran refugees in the United States. 
Some 2.3 million Hispanic Americans now trace their roots to El Salvador, more than to any other place except Mexico and the U.S. territory Puerto Rico. Many people point to the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 as the catalyst for this immigration. But according to testimony given by a Census Department official before Congress in 1985, Salvadorans did not begin to leave their country en masse until April 1980, 15 years after that act was passed. According to the Pew Research Center, in 1980 there were an estimated 92,000 foreign-born Salvadorans living in the United States. By 1990, that number had rocketed to 459,000. Why did hundreds of thousands of Salvadorans move to the United States in a single decade? The answer to this question is the history of T.P.S. 
In February 1980, the archbishop of San Salvador, Óscar Romero, wrote a letter to President Jimmy Carter, asking him not to move forward with a nearly $50 million aid package that would send U.S. military advisers and equipment to the civilian-military junta then governing El Salvador. “The contribution of your government,” Romero wrote, “instead of promoting greater justice and peace in El Salvador will without doubt sharpen the injustice and repression against the organizations of the people which repeatedly have been struggling to gain respect for their most fundamental human rights.” 
During the 1970s, as the conflict between El Salvador’s various leftist groups and its conservative oligarchy escalated, paramilitary forces began assassinating anyone who seemed to pose a political threat: labor leaders, human rights workers, schoolteachers, peasants, clergy. In 1979 and 1980, political murders hit 800 a month in a country with the same population as Tennessee. Because Jesuits often sided with El Salvador’s poor and some kept records of human rights violations, they were hated by the country’s ultraright. One paramilitary slogan was: “Be a patriot! Kill a priest.” A month after Romero wrote his letter to Carter, the 62-year-old archbishop was murdered by a sniper during Mass.
Ignoring Romero’s objection, the Carter administration went ahead with aid for El Salvador in 1980. When President Ronald Reagan took office the following year, he made support of El Salvador’s junta a foreign-policy priority. Both administrations feared that without such support, El Salvador would go the way of Nicaragua, which overthrew the Somoza-family dictatorship and installed a socialist civilian-military government in 1979.
By 1992, the United States had sent more than $4 billion to the government of El Salvador, despite reports of torture, rape, killings and massacres. To military forces in El Salvador, the message was clear: Violating human rights would not affect their standing with the Reagan and George H.W. Bush administrations. As Mark Danner documents in his 1994 book, “The Massacre at El Mozote,” U.S. military trained Salvadoran battalions and equipped them with bullets, M16s and military helicopters. This assistance abetted a 12-year civil war that began shortly before Romero’s assassination and killed at least 75,000 people. Thousands more were forcibly disappeared. Testimony to the United Nations’ Truth Commission for El Salvador attributed a vast majority of the violence to Salvadoran government and paramilitary forces. 
Many of the Salvadorans fleeing their country during the war sought refuge in the United States, where they were routinely denied political asylum. These rejections may have violated the Refugee Act of 1980, which brought the United States in line with United Nations protocols and which states that all applicants for asylum must be considered equally. In practice, however, applications made by immigrants from Soviet client states like Romania, Czechoslovakia and Poland were frequently approved during the mid-1980s, while more than 97 percent of Salvadorans were rejected. (Would-be migrants from Guatemala, where the United States supported another military government, fared even worse.) 
Maureen Sweeney, a law professor at the University of Maryland, remembers seeing hundreds of young men from El Salvador and Guatemala while she worked at the Texas Center for Immigrant Legal Assistance during the 1980s. She estimates that the center represented hundreds of asylum claims in two years and won only three. “We didn’t win a single Salvadoran claim,” she told me. “We didn’t win a single Guatemalan claim.” It didn’t matter if these immigrants had been tortured, if their relatives had been killed. Immigration judges denied their claims and ordered their deportations. “The idea that that looked anything like due process, even in terms of the time, is just kind of ludicrous,” Sweeney said. 
The State Department had a strong motivation for thwarting Salvadoran claims: The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 forbids the United States to fund any foreign government that “engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights.” So the Reagan administration instead portrayed Salvadoran refugees as “economic migrants.” This description not only gave officials a rationale for deporting Salvadorans; it also obscured the role that the administration played in funding the violence that drove Central Americans to the United States. 
Faced with this perversion of the asylum process, some churches and synagogues in the American Southwest decided to help Salvadorans and Guatemalans enter and remain in the United States illegally. By 1984, this sanctuary movement included 185 religious institutions in the Southwest, Midwest and Eastern United States. The movement faced a serious setback, however, that same year, when more than half a dozen of its American supporters were charged with transporting and harboring illegal aliens in Texas and Arizona. 
The lawsuit American Baptist Churches et al. v. Thornburgh began as an attempt to block this crackdown by claiming that the decision to offer sanctuary inside churches was “a matter of religious faith and practice.” Before its filing, the case expanded to include other important arguments, including the claim that U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh was discriminating against asylum applicants from El Salvador and Guatemala. Three times over the next three years, the Reagan administration tried to have the lawsuit dismissed, but in 1989, the discrimination claim was allowed to proceed to trial. “It opened the doors to us getting huge amounts of discovery,” said Marc Van Der Hout, the lead lawyer for the case. With subpoenas and sufficient time, he said, prosecutors might have located evidence that the United States was denying asylum with the express purpose of maintaining military aid to El Salvador. 
Even before that legal case was filed, Salvadoran immigrants began visiting the offices of Representative Joe Moakley. A native of South Boston, Moakley entered Congress in 1973 with little interest in foreign affairs. “He used to joke a foreign-policy issue to him was driving from South Boston to East Boston for an Italian sandwich,” Representative Jim McGovern, an aide to Moakley throughout the 1980s, told me. McGovern often sat with Moakley as Salvadorans recounted horrific stories of persecution and discrimination. Moved and outraged by these accounts, Moakley took up their cause.
In 1983, after efforts to pressure Reagan officials proved futile, Moakley began introducing amendments to various House bills trying to suspend the deportations of Salvadorans. “The institutions of government that should have been functioning in response to this kind of humanitarian situation weren’t responding,” said Joy Olson, who rallied support for Moakley’s efforts as an employee of Church World Service, which organized international humanitarian aid. But Moakley’s legislative actions were repeatedly blocked.
Then on Nov. 16, 1989, six Jesuit priests were dragged from their home and murdered in San Salvador. Their bodies were riddled with bullets, and some were left near a garden wall sprayed with blood, suggesting they were killed execution-style with assault rifles. Their cook and her 16-year-old daughter were also killed. Days after the murders, Congress approved another $85 million in military aid to El Salvador, despite opposition from America’s largest religious federation, the National Council of Churches. 
Though government officials in El Salvador first blamed Marxist guerrillas for the murders, Moakley led a congressional investigation that linked the killings to the Salvadoran military high-command and to soldiers of a Salvadoran battalion named Atlacatl who were trained at Fort Benning in Georgia. The murders turned many Americans against U.S. aid to El Salvador for the first time.
A year later, Moakley attached a provision to an immigration act making its way through Congress, proposing to grant Salvadorans temporary protection from deportation. “Anybody who’s telling me that El Salvador is a safe place is living in La La Land,” McGovern recalls Moakley saying. “You’re having priests that are killed in cold blood. Students are being targeted. Labor unions are being targeted.” By then, Moakley wielded power as chairman of the House Committee on Rules. Dropping an expletive or two, he told opponents that he would not bring the Immigration Act of 1990 to a vote in the House unless his amendment to create Temporary Protected Status for Salvadorans was attached. 
In the end, Moakley’s provision didn’t just protect Salvadorans; it created an entirely new way for the federal government to allow migrants from specific countries to avoid deportation. Unlike asylum, which requires individuals to prove a well-founded fear of persecution based on their race, religion, nationality, political beliefs or membership in a particular social group, T.P.S. allows the government to help an entire class of people whose living conditions have become untenable. In this way, T.P.S. is a better tool for addressing enormous waves of forced migration, like the recent Venezuelan exodus fleeing both political repression and widespread hunger. The Immigration Act designated Salvadorans living in the United States in 1990 as eligible for T.P.S. — the only group specifically named for this benefit. Other countries would have to be considered on a case-by-case basis using recommendations made by the State Department.
The same year that T.P.S. became law, federal officials reached out to Van Der Hout through an intermediary, he says, to see if they could settle A.B.C. v. Thornburgh. When Van Der Hout received the call, he nearly fell off his chair. While the U.S. government never admitted to discriminating against Salvadorans and Guatemalans, in the settlement it did acknowledge that it could not decide asylum cases based on foreign-policy considerations. And it agreed to reconsider all the asylum applications of Salvadorans and Guatemalans living in the United States.
Born in 1980, Morales grew up in the midst of the Salvadoran civil war. She remembers her grandmother hiding cousins on a roof to keep them from being conscripted by soldiers and guerrillas. She remembers staying in a house where the television was kept on the floor, so they could watch it from under the bed during gunfights outside. She remembers her grandfather throwing rocks into fields to check for land mines.
But most of all, Morales remembers the violence of her own father. His beatings drove her mother to abandon the family when Morales was about 7. In her mother’s absence, the care of her younger brother and sister fell onto Morales. So did most of her father’s abuse. A few years later, he sweet-talked her mother into returning, but the honeymoon lasted only a few months. When Morales was 11, she says, her father sneaked up behind her mother while she was cooking, prepared to stab her in the back with a pocketknife. Morales jumped between them. “I said to him that before getting her, he was going to have to get me,” she recalled. Enraged, her father threw her against a wall, hard enough to knock her out. Morales’s mother didn’t go to the police to help. After the civil war ended in 1992, a broad amnesty allowed war criminals to hold onto government jobs, eroding trust in Salvadoran institutions. Instead, she left the children with their grandmother and fled for the United States, where she found work cleaning American houses and caring for American children. Morales’s father, meanwhile, tracked down his kids in San Salvador and began stalking them. The situation made Morales suicidal: She considered throwing herself into a ravine; she asked God to take her away in her sleep. That’s when she decided to follow her mother to California.
“When I came here,” she told me, her voice thick with emotion, “I felt like God gave me a second chance.” Living with her mother, Morales attended school regularly for the first time in her life. She funneled painful childhood memories into poetry. In her final year at San Rafael High School, she turned one of these verses into a short film about domestic abuse called “Silent Shadows.” It screened in 1999 at Marin County’s Latino Film Festival and aired on HBO Family in 2001. The film’s success could have paved Morales’s way to college, but without legal documents, she says, she could not follow up on an offer to attend a nearby college. Instead, she took care of her mother’s new baby.
Like many undocumented minors, Morales didn’t fully realize how vulnerable she was until she graduated from high school in 1999. “I had to learn the other side of being here: visible, but invisible,” she told me. At 12, she thought coming to the United States meant finding freedom and safety. She didn’t realize that entering illegally would thwart her dreams to study, to work, to live an independent life. “I didn’t want to be in the shadows,” she said, but for two years she had no other option. Though T.P.S. helped thousands of Salvadorans who were living in the United States in 1990, Morales, who entered in 1993, was not eligible for the benefit. 
Then in January 2001, an earthquake measuring 7.7 on the Richter scale hit El Salvador. An aftershock measuring 5.7 hit the country two days later, and another 5.7 quake struck the following month. The quakes damaged nearly 278,000 homes and displaced more than a million people. In response to these natural disasters, President George W. Bush, who had just been elected with a campaign promising “compassionate conservatism,” granted El Salvador a new T.P.S. designation. Morales and her mother applied soon after they heard the news on television. With her new T.P.S. card, Morales landed a job at Macy’s and moved into her own apartment. Eventually she married her high school sweetheart, who worked in construction. They had a daughter, then a son. They bought a house. They organized their lives around work, school, church and soccer. 
Morales didn’t mind the T.P.S. procedures: paying several hundred dollars and getting her fingerprints scanned at an immigration office every 18 months or so. To her, it all felt worth the privilege of living legally inside the United States. “Renewing for me, it was the best thing in the world,” she said. Every time she got her new work permit in the mail, she thought to herself, OK, I’m good, I’m making it. 
When Trump won the presidential election in 2016, Morales told herself that she would be OK. She first received T.P.S. status under Bush, a Republican president, so how bad could things get for her under another Republican? 
“The Trump administration was trying to figure out a way to end T.P.S. for all the people who had had it for any length of time,” said Ahilan Arulanantham, a lawyer working on the Ramos case. The administration’s solution was to apply a new interpretation to the 1990 Immigration Act. For nearly three decades, both Republicans and Democrats had weighed the effects of disasters and crises that occurred after a country was designated for T.P.S. when deciding whether to extend the benefit another six to 18 months. But Trump officials wanted to terminate T.P.S. regardless of whether living conditions in countries like El Salvador or Sudan were safe. So they decided that only conditions connected to the original T.P.S. decision needed to show improvement. 
With this new interpretation, it didn’t matter that El Salvador had the highest homicide rate in the world outside a war zone in 2015. It didn’t matter that Salvadoran parents often kept their children home from school, for fear that their boys would be dragooned into gangs and their girls would be assaulted. It didn’t matter that the American Embassy in San Salvador sent a diplomatic cable in July 2017 suggesting that, given the country’s dismal record of job creation, repatriated T.P.S. holders, or their children, could be pushed into criminal employment. The 1990 T.P.S. decision for El Salvador expired in 1992. So all that mattered was whether the country’s infrastructure had recovered from the destruction caused by the quakes that spurred the 2001 designation.
In November, three days before the acting secretary of homeland security, Elaine Duke, needed to announce her decision on T.P.S. for Honduras and Nicaragua, she attended a meeting at the White House. Its purpose, according to its agenda, was “to coordinate the conditions and process for terminating temporary protected status (T.P.S.) for aliens from El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Haiti,” all countries with designations connected to natural disasters. In a briefing paper for this meeting — one of a trove of documents unearthed by the Ramos suit — the White House stated its new reading of the law. The statute, it said, required a decision on whether to extend the status “based on an evaluation of the conditions that initially warranted granting T.P.S.”
“This is not how any prior administration had read the statutes,” Arulanantham noted. “They had consistently looked at whether it was safe period, not whether it was safe with respect to something.” In a letter that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson sent to Duke a few days before the meeting, he acknowledged that neither El Salvador nor Honduras could ensure the safety of repatriated T.P.S. recipients or their U.S.-citizen children. He even observed that ending T.P.S. could hurt American interests by angering Central American leaders. “They may take retaliatory actions counter to our longstanding national security and economic interests,” he wrote, “like withdrawing their counternarcotics and anti-gang cooperation with the United States, reducing their willingness to accept the return of their deported citizens or refraining from efforts to control illegal migration.” Yet Tillerson still claimed that the four countries no longer met “the legal requirements necessary for extension” — a remarkable assertion given that country condition reports appended to his letter contradicted this conclusion. 
Handwritten notes taken by Duke during the meeting suggest that Attorney General Jeff Sessions may have told her and other officials that they needed to “bite the bullet” on T.P.S. terminations because “no one has the guts to pull the trigger.” The urgency of pulling that trigger was suggested in the briefing paper’s conclusion: It was important to end T.P.S. for El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Haiti, it suggested, because extending the protection “would also lengthen the period during which beneficiaries would deepen their connections to the United States.” 
Prosecutors in the Ramos case argue that by suddenly departing from decades of “consistent interpretation and corresponding practice” without explanation, D.H.S. violated the Administrative Procedure Act, which states that agencies cannot silently or secretly depart from earlier policy and that public accounting of new policies is especially required when they contradict previous practice. “Despite multiple discovery requests,” the prosecutors wrote, the Trump administration was “unable to identify or produce a single document” showing that earlier administrations required current country conditions to be “directly tied” to the specific conditions that initiated a country’s T.P.S. designation.
Duke told me that she knew the new reading was a departure from previous practice, but she did not believe that precedent was a good basis for making decisions in immigration because too many previous actions had distorted the statutes. They are “not effective,” she said. “So to counter the ineffectiveness of the statutes, some people chose to interpret into them the outcomes that they desire.”
When McGovern confronted Nielsen about T.P.S. for Salvadorans shortly after she was confirmed as the new secretary of D.H.S., Nielsen said that lawyers advised her that she could not legally renew it. “Your lawyers are wrong,” McGovern recalls saying. He told Nielsen that he wanted to talk to the lawyers who were advising D.H.S. But he said no lawyers ever got in touch. (Nielsen did not respond to multiple requests for comment.)
“It became very clear to me this was a political decision to end it,” McGovern told me. “It had nothing to do with the law.” Because the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decided the District Court did not have jurisdiction to overturn the Trump-era interpretation of the T.P.S. statute, the new reading will remain intact. In other words, T.P.S. status has become even more precarious, and future designations may shift according to political whim, without any judicial review. This means that even the Biden administration’s new T.P.S. designations for Venezuela and Myanmar could be easily terminated by a future administration.
A few years ago, McGovern took his daughter to El Salvador and visited the memorial at El Mozote, where in 1981 the Atlacatl soldiers slaughtered unarmed men, women and children. “The hamlet was known throughout the zone as a stronghold of the Protestant evangelical movement,” Danner notes in his history of the atrocity. Because evangelicals were anti-Communist, the townspeople thought they had nothing to fear from the Salvadoran Army. They were wrong. When reports of the massacre first appeared in The New York Times and The Washington Post, Reagan officials dismissed the news as Marxist propaganda. 
But forensic anthropologists, who entered the area after the peace accords were signed, unearthed hundreds of skeletons. One hundred and thirty-six children died in a church sacristy, which had been raked with bullets and then set on fire. “There’s a list of the names of people who died and their ages,” McGovern said. “Some of the ages are 0 — because they were infants that were murdered, right?” Most of the cartridge cases recovered from the sacristy had stamps indicating that they were made for the United States government in Lake City, Mo.
“We hurt the people of El Salvador,” McGovern said. “I think we have a duty to make it right.” In his office in Washington, McGovern keeps a poster showing the six murdered Jesuits and a photograph of a Salvadoran mural depicting Archbishop Romero, whom Pope Francis canonized in 2018. “Helping those with T.P.S. regularize their status and become citizens would be a step in the right direction,” he said. In March, Representative Lucille Roybal-Allard of California introduced a new version of the American Dream and Promise Act, which would grant conditional permanent legal status to DACA and T.P.S. recipients. But as Central American migrants gather at our Southern border, the chances of passing any bill that includes permanent legalizations are waning. It now looks unlikely that Congress will make any real progress in reforming the system, yet again leaving millions of immigrants vulnerable to the shifting agendas of America’s presidents. 
In 2018, nearly two million undocumented immigrants in the United States were from Central America, more than from any other region except Mexico. Many people have heard about the violence, the lawlessness and the destitution that provoke these people to enter the United States. But few remember America’s role in creating these conditions during the Cold War. In Guatemala in 1954, the United States overthrew a democratically elected president who tried to implement labor and land reforms. In Nicaragua, it funded a covert war against a socialist government and lined a harbor with mines. In Honduras, it spent more than $1 billion in military aid and tacitly supported death squads. In Panama, it established a neocolonial Canal Zone and set up a school, the U.S. Army School of the Americas, that trained some 60,000 Latin American military officers to use torture and execution techniques. It’s telling that Costa Rica — located about an hour from El Salvador by plane, and more than twice El Salvador’s size — is not a significant source of immigration to the United States; it’s the most prosperous nation in Central America. Unlike its neighbors, Costa Rica avoided military intervention by the United States.
In a 1904 message to Congress, President Theodore Roosevelt explicitly justified U.S. intervention anywhere in Latin America on the grounds that a “civilized nation,” like the United States, should exercise “an international police power.” El Salvador might have recovered from its experience with this power if President Bill Clinton had not signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act in 1996. This popular bill fast-tracked the deportation of criminals, and these removals sent violent offenders to El Salvador, a country that had not yet recovered the rule of law. The deportations helped transform a California heavy-metal gang, MS-13, into a transnational criminal syndicate that terrorizes much of the country. 
“There has never been anything of a legal nature that recognizes U.S. culpability for these conditions,” said Karen Musalo, an international-law professor at University of California, Hastings. “And there seems to be, frankly, a total amnesia about it.” Biden’s administration has suggested that the United States spend $4 billion “to address the underlying causes of migration” from Central America. But history suggests that money alone is no solution. In the wrong hands, with the wrong incentives, money is part of the problem. 
In late March, a few days after the anniversary of Romero’s assassination, some 40 members of the National T.P.S. Alliance gathered in a corner of Freedom Plaza in Washington to pay homage to the Salvadoran saint. Most of the plaza was taken over by dozens of skateboarders that Saturday. The noise of their boards hitting stone steps and low granite walls formed a soundtrack of indifference as the sun set and Elsy Flores Ayala, another plaintiff in the Ramos case, read in Spanish from Isaiah 53: 
He was pierced for our transgressions, 
He was crushed for our iniquities;
The punishment that brought us peace was on him.
The White House stood a couple of blocks away. The sound of military helicopters arriving and departing from its grounds occasionally interrupted the service. 
A week earlier, members of the alliance began a 43-day hunger strike that worked like a relay. A few members would sit in the plaza and stop eating for two or three days, then they’d go back to work and others would take their places. Cristina Morales is flying in early this month for her turn. The alliance hopes that these efforts will pressure the Senate to pass the American Dream and Promise Act, which was passed by the House on March 18, or at least draw mainstream media attention to their cause. But few people seem to be paying attention. T.P.S. is too confusing, too historically complicated. Talking about its details, I often watched people’s eyes glaze over. 
But for some of those watching the outdoor screening of the movie “Romero” that chilly spring night, history still felt visceral. Antonio Vasquez, 56, attended Romero’s funeral as a teenager. He walked 10 miles from his house to pay his respects because, he said, Romero “was the voice of the people.” When he arrived at the funeral, he joined a huge, peaceful crowd. Then a bomb went off, and gunfire started. People fell near him, and he ran in terror until he reached his own neighborhood. His wife, Maribel, another T.P.S. holder, sat next to their 9-year-old daughter watching the movie. She attended Romero’s funeral with her uncle because her own father was murdered — hanged and decapitated after abduction from his home. “El Salvador never recovered from that war,” Vasquez said. His brother, a 70-year-old small business owner, told him not to think of returning. He can barely make a living; the gangs extort his profits. “It’s sad for me,” Vasquez said. After 20 years as a law-abiding taxpayer, he still had to worry about being sent back. “I’ve spent my energy here,” he said, “my youth, my life.”
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCELA VALDES) (MM24-MM25)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); DEPORTATION (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); LITIGATION (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (78%); EMIGRATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (76%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%); FAMILY (76%); AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAMS (71%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (71%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (71%); ARRESTS (62%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Asylum, Right of (%); United States International Relations (%); El Salvador (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Central America (%); Guatemala (%); Honduras (%); Nicaragua (%)

Industry: MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (78%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (92%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); BARACK OBAMA (59%); KIRSTJEN NIELSEN (59%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); EL SALVADOR (93%); HONDURAS (92%); NICARAGUA (92%); SOUTH SUDAN (92%); SYRIA (90%); GUATEMALA (79%); HAITI (79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (58%)

Load-Date: November 11, 2021


End of Document
Immigration Reform and Workers' Rights
The New York Times
February 21, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26; EDITORIAL
Length: 548 words
Body


Members of Congress and President Obama have been working in earnest to deliver on their promise to overhaul immigration this year. Mr. Obama would clearly prefer a bipartisan bill, and last week the Senate Judiciary Committee held its first hearing on possible changes in immigration law. News reports last weekend suggested that the White House would fashion its own bill should negotiations between Republican and Democratic supporters of reform collapse.
Yet, in all the talk of providing a path to citizenship for millions of undocumented workers while tightening border security, one important issue has, so far, received only passing mention: stronger protections for immigrant workers against exploitation and abuse. Such protections, essential to any reform plan, would help rid the system of bottom-feeding employers who hire and underpay and otherwise exploit cheap immigrant labor, dragging down wages and workplace standards for everyone.
Such abuses are easily visited on immigrant workers by unscrupulous employers who use the threat of deportation to force their victims into silence. This imbalance of power harms workers who toil in the shadows. But the system that recruits legal temporary workers is also a mess. In the event that an immigration overhaul greatly expands the number of guest workers -- even hard-line Republicans have been talking about adding temporary visas in agriculture and in high-tech industries -- it is crucial to avoid making the mess even bigger.
A new report by a coalition of labor, immigrant and human-rights groups has identified and examined ''disturbingly common patterns'' of abuse in America's guest-worker programs. They are an alphabet-soup of visas with names like H-1B, H-2A, H-2B, J-1 and A-3, all having their own rules and little in common except, the report said, workers who are frequently victimized by ''fraud, discrimination, severe economic coercion, retaliation, blacklisting and, in some cases, forced labor, indentured servitude, debt bondage and human trafficking.''
The abuses begin overseas, where workers pay recruiters steep fees and start their new lives in deep debt. Unable to leave abusive employers and with little access to the legal system, they suffer in silence. Those who do speak out are threatened, fired, deported, blacklisted. They have little opportunity to complain about unsafe working conditions, to sue for stolen wages or to assert their rights to overtime and time off.
Overhauling visa programs to ensure workers' rights should be in the thick of the immigration discussion. For one thing, it's a way to move past the deep divisions that have stalled reform. Labor unions have been wary of bills that include guest-worker programs because they don't want the competition. But in a promising shift, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and Service Employees International Union have joined forces with an old adversary, the Chamber of Commerce, in the current push for reform. The unions recognize that deporting 11 million undocumented immigrants is a delusion, and that the benefits of legalizing them far outweigh keeping them outside the law.
And if immigrant workers are free to assert their rights without fear, to bargain collectively and blow the whistle on bad employers, American workers can only benefit, too.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/21/opinion/immigration-reform-and-workers-rights.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (90%); LABOR REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); ABUSE & NEGLECT (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); FORCED LABOR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); LABOR UNIONS (78%); OVERTIME (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (77%); DISCRIMINATION (75%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (74%); SERVICE WORKERS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (73%); BORDER CONTROL (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (70%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (69%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: February 21, 2013


End of Document
Russia, Syria, Bill O’Reilly: Your Morning Briefing; Asia and Australia Edition
The New York Times 
April 4, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 1187 words
Byline: CHARLES McDERMID
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


Good morning. 
Here’s what you need to know:
 Syria’s deadliest chemical attack in years.
Dozens of people were killed, including women and children. Graphic photographs and videos posted online showed people struggling to breathe or lying motionless in mud.
The White House blamed President Bashar al-Assad's government and said the “reprehensible act” could not “be ignored by the civilized world.”
What President Trump will do is not clear. A few days ago, administration officials said regime change was not a priority.
_____
 North Korea fired a ballistic missile off its east coast, making its nuclear ambitions known a day before President Xi Jinping of China arrives in the U.S. to meet with Mr. Trump.
The summit meeting at the president’s Mar-a-Lago resort, as well as leaders’ agenda, was crafted in part by Matthew Pottinger, a former journalist and Marine who is the Trump administration’s top Asia policy maker.
Here’s a potential wrinkle: one of Mar-a-Lago’s members is Guo Wengui, an outspoken Chinese billionaire who has recently taken up criticizing the Communist Party.
_____
 The storm at Fox News is intensifying.
BMW, Allstate and at least five other companies joined Mercedes-Benz and Hyundai in an advertising revolt against the channel over the sexual harassment allegations against its superstar host, Bill O’Reilly.
_____
 The rush for skilled-worker visas to the U.S., known as H-1B visas, has escalated to an all-out scramble this year.
So many foreign workers have applied for the 85,000 three-year visas that officials could set the cutoff within days. In recent years, Indians have received more than 70 percentof the total.
A computer randomly chooses the winners.
_____
 Meet Duop. He was one of the 10,000-plus boys who've been toting rifles in South Sudan, some forced to fight as young as 10.
Duop is 16 now, give or take, and what he suffered seems to have robbed him of the ability to speak. Our correspondent went with him to see his mother for the first time in six years.
_____
 And here lies Bukit Brown, one of the world’s largest Chinese cemeteries.
It’s just a few miles from central Singapore. Built in 1922, and now neglected, the 213-acre site packed with tombstones, statues and shrines has become a pilgrimage point for Singaporeans trying to reconnect with their country’s vanishing past.
Business
 Silicon Valley scored one on Detroit as Tesla, the            electric car company, hit a market valuation of $48.7 billion, surpassing Ford ($45.6 billion) and edging nearer to General Motors ($51.2 billion).
 U.S. antitrust regulators approved ChemChina’s acquisition of Syngenta, the Swiss agricultural and chemical giant. The deal would be the largest overseas purchase by a Chinese company.
 Coca-Cola is putting a picture of its largest investor, Warren Buffett, on Cherry Coke cans in China, where he has legions of fans.
 America’s trade deficit declined 9.6 percent to $43.6 billion in February, as exports increased to a two-year high.
 U.S. stocks were up. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
In the News
 The suspect in the St. Petersburg subway bombing was identified as a 22-year-old from Kyrgyzstan who had been living in the city, but his motive remained unclear. The toll rose to 14 dead and 64 injured. [The New York Times]
 Russia is moving to outlaw the pacifist Jehovah’s Witnesses for “extremist activities,” likening members to Islamic militants. [The New York Times]
 The Trump administration axed U.S. funding of the U.N. Population Fund, the world’s leading provider of family planning services, including contraception. [The New York Times]
 The World Health Organization will name a new director general in May, and for the first time the selection will be made by vote rather than horse-trading. The top candidates are from Ethiopia, Britain and Pakistan. [The New York Times]
 To save their land, the Goolarabooloo people of Australia revealed the location of dinosaur footprints that they had kept secret for thousands of years. [Popular Science]
 Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia raised the donation required to receive the honorific title “oknha,” which roughly translates to “tycoon,” from $100,000 to $500,000. [The Phnom Penh Post]
 Our Vietnam ’67 series looks at the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s blistering attack on the government’s conduct of the Vietnam War that, among other things, compared American tactics to those of the Nazis during World War II. [           The New York Times]
Smarter Living
 The best way to get more done may be to spend more time doing less.
 Beginning a new exercise regimen, but gaining weight? Starting to exercise often means we eat more and move less than we did before.
 This recipe for flounder with mustard greens puts bold tastes front and center.
Noteworthy
 Brando’s style on Taipei’s streets: An Rong Xu, the photographer, spent a month in Taiwan and captured looks influenced by street style, Parisian cafes, the American West and 1990s Hong Kong cinema.
 Steve Lillywhite, the producer of multiplatinum records by U2 and the Rolling Stones, now runs a company that bundles CDs with fast food at Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants in Indonesia. “My job is basically like running a record label, except this record label also happens to sell chicken.”
 Finally, our new food writer, the Israeli-born British chef Yotam Ottolenghi, invited the Easter bunny to his Seder. So to speak.
In his latest column, he offers recipes for each holiday, and reflects on how a meal can be “the bridge between generations and the signifier of a story” that allows us to connect personally with history, and make our own.
Back Story
Even a schoolchild can tell you that matter can exist as a solid, liquid or gas. But humanity’s hope for near-limitless, clean energy may hinge on a fourth state: plasma.
A giant plant now under construction in the south of France will be the testing ground, if the project’s partners — which include the European Union, the U.S., Russia and China — stay on course for billions of dollars of investment and a couple of decades of painstaking work.
The kind of plasma we’re talking about was named by an American scientist, Irving Langmuir, who saw a resemblance to blood plasma.
It emerges when energy is added to gas, leaving a cloud of positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons zipping around. That’s what makes up the sun and other stars.
Under the right conditions, some superheated ions can fuse. And as they join, they shed a tiny amount of mass that translates into vast amounts of energy. Hence all that heat and light from the sun.
The French plant aims to create the right conditions by using magnetic fields to contain the plasma and radio waves and microwaves to make it unimaginably hot — and then see if human-created fusion will work.
Andrea Kannapell contributed reporting.
_____
This briefing was prepared for the Asian morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian,            European and            American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters            here.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PHOTO & VIDEO SHARING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (86%); FOREIGN LABOR (86%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (86%); COMMUNISM (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (70%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (67%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (65%); JOINT VENTURES, MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS LAW (61%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (51%); ANTITRUST & TRADE LAW (50%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (50%)

Industry: PHOTO & VIDEO SHARING (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (86%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (86%); CHEMICALS (73%); CHEMICALS MFG (73%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (70%); MOTOR VEHICLES (66%); CEMETERIES (60%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); XI JINPING (79%); BASHAR AL-ASSAD (57%); WARREN BUFFETT (51%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (68%); CHINA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ASIA (88%); NORTH KOREA (79%); SINGAPORE (79%); SOUTH SUDAN (79%); SUDAN (79%); SYRIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 7, 2017


End of Document
Donald Trump Jr. Retreats From Foreign Policy on India Trip
The New York Times 
February 23, 2018 Friday 15:17 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1205 words
Byline: Vindu Goel and Maria Abi-Habib
Highlight: A speech in New Delhi was to focus on “Indo-Pacific” ties. After criticism about mixing profit and policy, it became a chat about business and family.
Body


NEW DELHI — After days of controversy over whether he would blur the lines between American foreign policy and his family’s real estate business during a trip to India to sell condos, Donald Trump Jr. on Friday abandoned plans to give a policy speech and instead gave an interview with an Indian journalist, sticking to safe topics.
His remarks in the interview — about his father’s successful 2016 presidential campaign, how little the family sees him now, and India’s great entrepreneurial spirit — were so anodyne that when the Bollywood star Shah Rukh Khan entered the room near the end of the interview, people lifted their phones to take photos of the actor and stopped paying attention to the oldest child of America’s president.
“I’m here as a businessman,” Mr. Trump told a crowd of about 2,000 business and political leaders, who were gathered for the annual business conference hosted by India’s most powerful media company, The Times Group. “I’m not representing anyone.”
But his efforts to distance himself from administration policy were met with some skepticism.
“Though he claims that it’s not an official speech, we take it as an official statement,” said P. V. Sunil, a managing director of a company that builds malls and cinema complexes in India and Singapore. “He speaks to his father more than anyone here.”
Mr. Trump has spent the last week in India promoting new luxury housing projects in the country, the biggest foreign market for Trump real estate interests outside of North America.
He originally intended to give a speech Friday on “Indo-Pacific” cooperation, a policy idea recently championed by President Trump as a counterweight to China’s rising influence. That sparked an uproar, underscoring how the Trump family, with some members working in the White House and others running the family business, has obscured the traditional line between public and private interests.
Ethicists and former government officials with both major political parties have raised concerns that foreign-policy decisions made by the White House could affect the Trump Organization’s business prospects, and in turn, the president’s wealth. Although the president has turned over management of the company to Donald Trump Jr. and another son, Eric Trump, he still holds a huge financial interest in Trump projects around the world.
Two organizers of Friday’s conference said that they had proposed the Indo-Pacific topic to Donald Trump Jr.’s team and that he had agreed to address it. On Thursday, after criticism by ethicists and a Democratic senator, Mr. Trump requested that the topic be changed, they said.
Shortly after Mr. Trump’s interview, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, gave his own keynote speech about India’s economic progress.
Mr. Trump has downplayed ethical concerns during his India visit, saying the company’s promise not to seek new foreign projects during his father’s presidency had hurt its business.
Eric Trump said in an interview on Friday that the criticism of his brother was unfair and unjustified. He said that although he was not involved in the discussions regarding his brother’s speech, there was nothing wrong with the original topic.
“We have been doing business in India for many years,” he said. “I don’t understand the problem with celebrating the camaraderie between two great countries.”
During his onstage interview, Donald Trump Jr. went out of his way to suggest that the Trumps do not mix politics and business, even when they all get together.
“We see him so little that it’s really about being a family,” he said of his father. “We don’t talk politics.”
Donald Trump Jr. was deeply involved in his father’s campaign, meeting with a Russian lawyer who promised political dirt on Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate. That meeting, and how Mr. Trump and the White House responded to public disclosure of it last July, are            now being scrutinized by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating Russian interference in the 2016 election.
In India, officials have struggled to understand what the Trump White House means for Indo-American relations.
“Under Trump, you cannot be sure the policy today will be the policy tomorrow,” said C. Raja Mohan, a foreign-policy analyst and director of Carnegie India. “That is a huge problem.”
India views some of the president’s evolving positions as favorable and others as less so.
His recent criticism of Pakistan as a haven for terrorists has been music to the ears of leaders in New Delhi, some of whom view that neighboring country in much the same way. The president has also signaled that he sees a more important role for India, along with other traditional American allies like Japan and Australia, in an Indo-Pacific grouping that would curb Beijing’s influence.
The Trump administration has strengthened military ties with New Delhi and discussed a flurry of defense agreements, including one that may see the F-16 fighter jet move its production line from Texas to India.
At the same time, there are significant tensions between the Modi government and the Trump administration on several critical issues, including immigration and trade policy.
In an effort to boost Indian manufacturing, the Modi government has raised tariffs on imported products like electronics and beauty products. India has also tangled with American drug companies over patent protections for their products. In 2017, the United States had a $23 billion trade deficit with India.
Indian immigrants are also a large segment of the work force of American technology companies. President Trump campaigned on curbing such immigration and has gradually tightened the rules governing the H-1B and other visas used by tech workers.
On Thursday, the administration announced rules that would make it harder for Indian outsourcers that have many corporate customers to bring workers to the United States and move them from site to site. Friday’s conference was in full swing as news spread of the administration’s latest move to restrict H-1B visas.
With the younger Mr. Trump, who has voiced strong support for his father’s tough stance on immigration, sitting in the audience, Uber’s chief executive officer, Dara Khosrowshahi, took a dig at the president.
“The American dream is the single most incredible brand in the world,” said Mr. Khosrowshahi, whose family immigrated from Iran. “I’m worried that the attitude this American administration has on immigration will ruin that brand.”
The journalist who interviewed Mr. Trump, Supriya Shrinate, pressed him on immigration, asking whether he thought it was fair that he could travel the world and invest in places like India, while the United States tightened immigration rules.
Mr. Trump dodged the question, before Ms. Shrinate finally asked: “Is the American dream still alive? A lot of people in this audience beg to differ.”
“I think 100 percent it is,” Mr. Trump said.
Eric Lipton contributed reporting from Washington. 
PHOTO: A newspaper bearing an image of Donald Trump Jr. in New Delhi. (PHOTOGRAPH BY The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As Donald Trump Jr. Drums Up Business in India, Some Ask What’s Being Sold
    • President or Luxury Towers: Either Way, Trump Is the Rage in India
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: FOREIGN POLICY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); ETHICS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (79%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); FAMILY COMPANIES (78%); GOVERNMENT ETHICS (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (77%); FAMILY (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); POLITICS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (75%); EXECUTIVES (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); India (%); Trump, Donald J Jr (%); Conflicts of Interest (%); United States International Relations (%); Trump Organization (%); Modi, Narendra (%); New Delhi (India) (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: CONDOMINIUMS (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (90%); MEDIA & TELECOMMUNICATIONS (78%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (78%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (73%); MOVIE THEATERS (51%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP JR (94%); ERIC TRUMP (92%); DONALD TRUMP (90%); NARENDRA MODI (79%); SHAH RUKH KHAN (79%); Trump, Donald J Jr; Modi, Narendra

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (91%); INDIA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: October 9, 2018


End of Document
A Forgotten Promise
The New York Times
April 11, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 25
Length: 7068 words
Byline: By Marcela Valdes
Body


To hear more audio stories from publishers like The New York Times, download Audm for iPhone or Android.
Cristina Morales got the news that she was going to lose her legal right to live and work in the United States via text. The news devastated Morales. But the texts from her friends arrived while Morales, who was then 37, was at the Catholic school where she ran the after-school program. She believed that part of her job was to create a safe place for children, so she said nothing about her despair at work. ''You need to have a happy face,'' she told me. ''No matter how bad you feel.'' 
  Morales kept up the pretense in the car with her family on the way home. As her 11-year-old son and 13-year-old daughter sang in the back seat, she swallowed her tears and tried not to look at her husband. Their children had no idea that Morales was not an American citizen. She and her husband didn't talk about her status because they didn't want to taint the kids' lives with fear. Only a handful of people knew that Morales was a beneficiary of a program called Temporary Protected Status (T.P.S.), which allows some immigrants to reside in the United States while their home countries are in crisis. About 411,000 immigrants had T.P.S. in 2020. More than half of them came from El Salvador, like Morales. The rest emigrated from Haiti, Honduras, Nepal, Nicaragua, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria or Yemen. 
  Less than a year after President Donald Trump took office, his administration began to dismantle the program. Over the course of eight months in 2017 and 2018, the Department of Homeland Security ordered the departure of 98 percent of T.P.S. recipients by canceling the designation for every country except Somalia, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen. In a January 2018 news release, the Department of Homeland Security announced Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen's decision to terminate T.P.S. for El Salvador, stating that ''the original conditions'' that prompted the designation in 2001 ''no longer exist.'' That's when Morales received the life-changing texts. 
  We need to be positive, Morales's husband told her that night in January. Maybe it's a misunderstanding. When he led the family in evening prayer, he asked God to keep families together. After their children went to bed, Morales sat on the couch in the study and wept. This is it, she thought, looking around her home. I'm going to lose everything, just like that.
  Morales knew what deportation looked like. In Northern California, where she has lived since she was 12, ICE raids were so frequent under President Barack Obama that many members of her church stopped attending Mass, afraid that they might be arrested en route to services. During the 2016 election, kids at school would tell Morales that they were afraid agents were going to come and take their parents.
  For years, Morales met with local police and government officials to advocate for the undocumented parishioners in her church. Now, faced with the possibility of her own deportation, she decided it was time to advocate for herself. Days after Nielsen's decision, Morales contacted a local committee of the National T.P.S. Alliance, a grass-roots organization that began advocating for T.P.S. holders during the final months of the Obama administration. Soon she and her daughter, Crista Ramos, became the lead plaintiffs in Ramos v. Nielsen, a suit with 14 plaintiffs representing T.P.S. holders from El Salvador, Nicaragua, Haiti and Sudan as well as their U.S.-citizen children.
  Ramos v. Nielsen kept T.P.S. holders safe from deportation during Trump's presidency. Put together by four organizations -- the National Day Laborers Organizing Network, the Central American Resource Center, the National T.P.S. Alliance and the American Civil Liberties Union -- this lawsuit won a preliminary injunction in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California in fall 2018. The injunction suspended the termination of T.P.S. for six countries. During the discovery process, the plaintiffs' attorneys turned up documents that revealed how Trump officials disregarded the recommendations of America's own foreign ambassadors as well as the advice of senior officials in the State Department. Ending T.P.S. for El Salvador in particular, many of these experts warned, could damage America's national security by undermining efforts to curtail illegal immigration and transnational gangs.
  But last September, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decided that the District Court had no jurisdiction to overturn the Trump administration's decision, a ruling that is likely to affect legal cases involving Honduras and Nepal as well. The plaintiffs may continue to litigate that decision. But unless Congress passes legislation that grants T.P.S. holders permanent status or President Biden's administration issues new T.P.S. designations for the six countries, the forced removal of 402,000 T.P.S. holders could begin as soon as October. Because they are the parents of some 273,000 U.S. citizens -- most of them under the age of 21, like Morales's children -- it could also turn into the largest family-separation operation in American history. 
  For 20 years, the T.P.S. program allowed Morales to be a taxpaying, homeowning legal resident. But it also made her every achievement precarious. ''The Trump administration terrorized those with T.P.S. and DACA, threatening massive deportation,'' Morales said during a Zoom meeting with leaders of the National T.P.S. Alliance in February, referring to both her own program and the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy, which protects undocumented people who arrived as minors. If Biden and the Democrats can't provide permanent solutions for these two groups -- whose regular background checks make them the most-vetted immigrants in America -- Morales wonders how anyone can trust them to help the millions of other immigrants whose fates currently hang in the balance.
  We often speak of immigration as if it were one unified issue. But though Democrats hold the presidency and Congress, they will find it exceptionally difficult to solve the many problems of our byzantine system. In the United States, immigration has a separate legal system with separate courts and separate laws, where some of the fundamental principles of our normal judicial system -- like independent judges, the right to legal representation and the right to a trial by jury -- simply do not exist. Immigration policy is decided by several different parts of the federal bureaucracy, including the Justice Department, the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security. Immigration enforcement involves an enormous apparatus that may include federal Border Patrol officers, ICE agents and local police departments, as well as detention centers that range in quality from canvas tents to refurbished prisons. Immigration is a legal issue, a labor issue, a security issue and a foreign-policy issue. 
  To speak of reforming this entire system with one comprehensive bill is mystifying, but that's exactly what several major national immigration rights organizations have been doing for decades. That certainly seemed to be the new administration's strategy when, hours after Biden was inaugurated as president, it released a four-page ''fact sheet'' detailing a bold plan for comprehensive immigration reform. Among its dozens of provisions, the plan would allow undocumented people to apply for a kind of temporary legal status, would make it easier for students with advanced STEM degrees to remain in the United States, would shield workers who report labor violations from deportation and would make many T.P.S. holders immediately eligible for legal permanent residency. 
  The fact sheet read like an immigration advocate's wish list, yet all the T.P.S. activists I spoke with in January greeted it with more skepticism than joy. No comprehensive immigration-reform bill involving legalization has made it through Congress since 1986, and the repeated failure of such bills left T.P.S. holders vulnerable when Trump won the presidency in 2016. ''T.P.S. holders have been held hostage to the idea of comprehensive immigration reform,'' said Pablo Alvarado, a founder of the National T.P.S. Alliance and a longtime immigration rights activist. In the 1990s and 2000s, when Salvadoran T.P.S. holders spoke of their desire for permanent residency, they knew that their history as political refugees made them almost as sympathetic as undocumented minors. But national organizations based in Washington, hoping for a bill that might help all undocumented immigrants, urged them not to advocate for themselves. ''We were told you have to wait because we're going for the whole enchilada,'' Alvarado said. 
  Homeland Security may use T.P.S. to grant foreign residents temporary legal status when they cannot return home safely because of an armed conflict, a natural disaster or any other kind of humanitarian crisis. For each country, the department issues a new decision every six to 18 months about whether its T.P.S. designation will be prolonged. If it is, beneficiaries like Morales can apply to renew their T.P.S. cards by paying another fee and going through another background check. T.P.S. sets a precise window for eligibility: When Morales received her status in 2001, only Salvadorans already living in the United States when several earthquakes struck El Salvador could receive the benefit. A Salvadoran who arrived a month later could not. 
  Most T.P.S. holders have lived for decades in a kind of immigration purgatory. In a 2006 paper about the ''liminal legality'' of T.P.S. holders, the U.C.L.A. sociologist Cecilia Menjívar explains that ''the process itself is fraught with anxiety -- especially around expiration and renewal time -- because any wrong step, missed deadline, lack of information or an error on a form may result in denial and deportation.'' Most T.P.S. holders, she said in a 2017 report, work in construction, painting, cleaning, driving, cooking and child care. Nearly 90 percent have jobs, and 90 percent file income taxes every year. In effect, T.P.S. holders are what DACA recipients will look like if they're kept in immigration purgatory another 15 years. 
  When Donald Trump was elected, his administration enacted its own kind of immigration reform with remarkable efficiency. Under the guidance of his first attorney general, Jeff Sessions, and his senior adviser Stephen Miller, officials changed more than 1,000 rules, interpretations and directives throughout the immigration system, making it harder for immigrants to enter legally and easier for them to be removed. Democrats sometimes seem less knowledgeable about the intricate details of immigration policy. When members of the T.P.S. Alliance went to Capitol Hill in 2017 to lobby for the American Dream and Promise Act, which would have allowed permanent residency to both DACA and T.P.S. recipients, they discovered that most members of Congress had never heard of T.P.S. ''The ones who knew the least about T.P.S. weren't the Republicans,'' Alvarado noted. ''It was the Democrats. The Republicans had it very clear. They wanted to terminate T.P.S. together with Trump.''
  While some components of our immigration system, like H-1B and farmworker visas, are primarily designed to help American businesses, others spring from less mercenary impulses. DACA, T.P.S. and political asylum all fit into this altruistic category, and all drew special ire from Trump officials, who viewed them as forms of ''amnesty'' that attracted undesirable immigrants. They deliberately tried to roll back 40 years of immigration policy. ''All the policies that are being adopted by the Trump administration,'' Lucas Guttentag, a professor of law at Stanford and Yale, told me last year, ''and its dismantling of the Southern-border asylum system, are in complete disregard of the human suffering and of the legal rights that apply.'' In recent months, as thousands of Central Americans have traveled to America's Southern border, hoping that Biden's administration might let them in, some members of Congress have begun to suggest that any immigration reform must wait until this migration pattern ends. But this rhetorical ultimatum elides the responsibility Americans have for this humanitarian crisis. Many of these would-be immigrants are trying to escape genuinely life-threatening conditions, and they have an internationally recognized right to apply for asylum and to have their claims considered. In many cases, the violence that they flee has its roots in more than a decade of American foreign policy.
  In fact, T.P.S. was created precisely because the asylum process failed in the United States during the 1980s. For Representative Jim McGovern, a Democrat from Massachusetts, the argument for granting T.P.S. holders permanent residency extends beyond any benefit they provide to America. ''We have a moral obligation to the people of El Salvador,'' he told me. As a congressional staff member in the 1980s, McGovern worked on the creation the original T.P.S. statute. Unlike many politicos, he remembers that T.P.S. was a response to America's foreign policy in El Salvador and to its discrimination against Salvadoran refugees in the United States. 
  Some 2.3 million Hispanic Americans now trace their roots to El Salvador, more than to any other place except Mexico and the U.S. territory Puerto Rico. Many people point to the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 as the catalyst for this immigration. But according to testimony given by a Census Department official before Congress in 1985, Salvadorans did not begin to leave their country en masse until April 1980, 15 years after that act was passed. According to the Pew Research Center, in 1980 there were an estimated 92,000 foreign-born Salvadorans living in the United States. By 1990, that number had rocketed to 459,000. Why did hundreds of thousands of Salvadorans move to the United States in a single decade? The answer to this question is the history of T.P.S. 
  In February 1980, the archbishop of San Salvador, Óscar Romero, wrote a letter to President Jimmy Carter, asking him not to move forward with a nearly $50 million aid package that would send U.S. military advisers and equipment to the civilian-military junta then governing El Salvador. ''The contribution of your government,'' Romero wrote, ''instead of promoting greater justice and peace in El Salvador will without doubt sharpen the injustice and repression against the organizations of the people which repeatedly have been struggling to gain respect for their most fundamental human rights.'' 
  During the 1970s, as the conflict between El Salvador's various leftist groups and its conservative oligarchy escalated, paramilitary forces began assassinating anyone who seemed to pose a political threat: labor leaders, human rights workers, schoolteachers, peasants, clergy. In 1979 and 1980, political murders hit 800 a month in a country with the same population as Tennessee. Because Jesuits often sided with El Salvador's poor and some kept records of human rights violations, they were hated by the country's ultraright. One paramilitary slogan was: ''Be a patriot! Kill a priest.'' A month after Romero wrote his letter to Carter, the 62-year-old archbishop was murdered by a sniper during Mass.
  Ignoring Romero's objection, the Carter administration went ahead with aid for El Salvador in 1980. When President Ronald Reagan took office the following year, he made support of El Salvador's junta a foreign-policy priority. Both administrations feared that without such support, El Salvador would go the way of Nicaragua, which overthrew the Somoza-family dictatorship and installed a socialist civilian-military government in 1979.
  By 1992, the United States had sent more than $4 billion to the government of El Salvador, despite reports of torture, rape, killings and massacres. To military forces in El Salvador, the message was clear: Violating human rights would not affect their standing with the Reagan and George H.W. Bush administrations. As Mark Danner documents in his 1994 book, ''The Massacre at El Mozote,'' U.S. military trained Salvadoran battalions and equipped them with bullets, M16s and military helicopters. This assistance abetted a 12-year civil war that began shortly before Romero's assassination and killed at least 75,000 people. Thousands more were forcibly disappeared. Testimony to the United Nations' Truth Commission for El Salvador attributed a vast majority of the violence to Salvadoran government and paramilitary forces. 
  Many of the Salvadorans fleeing their country during the war sought refuge in the United States, where they were routinely denied political asylum. These rejections may have violated the Refugee Act of 1980, which brought the United States in line with United Nations protocols and which states that all applicants for asylum must be considered equally. In practice, however, applications made by immigrants from Soviet client states like Romania, Czechoslovakia and Poland were frequently approved during the mid-1980s, while more than 97 percent of Salvadorans were rejected. (Would-be migrants from Guatemala, where the United States supported another military government, fared even worse.) 
  Maureen Sweeney, a law professor at the University of Maryland, remembers seeing hundreds of young men from El Salvador and Guatemala while she worked at the Texas Center for Immigrant Legal Assistance during the 1980s. She estimates that the center represented hundreds of asylum claims in two years and won only three. ''We didn't win a single Salvadoran claim,'' she told me. ''We didn't win a single Guatemalan claim.'' It didn't matter if these immigrants had been tortured, if their relatives had been killed. Immigration judges denied their claims and ordered their deportations. ''The idea that that looked anything like due process, even in terms of the time, is just kind of ludicrous,'' Sweeney said. 
  The State Department had a strong motivation for thwarting Salvadoran claims: The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 forbids the United States to fund any foreign government that ''engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights.'' So the Reagan administration instead portrayed Salvadoran refugees as ''economic migrants.'' This description not only gave officials a rationale for deporting Salvadorans; it also obscured the role that the administration played in funding the violence that drove Central Americans to the United States. 
  Faced with this perversion of the asylum process, some churches and synagogues in the American Southwest decided to help Salvadorans and Guatemalans enter and remain in the United States illegally. By 1984, this sanctuary movement included 185 religious institutions in the Southwest, Midwest and Eastern United States. The movement faced a serious setback, however, that same year, when more than half a dozen of its American supporters were charged with transporting and harboring illegal aliens in Texas and Arizona. 
  The lawsuit American Baptist Churches et al. v. Thornburgh began as an attempt to block this crackdown by claiming that the decision to offer sanctuary inside churches was ''a matter of religious faith and practice.'' Before its filing, the case expanded to include other important arguments, including the claim that U.S. Attorney General Dick Thornburgh was discriminating against asylum applicants from El Salvador and Guatemala. Three times over the next three years, the Reagan administration tried to have the lawsuit dismissed, but in 1989, the discrimination claim was allowed to proceed to trial. ''It opened the doors to us getting huge amounts of discovery,'' said Marc Van Der Hout, the lead lawyer for the case. With subpoenas and sufficient time, he said, prosecutors might have located evidence that the United States was denying asylum with the express purpose of maintaining military aid to El Salvador. 
  Even before that legal case was filed, Salvadoran immigrants began visiting the offices of Representative Joe Moakley. A native of South Boston, Moakley entered Congress in 1973 with little interest in foreign affairs. ''He used to joke a foreign-policy issue to him was driving from South Boston to East Boston for an Italian sandwich,'' Representative Jim McGovern, an aide to Moakley throughout the 1980s, told me. McGovern often sat with Moakley as Salvadorans recounted horrific stories of persecution and discrimination. Moved and outraged by these accounts, Moakley took up their cause.
  In 1983, after efforts to pressure Reagan officials proved futile, Moakley began introducing amendments to various House bills trying to suspend the deportations of Salvadorans. ''The institutions of government that should have been functioning in response to this kind of humanitarian situation weren't responding,'' said Joy Olson, who rallied support for Moakley's efforts as an employee of Church World Service, which organized international humanitarian aid. But Moakley's legislative actions were repeatedly blocked.
  Then on Nov. 16, 1989, six Jesuit priests were dragged from their home and murdered in San Salvador. Their bodies were riddled with bullets, and some were left near a garden wall sprayed with blood, suggesting they were killed execution-style with assault rifles. Their cook and her 16-year-old daughter were also killed. Days after the murders, Congress approved another $85 million in military aid to El Salvador, despite opposition from America's largest religious federation, the National Council of Churches. 
  Though government officials in El Salvador first blamed Marxist guerrillas for the murders, Moakley led a congressional investigation that linked the killings to the Salvadoran military high-command and to soldiers of a Salvadoran battalion named Atlacatl who were trained at Fort Benning in Georgia. The murders turned many Americans against U.S. aid to El Salvador for the first time.
  A year later, Moakley attached a provision to an immigration act making its way through Congress, proposing to grant Salvadorans temporary protection from deportation. ''Anybody who's telling me that El Salvador is a safe place is living in La La Land,'' McGovern recalls Moakley saying. ''You're having priests that are killed in cold blood. Students are being targeted. Labor unions are being targeted.'' By then, Moakley wielded power as chairman of the House Committee on Rules. Dropping an expletive or two, he told opponents that he would not bring the Immigration Act of 1990 to a vote in the House unless his amendment to create Temporary Protected Status for Salvadorans was attached. 
  In the end, Moakley's provision didn't just protect Salvadorans; it created an entirely new way for the federal government to allow migrants from specific countries to avoid deportation. Unlike asylum, which requires individuals to prove a well-founded fear of persecution based on their race, religion, nationality, political beliefs or membership in a particular social group, T.P.S. allows the government to help an entire class of people whose living conditions have become untenable. In this way, T.P.S. is a better tool for addressing enormous waves of forced migration, like the recent Venezuelan exodus fleeing both political repression and widespread hunger. The Immigration Act designated Salvadorans living in the United States in 1990 as eligible for T.P.S. -- the only group specifically named for this benefit. Other countries would have to be considered on a case-by-case basis using recommendations made by the State Department.
  The same year that T.P.S. became law, federal officials reached out to Van Der Hout through an intermediary, he says, to see if they could settle A.B.C. v. Thornburgh. When Van Der Hout received the call, he nearly fell off his chair. While the U.S. government never admitted to discriminating against Salvadorans and Guatemalans, in the settlement it did acknowledge that it could not decide asylum cases based on foreign-policy considerations. And it agreed to reconsider all the asylum applications of Salvadorans and Guatemalans living in the United States.
  Born in 1980, Morales grew up in the midst of the Salvadoran civil war. She remembers her grandmother hiding cousins on a roof to keep them from being conscripted by soldiers and guerrillas. She remembers staying in a house where the television was kept on the floor, so they could watch it from under the bed during gunfights outside. She remembers her grandfather throwing rocks into fields to check for land mines.
  But most of all, Morales remembers the violence of her own father. His beatings drove her mother to abandon the family when Morales was about 7. In her mother's absence, the care of her younger brother and sister fell onto Morales. So did most of her father's abuse. A few years later, he sweet-talked her mother into returning, but the honeymoon lasted only a few months. When Morales was 11, she says, her father sneaked up behind her mother while she was cooking, prepared to stab her in the back with a pocketknife. Morales jumped between them. ''I said to him that before getting her, he was going to have to get me,'' she recalled. Enraged, her father threw her against a wall, hard enough to knock her out. Morales's mother didn't go to the police to help. After the civil war ended in 1992, a broad amnesty allowed war criminals to hold onto government jobs, eroding trust in Salvadoran institutions. Instead, she left the children with their grandmother and fled for the United States, where she found work cleaning American houses and caring for American children. Morales's father, meanwhile, tracked down his kids in San Salvador and began stalking them. The situation made Morales suicidal: She considered throwing herself into a ravine; she asked God to take her away in her sleep. That's when she decided to follow her mother to California.
  ''When I came here,'' she told me, her voice thick with emotion, ''I felt like God gave me a second chance.'' Living with her mother, Morales attended school regularly for the first time in her life. She funneled painful childhood memories into poetry. In her final year at San Rafael High School, she turned one of these verses into a short film about domestic abuse called ''Silent Shadows.'' It screened in 1999 at Marin County's Latino Film Festival and aired on HBO Family in 2001. The film's success could have paved Morales's way to college, but without legal documents, she says, she could not follow up on an offer to attend a nearby college. Instead, she took care of her mother's new baby.
  Like many undocumented minors, Morales didn't fully realize how vulnerable she was until she graduated from high school in 1999. ''I had to learn the other side of being here: visible, but invisible,'' she told me. At 12, she thought coming to the United States meant finding freedom and safety. She didn't realize that entering illegally would thwart her dreams to study, to work, to live an independent life. ''I didn't want to be in the shadows,'' she said, but for two years she had no other option. Though T.P.S. helped thousands of Salvadorans who were living in the United States in 1990, Morales, who entered in 1993, was not eligible for the benefit. 
  Then in January 2001, an earthquake measuring 7.7 on the Richter scale hit El Salvador. An aftershock measuring 5.7 hit the country two days later, and another 5.7 quake struck the following month. The quakes damaged nearly 278,000 homes and displaced more than a million people. In response to these natural disasters, President George W. Bush, who had just been elected with a campaign promising ''compassionate conservatism,'' granted El Salvador a new T.P.S. designation. Morales and her mother applied soon after they heard the news on television. With her new T.P.S. card, Morales landed a job at Macy's and moved into her own apartment. Eventually she married her high school sweetheart, who worked in construction. They had a daughter, then a son. They bought a house. They organized their lives around work, school, church and soccer. 
  Morales didn't mind the T.P.S. procedures: paying several hundred dollars and getting her fingerprints scanned at an immigration office every 18 months or so. To her, it all felt worth the privilege of living legally inside the United States. ''Renewing for me, it was the best thing in the world,'' she said. Every time she got her new work permit in the mail, she thought to herself, OK, I'm good, I'm making it. 
  When Trump won the presidential election in 2016, Morales told herself that she would be OK. She first received T.P.S. status under Bush, a Republican president, so how bad could things get for her under another Republican? 
  ''The Trump administration was trying to figure out a way to end T.P.S. for all the people who had had it for any length of time,'' said Ahilan Arulanantham, a lawyer working on the Ramos case. The administration's solution was to apply a new interpretation to the 1990 Immigration Act. For nearly three decades, both Republicans and Democrats had weighed the effects of disasters and crises that occurred after a country was designated for T.P.S. when deciding whether to extend the benefit another six to 18 months. But Trump officials wanted to terminate T.P.S. regardless of whether living conditions in countries like El Salvador or Sudan were safe. So they decided that only conditions connected to the original T.P.S. decision needed to show improvement. 
  With this new interpretation, it didn't matter that El Salvador had the highest homicide rate in the world outside a war zone in 2015. It didn't matter that Salvadoran parents often kept their children home from school, for fear that their boys would be dragooned into gangs and their girls would be assaulted. It didn't matter that the American Embassy in San Salvador sent a diplomatic cable in July 2017 suggesting that, given the country's dismal record of job creation, repatriated T.P.S. holders, or their children, could be pushed into criminal employment. The 1990 T.P.S. decision for El Salvador expired in 1992. So all that mattered was whether the country's infrastructure had recovered from the destruction caused by the quakes that spurred the 2001 designation.
  In November, three days before the acting secretary of homeland security, Elaine Duke, needed to announce her decision on T.P.S. for Honduras and Nicaragua, she attended a meeting at the White House. Its purpose, according to its agenda, was ''to coordinate the conditions and process for terminating temporary protected status (T.P.S.) for aliens from El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Haiti,'' all countries with designations connected to natural disasters. In a briefing paper for this meeting -- one of a trove of documents unearthed by the Ramos suit -- the White House stated its new reading of the law. The statute, it said, required a decision on whether to extend the status ''based on an evaluation of the conditions that initially warranted granting T.P.S.''
  ''This is not how any prior administration had read the statutes,'' Arulanantham noted. ''They had consistently looked at whether it was safe period, not whether it was safe with respect to something.'' In a letter that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson sent to Duke a few days before the meeting, he acknowledged that neither El Salvador nor Honduras could ensure the safety of repatriated T.P.S. recipients or their U.S.-citizen children. He even observed that ending T.P.S. could hurt American interests by angering Central American leaders. ''They may take retaliatory actions counter to our longstanding national security and economic interests,'' he wrote, ''like withdrawing their counternarcotics and anti-gang cooperation with the United States, reducing their willingness to accept the return of their deported citizens or refraining from efforts to control illegal migration.'' Yet Tillerson still claimed that the four countries no longer met ''the legal requirements necessary for extension'' -- a remarkable assertion given that country condition reports appended to his letter contradicted this conclusion. 
  Handwritten notes taken by Duke during the meeting suggest that Attorney General Jeff Sessions may have told her and other officials that they needed to ''bite the bullet'' on T.P.S. terminations because ''no one has the guts to pull the trigger.'' The urgency of pulling that trigger was suggested in the briefing paper's conclusion: It was important to end T.P.S. for El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Haiti, it suggested, because extending the protection ''would also lengthen the period during which beneficiaries would deepen their connections to the United States.'' 
  Prosecutors in the Ramos case argue that by suddenly departing from decades of ''consistent interpretation and corresponding practice'' without explanation, D.H.S. violated the Administrative Procedure Act, which states that agencies cannot silently or secretly depart from earlier policy and that public accounting of new policies is especially required when they contradict previous practice. ''Despite multiple discovery requests,'' the prosecutors wrote, the Trump administration was ''unable to identify or produce a single document'' showing that earlier administrations required current country conditions to be ''directly tied'' to the specific conditions that initiated a country's T.P.S. designation.
  Duke told me that she knew the new reading was a departure from previous practice, but she did not believe that precedent was a good basis for making decisions in immigration because too many previous actions had distorted the statutes. They are ''not effective,'' she said. ''So to counter the ineffectiveness of the statutes, some people chose to interpret into them the outcomes that they desire.''
  When McGovern confronted Nielsen about T.P.S. for Salvadorans shortly after she was confirmed as the new secretary of D.H.S., Nielsen said that lawyers advised her that she could not legally renew it. ''Your lawyers are wrong,'' McGovern recalls saying. He told Nielsen that he wanted to talk to the lawyers who were advising D.H.S. But he said no lawyers ever got in touch. (Nielsen did not respond to multiple requests for comment.)
  ''It became very clear to me this was a political decision to end it,'' McGovern told me. ''It had nothing to do with the law.'' Because the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decided the District Court did not have jurisdiction to overturn the Trump-era interpretation of the T.P.S. statute, the new reading will remain intact. In other words, T.P.S. status has become even more precarious, and future designations may shift according to political whim, without any judicial review. This means that even the Biden administration's new T.P.S. designations for Venezuela and Myanmar could be easily terminated by a future administration.
  A few years ago, McGovern took his daughter to El Salvador and visited the memorial at El Mozote, where in 1981 the Atlacatl soldiers slaughtered unarmed men, women and children. ''The hamlet was known throughout the zone as a stronghold of the Protestant evangelical movement,'' Danner notes in his history of the atrocity. Because evangelicals were anti-Communist, the townspeople thought they had nothing to fear from the Salvadoran Army. They were wrong. When reports of the massacre first appeared in The New York Times and The Washington Post, Reagan officials dismissed the news as Marxist propaganda. 
  But forensic anthropologists, who entered the area after the peace accords were signed, unearthed hundreds of skeletons. One hundred and thirty-six children died in a church sacristy, which had been raked with bullets and then set on fire. ''There's a list of the names of people who died and their ages,'' McGovern said. ''Some of the ages are 0 -- because they were infants that were murdered, right?'' Most of the cartridge cases recovered from the sacristy had stamps indicating that they were made for the United States government in Lake City, Mo.
  ''We hurt the people of El Salvador,'' McGovern said. ''I think we have a duty to make it right.'' In his office in Washington, McGovern keeps a poster showing the six murdered Jesuits and a photograph of a Salvadoran mural depicting Archbishop Romero, whom Pope Francis canonized in 2018. ''Helping those with T.P.S. regularize their status and become citizens would be a step in the right direction,'' he said. In March, Representative Lucille Roybal-Allard of California introduced a new version of the American Dream and Promise Act, which would grant conditional permanent legal status to DACA and T.P.S. recipients. But as Central American migrants gather at our Southern border, the chances of passing any bill that includes permanent legalizations are waning. It now looks unlikely that Congress will make any real progress in reforming the system, yet again leaving millions of immigrants vulnerable to the shifting agendas of America's presidents. 
  In 2018, nearly two million undocumented immigrants in the United States were from Central America, more than from any other region except Mexico. Many people have heard about the violence, the lawlessness and the destitution that provoke these people to enter the United States. But few remember America's role in creating these conditions during the Cold War. In Guatemala in 1954, the United States overthrew a democratically elected president who tried to implement labor and land reforms. In Nicaragua, it funded a covert war against a socialist government and lined a harbor with mines. In Honduras, it spent more than $1 billion in military aid and tacitly supported death squads. In Panama, it established a neocolonial Canal Zone and set up a school, the U.S. Army School of the Americas, that trained some 60,000 Latin American military officers to use torture and execution techniques. It's telling that Costa Rica -- located about an hour from El Salvador by plane, and more than twice El Salvador's size -- is not a significant source of immigration to the United States; it's the most prosperous nation in Central America. Unlike its neighbors, Costa Rica avoided military intervention by the United States.
  In a 1904 message to Congress, President Theodore Roosevelt explicitly justified U.S. intervention anywhere in Latin America on the grounds that a ''civilized nation,'' like the United States, should exercise ''an international police power.'' El Salvador might have recovered from its experience with this power if President Bill Clinton had not signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act in 1996. This popular bill fast-tracked the deportation of criminals, and these removals sent violent offenders to El Salvador, a country that had not yet recovered the rule of law. The deportations helped transform a California heavy-metal gang, MS-13, into a transnational criminal syndicate that terrorizes much of the country. 
  ''There has never been anything of a legal nature that recognizes U.S. culpability for these conditions,'' said Karen Musalo, an international-law professor at University of California, Hastings. ''And there seems to be, frankly, a total amnesia about it.'' Biden's administration has suggested that the United States spend $4 billion ''to address the underlying causes of migration'' from Central America. But history suggests that money alone is no solution. In the wrong hands, with the wrong incentives, money is part of the problem. 
  In late March, a few days after the anniversary of Romero's assassination, some 40 members of the National T.P.S. Alliance gathered in a corner of Freedom Plaza in Washington to pay homage to the Salvadoran saint. Most of the plaza was taken over by dozens of skateboarders that Saturday. The noise of their boards hitting stone steps and low granite walls formed a soundtrack of indifference as the sun set and Elsy Flores Ayala, another plaintiff in the Ramos case, read in Spanish from Isaiah 53: 
  He was pierced for our transgressions, He was crushed for our iniquities;The punishment that brought us peace was on him.
  The White House stood a couple of blocks away. The sound of military helicopters arriving and departing from its grounds occasionally interrupted the service. 
  A week earlier, members of the alliance began a 43-day hunger strike that worked like a relay. A few members would sit in the plaza and stop eating for two or three days, then they'd go back to work and others would take their places. Cristina Morales is flying in early this month for her turn. The alliance hopes that these efforts will pressure the Senate to pass the American Dream and Promise Act, which was passed by the House on March 18, or at least draw mainstream media attention to their cause. But few people seem to be paying attention. T.P.S. is too confusing, too historically complicated. Talking about its details, I often watched people's eyes glaze over. 
  But for some of those watching the outdoor screening of the movie ''Romero'' that chilly spring night, history still felt visceral. Antonio Vasquez, 56, attended Romero's funeral as a teenager. He walked 10 miles from his house to pay his respects because, he said, Romero ''was the voice of the people.'' When he arrived at the funeral, he joined a huge, peaceful crowd. Then a bomb went off, and gunfire started. People fell near him, and he ran in terror until he reached his own neighborhood. His wife, Maribel, another T.P.S. holder, sat next to their 9-year-old daughter watching the movie. She attended Romero's funeral with her uncle because her own father was murdered -- hanged and decapitated after abduction from his home. ''El Salvador never recovered from that war,'' Vasquez said. His brother, a 70-year-old small business owner, told him not to think of returning. He can barely make a living; the gangs extort his profits. ''It's sad for me,'' Vasquez said. After 20 years as a law-abiding taxpayer, he still had to worry about being sent back. ''I've spent my energy here,'' he said, ''my youth, my life.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/07/magazine/immigration-el-salvador.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCELA VALDES) (MM24-MM25)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (87%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (87%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (85%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%); FAMILY (76%); EMIGRATION (72%); AFTER SCHOOL PROGRAMS (71%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (71%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (71%); IMMIGRATION (70%); DEPORTATION (65%); NATIONAL SECURITY (62%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (62%)

Industry: MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (78%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%)

Person: KIRSTJEN NIELSEN (53%); BARACK OBAMA (50%); DONALD TRUMP (50%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); EL SALVADOR (92%); SOUTH SUDAN (92%); SYRIA (90%); HONDURAS (79%); HAITI (78%)

Load-Date: April 11, 2021


End of Document
Gender Bias Seen in Visas for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
March 19, 2013 Tuesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Washington; Pg. 
Length: 1153 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Senate Judiciary Committee heard testimony Monday afternoon arguing that the H-1B visa program, which covers highly skilled temporary foreign workers, often in high-tech fields, discriminates against women.
The hearing, which was devoted to issues women face in the immigration process, also focused on family reunification, and ways to help families -- and women specifically -- integrate into the legal immigration system.
''I don't think we should be setting up an either-or proposition -- even the most highly skilled immigrants, they have families, too,'' said Senator Mazie Hirono, Democrat of Hawaii, referring to what she described as a false, ''either-or'' choice between family-based immigration and high-skilled immigration. ''This is all about doing the kind of immigration reform that really supports the values we have in this country, and one of the values we have in this country is that family is important.''
Karen Panetta, the vice president for communications and public awareness for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in the United States of America, testified in her prepared remarks that ''the vast majority of H-1B workers are men.''
Ms. Panetta's prepared testimony pointed to ''a serious gender imbalance in science, technology, engineering and math,'' as part of the reason that these H-1B visas in high-tech fields skew disproportionately toward men. But she noted: ''If a major immigration program effectively discriminated based on race or national origin, would that be O.K.?''
''The I.E.E.E.-U.S.A. represents more American high-tech workers than anybody else, so we have sources,'' Ms. Panetta said Monday afternoon. ''One from inside the industry, looking at the offshoring companies that dominate the H-1B program, is that their global hiring is 70 percent men.'' But in the United States, where outsourcing companies get more than half of the limited number of H-1B visas, she added, ''the ratio is more like 85 percent men.''
Ms. Panetta, whose organization has filed a Freedom of Information Act request with the Department of Homeland Security to get data on the gender breakdown of H-1B visas, accused the government in her written testimony of ''stonewalling'' on their request.
''How many women get H-1B visas?'' she said Monday.
A spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security said that there is not a gender-based cap for H-1B visas and that gender is not taken into account when deciding who qualifies for the program, so the department does not have this data readily available.
Ai-jen Poo, the director of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, emphasized the need for domestic care workers who are illegal immigrants -- ''a growing workforce of mainly immigrant women who take care of our children, our aging loved ones and our homes,'' as she described them -- to be allowed some flexibility in proving that they have been living and working in the United States.
A nanny who is an illegal immigrant, Ms. Poo said, most likely does not have pay stubs or tax forms to prove she worked for her employer because she largely exists in ''a paperless world.'' She called on the senators to accept ''proofs of presence as opposed to proof of employment'' when it comes to providing a work history for domestic care workers -- many of whom are female.
Another issue of concern is that immigration legislation that is likely to emerge from the Senate might eliminate the ability for United States citizens to sponsor their married adult children, as well as their siblings, on an immigrant visa. Currently, these two groups represent the third and fourth preference categories when it comes to family immigration, but there is some discussion that they might be reshuffled and ultimately cut during the coming immigration overhaul.
''Our family is what permits us to be able to set root and really begin to build a life in this country,'' said Mee Moua, the president of the Asian American Justice Center. ''If those two categories were eliminated, unless some alternative version was put on the table, I think that it would just unfortunately affect women and their families.''
Ms. Moua argued that large, extended families can be critical to helping immigrants become a productive and integrated part of American society.
''Family immigration is critical to our economy, and we know that our communities and all Americans benefit when we're able to provide immigrants with an opportunity to set roots,'' she said. ''We know that siblings provide immigrants an immediate social support system, that is able to help them with child care or if they fall on hard times, or instances where they need some help to start a business. The family network is what has helped our immigrants, regardless of how you come to this country, survive and start a life in this country.
''Children will always be our children, whether they're over the age of 21 or not.'' she said. ''For us to start to think about which members of our family we're going to trade away is a dramatic and drastic departure from the core values of what has been driving this country since our founding days.''
Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, however, was not so convinced that all family members of immigrants deserved special consideration, simply because they have family in the United States.
''Because a person chooses to leave their home country and come to the United States does not necessarily mean they have the right to demand that their father or their other extended family members be allowed to come if they don't otherwise meet the standard,'' he said.
Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, on Monday also introduced legislation that, he said, would help overhaul the H-1B visa system.
''Somewhere along the line, the H-1B program got side-tracked,'' Mr. Grassley said in an e-mail statement. ''The program was never meant to replace qualified American workers, but it was instead intended as a means to fill gaps in highly specialized areas of employment. When times are tough, like they are now, it's especially important that Americans get every consideration before an employer looks to hire from abroad. The legislation will benefit the American worker, while still ensuring that U.S. companies get the specialized workers they need.''
Only four members of the committee -- Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota; Mr. Grassley; Ms. Hirono; and Mr. Sessions -- attended Monday's hearing. None of the committee members who are also part of the bipartisan group of eight senators working on comprehensive immigration legislation showed up.
Monday's hearing also kicked off a weeklong series of events on Capitol Hill as part of the ''We Belong Together'' campaign, in which hundreds of women from 24 states will call for an immigration overhaul that specifically addresses the challenges that female immigrants face.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/19/us/politics/gender-bias-seen-in-visas-for-skilled-workers.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); GENDER EQUALITY (91%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); ENGINEERING (90%); FAMILY (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WOMEN (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); MEN (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (74%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (68%); STEM EDUCATION (66%); OFFSHORING (61%); FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (60%)

Company:  INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS INC (68%)

Organization: INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS (55%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); ENGINEERING (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%)

Person: MAZIE K HIRONO (78%)

Geographic: HAWAII, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: March 20, 2013


End of Document
Changes to Tech Visas Are Cosmetic for Now
The New York Times
April 4, 2017 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 747 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL and NICK WINGFIELD
Body


The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced on Friday that it was reversing its previous guidance that entry-level computer programming jobs automatically qualify as a ''specialty occupation'' -- a basic requirement for receiving an H-1B work visa. And on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would look closely at any employer who discriminates against American workers by showing a preference for hiring H-1B workers.
The announcements came as the government began accepting applications on Monday for H-1B visas that will be issued for the next fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1. 
  How do the announcements change the government's policies toward foreign workers?
  The changes are more cosmetic than substantive. Visas for entry-level computer jobs have already been getting more scrutiny from immigration officials, and the Justice Department is reminding companies to follow the law.
  Still, critics of the H-1B program say the Justice Department's warning to companies not to discriminate against Americans might lead to enforcement action.
  ''If the Department of Justice concludes that these companies are discriminating against Americans, the entire outsourcing model becomes deeply suspect,'' said Russell Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, a group that represents American tech workers.
  Why is the H-1B program important? 
  H-1B visas are commonly used by companies to bring foreign workers to the United States to fill technical positions like software developers. Some tech companies say they need foreign workers because they cannot find enough Americans with the skills for these jobs.
  There's a lot of controversy around H-1Bs. Some of the biggest users of these work visas are outsourcing firms, many of them based in India. These firms often bring foreign workers to the United States at low wages to fill jobs once held by higher-paid Americans.
  How do the new policies affect Microsoft, Facebook and other big American technology companies? 
  The large tech companies are unlikely to be affected much in the near term, immigration lawyers and technology executives said. Technology companies usually apply for H-1B visas when they need to fill a job with higher-skilled workers holding bachelor's or master's degrees.
  William Moss, a spokesman for Intel, said the chip maker does not expect any impact from the change. ''Intel's foreign national population in the U.S. is largely comprised of individuals possessing unique and difficult to find skills which can only be acquired through advanced-degree, university-level education,'' Mr. Moss said.
  What about the Indian outsourcing firms? 
  Indian outsourcing firms like Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Infosys get a large number of H-1B visas, as do outsource companies that are based in America, such as I.B.M. and Cognizant.
  Although they do hire some entry-level programmers, they have been shifting their hiring to higher-skilled and better paid workers.
  Benjamin Trounson, a spokesman for Tata Consultancy Services, said the company has cut back on its use of H-1B visas in the past few years, receiving only 1,500 in 2016.
  Why is this happening now?
  On Monday, the federal government began accepting applications for next year's visas. Demand for the H-1B visas so far exceeds the supply that the government is likely to cut off applications within a week, and visas will be awarded by lottery. Congress allows for 65,000 H-1Bs each year, with an additional 20,000 for workers possessing a master's degree or higher.
  The Trump administration may be using the moment to discourage what they see as abuse of the work visa.
  ''The timing is not coincidental,'' said Ted Ruthizer, an immigration lawyer with Kramer Levin Naftalis & Frankel in New York. ''It's an attempt to show a mastery of the situation, that they know what companies are up to with H-1Bs and they're not going to let them get away with any shenanigans.''
  Are more changes coming that could affect the technology sector? 
  Probably. Companies like Amazon and Expedia took a leading position in opposing President Trump's first executive order banning travel to the United States from seven majority Muslim countries, saying that it restricted the movement of employees and hindered their ability to attract talent.
  The industry is also awaiting a possible executive order from Mr. Trump that could further change how H-1Bs and other visas used by the tech industry are issued.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/03/technology/tech-worker-h-1b-visas-changes.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (75%); LAWYERS (73%); ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS (72%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (67%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (82%);  INFOSYS LTD (55%);  FACEBOOK INC (52%);  MICROSOFT CORP (52%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (50%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (85%); INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS (55%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (82%); INFY (PAR) (55%); INFY (NYSE) (55%); INFY (NSE) (55%); FB (NASDAQ) (52%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (52%); TCS (NSE) (50%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (82%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (55%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (55%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (52%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (52%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (52%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (50%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (50%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (50%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (50%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); BIG TECH (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); ELECTRONICS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (78%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); LAWYERS (73%); CONSULTING SERVICES (50%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 4, 2017


End of Document
On Trip to India, Trump's Son Retreats From Foreign Policy
The New York Times
February 24, 2018 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 1164 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL and MARIA ABI-HABIB; Eric Lipton contributed reporting from Washington.
Body


NEW DELHI -- After days of controversy over whether he would blur the lines between American foreign policy and his family's real estate business during a trip to India to sell condos, Donald Trump Jr. on Friday abandoned plans to give a policy speech and instead gave an interview with an Indian journalist, sticking to safe topics.
His remarks in the interview -- about his father's successful 2016 presidential campaign, how little the family sees him now, and India's great entrepreneurial spirit -- were so anodyne that when the Bollywood star Shah Rukh Khan entered the room near the end of the interview, people lifted their phones to take photos of the actor and stopped paying attention to the oldest child of America's president. 
  ''I'm here as a businessman,'' Mr. Trump told a crowd of about 2,000 business and political leaders, who were gathered for the annual business conference hosted by India's most powerful media company, The Times Group. ''I'm not representing anyone.''
  But his efforts to distance himself from administration policy were met with some skepticism.
  ''Though he claims that it's not an official speech, we take it as an official statement,'' said P. V. Sunil, a managing director of a company that builds malls and cinema complexes in India and Singapore. ''He speaks to his father more than anyone here.''
  Mr. Trump has spent the last week in India promoting new luxury housing projects in the country, the biggest foreign market for Trump real estate interests outside of North America.
  He originally intended to give a speech Friday on ''Indo-Pacific'' cooperation, a policy idea recently championed by President Trump as a counterweight to China's rising influence. That sparked an uproar, underscoring how the Trump family, with some members working in the White House and others running the family business, has obscured the traditional line between public and private interests.
  Ethicists and former government officials with both major political parties have raised concerns that foreign-policy decisions made by the White House could affect the Trump Organization's business prospects, and in turn, the president's wealth. Although the president has turned over management of the company to Donald Trump Jr. and another son, Eric Trump, he still holds a huge financial interest in Trump projects around the world.
  Two organizers of Friday's conference said that they had proposed the Indo-Pacific topic to Donald Trump Jr.'s team and that he had agreed to address it. On Thursday, after criticism by ethicists and a Democratic senator, Mr. Trump requested that the topic be changed, they said.
  Shortly after Mr. Trump's interview, India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, gave his own keynote speech about India's economic progress.
  Mr. Trump has downplayed ethical concerns during his India visit, saying the company's promise not to seek new foreign projects during his father's presidency had hurt its business.
  Eric Trump said in an interview on Friday that the criticism of his brother was unfair and unjustified. He said that although he was not involved in the discussions regarding his brother's speech, there was nothing wrong with the original topic.
  ''We have been doing business in India for many years,'' he said. ''I don't understand the problem with celebrating the camaraderie between two great countries.''
  During his onstage interview, Donald Trump Jr. went out of his way to suggest that the Trumps do not mix politics and business, even when they all get together.
  ''We see him so little that it's really about being a family,'' he said of his father. ''We don't talk politics.''
  Donald Trump Jr. was deeply involved in his father's campaign, meeting with a Russian lawyer who promised political dirt on Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate. That meeting, and how Mr. Trump and the White House responded to public disclosure of it last July, are now being scrutinized by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating Russian interference in the 2016 election.
  In India, officials have struggled to understand what the Trump White House means for Indo-American relations.
  ''Under Trump, you cannot be sure the policy today will be the policy tomorrow,'' said C. Raja Mohan, a foreign-policy analyst and director of Carnegie India. ''That is a huge problem.''
  India views some of the president's evolving positions as favorable and others as less so.
  His recent criticism of Pakistan as a haven for terrorists has been music to the ears of leaders in New Delhi, some of whom view that neighboring country in much the same way. The president has also signaled that he sees a more important role for India, along with other traditional American allies like Japan and Australia, in an Indo-Pacific grouping that would curb Beijing's influence.
  The Trump administration has strengthened military ties with New Delhi and discussed a flurry of defense agreements, including one that may see the F-16 fighter jet move its production line from Texas to India.
  At the same time, there are significant tensions between the Modi government and the Trump administration on several critical issues, including immigration and trade policy.
  In an effort to boost Indian manufacturing, the Modi government has raised tariffs on imported products like electronics and beauty products. India has also tangled with American drug companies over patent protections for their products. In 2017, the United States had a $23 billion trade deficit with India.
  Indian immigrants are also a large segment of the work force of American technology companies. President Trump campaigned on curbing such immigration and has gradually tightened the rules governing the H-1B and other visas used by tech workers.
  On Thursday, the administration announced rules that would make it harder for Indian outsourcers that have many corporate customers to bring workers to the United States and move them from site to site. Friday's conference was in full swing as news spread of the administration's latest move to restrict H-1B visas.
  With the younger Mr. Trump, who has voiced strong support for his father's tough stance on immigration, sitting in the audience, Uber's chief executive officer, Dara Khosrowshahi, took a dig at the president.
  ''The American dream is the single most incredible brand in the world,'' said Mr. Khosrowshahi, whose family immigrated from Iran. ''I'm worried that the attitude this American administration has on immigration will ruin that brand.''
  The journalist who interviewed Mr. Trump, Supriya Shrinate, pressed him on immigration, asking whether he thought it was fair that he could travel the world and invest in places like India, while the United States tightened immigration rules.
  Mr. Trump dodged the question, before Ms. Shrinate finally asked: ''Is the American dream still alive? A lot of people in this audience beg to differ.''
  ''I think 100 percent it is,'' Mr. Trump said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/23/world/asia/donald-trump-jr-india-modi.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Donald Trump Jr. at a conference Friday in New Delhi. ''I'm here as a businessman,'' he told attendees. Above, newspapers bearing ads for a proposed Trump Towers development in Gurgaon, India. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MANISH SWARUP/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 REBECCA CONWAY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FOREIGN POLICY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); ETHICS (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); FAMILY (78%); FAMILY COMPANIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (77%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (76%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (75%); EXECUTIVES (73%); GOVERNMENT ETHICS (73%); POLITICS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%)

Industry: REAL ESTATE (90%); CONDOMINIUMS (89%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (89%); MEDIA & TELECOMMUNICATIONS (78%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (78%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (73%); MOVIE THEATERS (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP JR (93%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); ERIC TRUMP (79%); NARENDRA MODI (79%); SHAH RUKH KHAN (79%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); INDIA (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHINA (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: February 24, 2018


End of Document
Why California’s Growth Has Slowed (and Why Demographers Aren’t Surprised)
The New York Times 
April 26, 2021 Monday 12:24 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 986 words
Byline: Shawn Hubler
Highlight: California will lose a congressional seat based on new census data, in part because of birthrate and immigration declines.
Body


California will lose a congressional seat based on new census data, in part because of birthrate and immigration declines.
For generations, California has been America’s boomtown writ large, with a population that nearly doubled to some 40 million in the last four decades alone.
California remains the nation’s most populous state, an immense, churning window into a majority-minority national future. But new data from the Census Bureau released on Monday confirms what demographers have suspected for years.
The boom is gone.
Dampened by declining birthrates and federal policies that drastically slowed immigration, California’s population increase of 6.1 percent over the past decade was the smallest in at least a century and less than the 7.4 percent national average, according to the census.
For the first time in its 170-year history, the state will lose a congressional seat, with the new numbers trimming its delegation in the House to 52 members.
“We are at a tipping point,” said H.D. Palmer, a spokesman for the State Department of Finance.
Mr. Palmer stressed, however, that the new census data reflected not a mass departure but a shortage of new Californians — the result of postponed parenthood and blocked immigration.
Texas and other large Sun Belt states gained seats in Congress based on the new census numbers. But California officials and other experts said they were not alarmed, noting that several other large states lost seats, including New York and Pennsylvania. California’s congressional delegation remains by far the nation’s largest, and many noted that the issue was the pace of the state’s growth and not a decrease of its overall population over the past decade.
Some also speculated that the pandemic may have artificially depressed census participation, although the state spent more than $187 million on outreach.
“People who have a partisan ax to grind will no doubt use this to fuel the fiction that there is some kind of apocalyptic exodus from California,” Mr. Palmer said, laughing. “But from a data standpoint, that is not the case.”
Here are some of the reasons the state’s growth has slowed, and why Mr. Palmer and other experts say California may be entering a new demographic phase.
Younger generations are waiting to have families.
Birthrates have steadily fallen in California since the aftermath of World War II, when the baby boom first sent the state’s population soaring. According to state data, births have declined by more than 15 percent in the past decade.
The average age of first birth in California rose from 28 in 2010 to 31 by 2019, a function of living costs, employment prospects and the state’s higher levels of education.
But California’s baby bust since the last census has also been more acute than in the rest of the country. Take the fertility rate, which demographers typically define as births per 1,000 women between the ages of 15 and 44.
Nationally, that rate fell from 64.1 in 2010 to 58.3 in 2019 — a loss of 5.8 births per 1,000 women of childbearing age. In California, however, the decline was 11.7 births. By comparison, the fertility rate in Florida dropped by fewer than four births.
California’s baby boomers have aged.
In addition to lower birthrates, higher death rates have contributed to the slower population growth in California.
Driven largely by aging baby boomers, deaths — not counting those from Covid-19 — have increased by more than 10 percent in the state over the past decade.
Older adults have outpaced growth in children or working-age adults to become the state’s fastest-growing age group. The state projects that by 2030, more than nine million Californians will be over 65.
Housing is increasingly expensive in the state.
The cost of housing is one of the state’s signature challenges. Lisa Hershey, the executive director of Housing California, estimates the state is short at least 1.2 million units of affordable housing. The median price for a single-family home in California hit a record $758,990 in March, according to state figures, up 24 percent from a year ago.
In 2017, according to state figures, 1.7 percent of California’s population moved to other parts of the nation, and 1.3 percent of the population moved to California from other states. In 2019, 1.7 percent moved to other states while 1.0 percent moved in.
Critics of the state’s governance often contend that its system of taxation, which leans heavily on high earners, has driven out wealthy Californians. But research has shown that lower-income families are the ones departing.
“The people who are leaving the state are the people who can’t afford to live here,” Ms. Hershey said.
Immigration slowed, especially during the Trump administration.
Though a majority of Californians were born in the United States, more than a quarter of residents have come from other countries. For most of the decade, immigration more than made up for the loss of Californians deciding to move to other states.
In the past several years, however, that stream of newcomers slowed markedly.
Immigration represented between 0.4 and 0.5 percent of California’s annual population increase through the first half of the decade, according to Mr. Palmer. But starting in 2017, when former President Donald J. Trump took office, that began to decline, to less than 0.1 percent last year.
Among the policies that depressed immigration, state officials said, was the Trump administration’s decision to sharply limit or delay applications for asylum and visas. Historically, California has been home to about 30 percent of the nation’s asylum population, as well as hundreds of thousands of workers on H-1B visas.
“Because we are a global destination state,” Mr. Palmer said, “what happens in immigration affects us disproportionately.”
PHOTO: California’s growth was dampened by declining birthrates and policies that halted immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARIANA DREHSLER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: CENSUS (95%); IMMIGRATION (91%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (91%); BIRTHS & BIRTH RATES (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (79%); BABY BOOMERS (78%); COST OF LIVING (78%); FERTILITY RATES (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); POPULATION GROWTH (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); FERTILITY & INFERTILITY (73%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (73%); PARENTING (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); WORLD WAR II (50%); California (%); Population (%); Census (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Baby Boomers (%); Birth Rates (%); Census Bureau (%); Redistricting and Reapportionment (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU (83%)

Industry: PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: August 12, 2021


End of Document
Visa Program For Skilled Workers Hits Limit Early
The New York Times
April 6, 2013 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11; NATIONAL BRIEFING | WASHINGTON
Length: 79 words
Byline: By REUTERS
Body


A visa program for skilled workers has hit its quota just days into the application period, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said, prompting a lottery and signaling that companies feel confident enough to hire more foreign workers. The H-1B program has not reached its cap of 65,000 so fast since early 2008. A separate H-1B allocation for master's and Ph.D. graduates from universities in the United States has also hit its quota of 20,000, the agency said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/06/us/visa-program-for-skilled-workers-hits-limit-early.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Brief

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CITIZENSHIP (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (88%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (84%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: April 6, 2013


End of Document
California Today: Defying Trump With Sanctuary Bill; California Today
The New York Times 
April 4, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1027 words
Byline: MIKE McPHATE
Highlight: Tuesday: A new salvo in California’s fight with President Trump, a rush for H-1B visas, and the growing popularity of the slackline.
Body


 Good morning.
(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Let’s turn it over to Jennifer Medina, a correspondent based in Los Angeles, for today’s introduction.
Another day, another example of California’s continued fight with the Trump administration. The State Senate overwhelmingly approved legislation Monday that essentially turns California into a so-called “sanctuary state” for undocumented immigrants. The bill expands protections for immigrants at a time when the Trump administration has expanded who is considered a priority for deportation. The legislation prohibits any state or local law enforcement agency from using resources to investigate, detain, report or arrest people for immigration violations. Under the legislation, county jails would not be able to allow officers from Immigration and Customs Enforcement to work inside the jails or notify them when a prisoner is being released.
After the bill came under fierce criticism from the California State Sheriffs’ Association, it was amended to allow local law enforcement officials to notify ICE of the release date of serious and violent felons. It also enables local law enforcement officers to alert federal officials if they come across someone who has a violent felony record and has been previously deported. Language in the bill was also changed to explicitly allow local agencies to participate in task forces even if they include immigration enforcement in investigations. The amendments did little to mollify the opposition. One Republican senator warned that the Legislature would be “kicking the president right in the groin,” with the law and warned that “he will strike back.”
After the vote, Kevin de León, the leader of the state Senate and sponsor of the bill, said, “Our communities will become more, not less, dangerous if local police are enlisted to enforce federal immigration laws.” He called the passage of the bill a “rejection of President Trump’s false and cynical portrayal of undocumented immigrants as a lawless community.”
Just before the Senate passed the sanctuary state bill, lawmakers approved legislation to start a fund that would pay for lawyers for undocumented immigrants facing deportation. Several Republicans spoke out against the legislation, saying it was an unfair use of taxpayer money and also contradicted the idea that the state wants to stay out of immigration enforcement. Both bills will now move to the Assembly. Gov. Jerry Brown has not indicated whether he would sign either one.
California Online
(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)
 Fight, negotiate or beg: California Democrats are debating how to respond to President Trump. [The New York Times]
 For struggling Kern County, Mr. Trump represents hope and change. [San Francisco Chronicle]
 Slide Show: A first look at proposals for a border wall with Mexico. [San Diego Union-Tribune]
 With uncertainty over a program that lets tech companies import foreign workers, a rush for visas has become an all-out scramble. [The New York Times]
 Calexit might be far-fetched, but redrawing California’s state boundaries isn’t. [Opinion | The New York Times]
 Today, Los Angeles voters are choosing a member of Congress to fill the vacancy left by Xavier Becerra. [Los Angeles Times]
 A Los Angeles County judge denied a bid from Roman Polanski to have his sexual abuse case resolved in his absence. [The New York Times]
 Studying surfers could offer clues to whether antibiotic resistant genes move from the seas into humans. [The New York Times]
 Tesla surpassed Ford in market value for the first time and moved within striking distance of General Motors. [The New York Times]
 Gary Austin died at 75. He helped changed the shape of American comedy as the founder of the theater company the Groundlings. [The New York Times]
 The Athletics opened the baseball season with new optimism — on a field named after Rickey Henderson. [San Francisco Chronicle]
 Photos: What 10 gallery crawlers wore to an opening in downtown Los Angeles. [The New York Times]
 Vin Diesel decided to make himself a star after Hollywood didn’t give him a chance. [The New York Times]
And Finally ...
Some visitors to Big Sur go bird watching or relax with a novel at a seaside resort.
Others suspend themselves high above the Pacific’s crashing waves on a narrow strip of nylon known as a slackline.
Billy Rudiger, a reader in Carmel, shared a photo he captured of a slackliner traversing a cove just south of Monterey last November.
Rope walking has existed for centuries. But the origins of the modern slackline, flat webbing strung loose enough to bounce like a trampoline, usually between two trees, is traced to Yosemite rock climbers in the early 1980s. It quickly grew into a full-fledged sport.
In the last five or so years, social media has helped to propel its popularity.
The pinnacle of the sport is a variation known as highlining, meaning the line is affixed at height. Highliners wear tethers, though a small number of elite practitioners sometimes go without.
Injuries can happen, but they are usually of the sprained ankle variety and involve lines a few feet off the ground, said Sonya Iverson, president of            Slackline U.S., a group that promotes the sport. “We aren’t daredevils or thrill-seekers,” she said.
Slackliners talk about the practice as a metaphor for the art of living — “balancing everything on the line to demonstrate life’s possibilities,” as the famed climber and highliner Dean Potter put it.
For Ryan Robinson, 34, the highliner in Mr. Rudiger’s photo, the blue ocean juxtaposed against the jagged rocks represented a cathedral of sorts.
“It’s such a beautiful place,” he said. “It’s nice to pay respect in a very unique way.”
California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.
The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Davis. Follow him on Twitter.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); CORRECTIONS (90%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SANCTUARY SITES (78%); APPROVALS (77%); POLITICAL DETAINEES (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (75%); FELONIES (75%); PRISONERS (75%); VIOLENT CRIME (75%); POLICE FORCES (74%); LAWYERS (71%); California Today (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (71%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); JERRY BROWN (59%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%)

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document
Trump Floats Possible Citizenship to Holders of H-1B Visas: What Are They?
The New York Times 
April 6, 2018 Friday 13:13 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1398 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: President Trump said on Twitter that changes are coming to the H1-B visa program for foreign workers that could involve a path to citizenship.
Body


Updated Jan. 11, 2019
For years, skilled workers from abroad have been coming to the United States on temporary visas, known as H-1B visas, that allow companies to recruit employees overseas when the necessary talent might not be available at home.
Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized for displacing United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. Critics also want to end special work permits issued to some spouses of workers on H-1B visas. President Trump has long been critical of the program.
On Friday, the president said on Twitter that changes to the program might be coming — including the possibility that workers brought in under the program could be allowed to become American citizens.
“H1-B holders in the United States can rest assured that changes are soon coming which will bring both simplicity and certainty to your stay, including a potential path to citizenship,” the president wrote. “We want to encourage talented and highly skilled people to pursue career options in the U.S.”
What is the H-1B visa?
It is a temporary visa that employers use to hire foreigners in “specialty occupations” for which there are not enough skilled American workers to fill available jobs. The workers must have at least a bachelor’s degree. It enables those employed to legally work in the United States for three years, with the possibility of extensions.
How does a worker get a visa?
Companies identify a worker they wish to hire and submit a petition on the candidate’s behalf. The typical petition is a collection of forms and documents describing the job and the unique qualifications of the person chosen to fill it.
Are all H-1B recipients in the technology sector?
Many are software engineers, computer programmers and other workers in the technology sector. However, H-1B recipients work in a variety of jobs. They can be architects, scientists, models and tattoo artists. Some are math and science teachers in rural school districts that have trouble recruiting American instructors.
How many visas are issued each year?
Congress established that 65,000 H-1B visas are available each year for workers with bachelor’s degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master’s degrees or higher. Universities and research organizations are exempt from the cap.
Why is there a lottery to choose petitions?
In the past several years, the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services has received more petitions than there are visas. If the maximum number of applications is reached during the first five business days of April, the agency holds a lottery to randomly select which petitions it will process.
Can the visas lead to permanent residence?
Very often they do. Companies can choose to sponsor an H-1B worker for permanent residence. The green card applications are often approved, though they can take years to be issued.
Where are most foreign workers from?
India is the country of origin for more than 80 percent of H-1B recipients, with China a distant second. Next in line during the 2016 fiscal year were the Philippines, South Korea and Canada.
Do H-1B workers compete with Americans?
Supporters of the visa program say they fill a critical need for talent that is not available in the United States, especially when the economy is strong and the labor market is tight. Employers must attest that an H-1B worker will not adversely impact the wages and working conditions of American workers.
Critics say that employers often hire H-1B workers for lower salaries than they would pay Americans to do the same job. They point to Americans who have been displaced when companies have outsourced areas like technology maintenance to a company that brings in H-1B workers.
Who’s right?
As usual with immigration policy, it’s complicated. More than 40,500 companies sponsored workers for H-1B visas in the 2017 fiscal year. Many employers specifically target a worker with hard-to-find expertise whom they wish to hire to do specialized work — obviously because they could not find someone in the United States to do the job. In many cases, H-1B workers have gone on to create start-ups and develop cutting-edge technology that keeps America competitive.
But there are questions about who’s benefiting, collectively. About 20 companies accounted for 32 percent of approved H-1B petitions, according to an analysis by the Migration Policy Institute. Many of the employers are global outsourcing companies from India that supply entry-level workers to retailers, insurance companies and banks. Not all. Among them are also American firms who appear to be using the program to create a pool of cheap labor.
“Big household-name American companies are just as culpable as the outsourcing companies of abusing the program,” said Norman Matloff, a professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies the H-1B program.
So there has been some misuse?
Almost everybody agrees that there has, though it is probably not as widespread as critics claim. Abuses rarely result in penalties for the companies, experts say. In one highly publicized case in 2015, some Disney employees said they were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments. Workers filed suit, but the judge dismissed the case; new litigation is pending in state court. Workers at other companies, including Toys “R” Us and New York Life Insurance Company, also said they            lost their jobs to imported workers.
Last May, the former acting director of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the agency had started “multiple investigations” into “possible misuse” of the H-1B visa program and would turn the findings over for enforcement as warranted.
Ultimately, though, it is up to Congress to change laws that govern the program, since in most cases, practices that workers may claim as abusive are not necessarily illegal as the law is written.
What changes did the Trump administration start?
At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors, saying, “We won’t let this happen anymore.”
Once in office, he ordered a review of the H-1B and other visa programs. In April 2017, he signed a “Buy American, Hire American” executive order, which has served to justify several recent changes.
For one thing, United States Citizen and Immigration Services, the federal agency that reviews the petitions, has tightened its oversight. Between January and August of last year, it issued 45 percent more challenges or requests for more evidence. That has delayed the issuance of visas, and some immigration lawyers report an increase in denials.
The agency has also stepped up the number of surprise visits by fraud teams to sites where large numbers of H-1B workers are employed. And in a policy memo earlier this year, it expanded its review of H1-B workers who are employed at third-party work sites. Now, it is requiring more details about what work will be performed, why a foreigner is needed to do it, and what wages are being paid.
What more does the administration plan to do?
The administration has said from the beginning that it would end an Obama-era program that has allowed spouses of H-1B visa holders to work, as long as they had been approved and were waiting for a green card. Those work permits have been issued under a program known as H-4EAD.
Federal authorities had also suggested they might change the selection process for H-1B visas to ensure that they are granted to the “most skilled or highest-paid” job candidates.
Finally, Trump has said he would like to scrap the lottery.
But precisely what changes are being contemplated now is still unknown.
What about the role of Congress?
More sweeping changes can occur only if Congress passes new laws or overhauls the immigration system. The Trump administration’s call to end the lottery and raise wages for H-1B visa candidates as a means of recruiting qualified American workers has support among some Democrats and Republicans.
PHOTO: H-1B visa petitions en route to a government processing center in Laguna Niguel, Calif., last year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Eros Hoagland for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (93%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); IMMIGRATION (79%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (78%); RURAL EMPLOYMENT (78%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (77%); WORKER CATEGORIES (73%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (72%); LICENSES & PERMITS (71%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (69%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (66%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (66%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (62%); ENGINEERING (62%); MATHEMATICS (62%); RURAL SCHOOLS (60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (72%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (69%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (67%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (62%); ENGINEERING (62%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (62%); RURAL SCHOOLS (60%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: January 14, 2019


End of Document
California's Boom Vanishes: 'We Are at a Tipping Point'
The New York Times
April 27, 2021 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19
Length: 972 words
Byline: By Shawn Hubler
Body


California will lose a congressional seat based on new census data, in part because of birthrate and immigration declines.
For generations, California has been America's boomtown writ large, with a population that nearly doubled to some 40 million in the last four decades alone. 
  California remains the nation's most populous state, an immense, churning window into a majority-minority national future. But new data from the Census Bureau released on Monday confirms what demographers have suspected for years.
  The boom is gone.
  Dampened by declining birthrates and federal policies that drastically slowed immigration, California's population increase of 6.1 percent over the past decade was the smallest in at least a century and less than the 7.4 percent national average, according to the census.
  For the first time in its 170-year history, the state will lose a congressional seat, with the new numbers trimming its delegation in the House to 52 members.
  ''We are at a tipping point,'' said H.D. Palmer, a spokesman for the State Department of Finance.
  Mr. Palmer stressed, however, that the new census data reflected not a mass departure but a shortage of new Californians -- the result of postponed parenthood and blocked immigration.
  Texas and other large Sun Belt states gained seats in Congress based on the new census numbers. But California officials and other experts said they were not alarmed, noting that several other large states lost seats, including New York and Pennsylvania. California's congressional delegation remains by far the nation's largest, and many noted that the issue was the pace of the state's growth and not a decrease of its overall population over the past decade.
  Some also speculated that the pandemic may have artificially depressed census participation, although the state spent more than $187 million on outreach.
  ''People who have a partisan ax to grind will no doubt use this to fuel the fiction that there is some kind of apocalyptic exodus from California,'' Mr. Palmer said, laughing. ''But from a data standpoint, that is not the case.''
  Here are some of the reasons the state's growth has slowed, and why Mr. Palmer and other experts say California may be entering a new demographic phase.
  Younger generations are waiting to have families.
  Birthrates have steadily fallen in California since the aftermath of World War II, when the baby boom first sent the state's population soaring. According to state data, births have declined by more than 15 percent in the past decade.
  The average age of first birth in California rose from 28 in 2010 to 31 by 2019, a function of living costs, employment prospects and the state's higher levels of education.
  But California's baby bust since the last census has also been more acute than in the rest of the country. Take the fertility rate, which demographers typically define as births per 1,000 women between the ages of 15 and 44.
  Nationally, that rate fell from 64.1 in 2010 to 58.3 in 2019 -- a loss of 5.8 births per 1,000 women of childbearing age. In California, however, the decline was 11.7 births. By comparison, the fertility rate in Florida dropped by fewer than four births.
  California's baby boomers have aged.
  In addition to lower birthrates, higher death rates have contributed to the slower population growth in California.
  Driven largely by aging baby boomers, deaths -- not counting those from Covid-19 -- have increased by more than 10 percent in the state over the past decade.
  Older adults have outpaced growth in children or working-age adults to become the state's fastest-growing age group. The state projects that by 2030, more than nine million Californians will be over 65.
  Housing is increasingly expensive in the state.
  The cost of housing is one of the state's signature challenges. Lisa Hershey, the executive director of Housing California, estimates the state is short at least 1.2 million units of affordable housing. The median price for a single-family home in California hit a record $758,990 in March, according to state figures, up 24 percent from a year ago.
  In 2017, according to state figures, 1.7 percent of California's population moved to other parts of the nation, and 1.3 percent of the population moved to California from other states. In 2019, 1.7 percent moved to other states while 1.0 percent moved in.
  Critics of the state's governance often contend that its system of taxation, which leans heavily on high earners, has driven out wealthy Californians. But research has shown that lower-income families are the ones departing.
  ''The people who are leaving the state are the people who can't afford to live here,'' Ms. Hershey said.
  Immigration slowed, especially during the Trump administration.
  Though a majority of Californians were born in the United States, more than a quarter of residents have come from other countries. For most of the decade, immigration more than made up for the loss of Californians deciding to move to other states.
  In the past several years, however, that stream of newcomers slowed markedly.
  Immigration represented between 0.4 and 0.5 percent of California's annual population increase through the first half of the decade, according to Mr. Palmer. But starting in 2017, when former President Donald J. Trump took office, that began to decline, to less than 0.1 percent last year.
  Among the policies that depressed immigration, state officials said, was the Trump administration's decision to sharply limit or delay applications for asylum and visas. Historically, California has been home to about 30 percent of the nation's asylum population, as well as hundreds of thousands of workers on H-1B visas.
  ''Because we are a global destination state,'' Mr. Palmer said, ''what happens in immigration affects us disproportionately.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/26/us/us-census-california.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: California's growth was dampened by declining birthrates and policies that halted immigration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARIANA DREHSLER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CENSUS (93%); BIRTHS & BIRTH RATES (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (89%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (89%); POPULATION SIZE (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (79%); BABY BOOMERS (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); MINORITY GROUPS (78%); POPULATION GROWTH (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (76%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (73%); PARENTING (73%); COST OF LIVING (72%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (71%); WORLD WAR II (50%)

Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU (57%)

Industry: PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (71%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: April 27, 2021


End of Document
Reforms for Work Visas
The New York Times
April 8, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; EDITORIAL
Length: 481 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


The debate about immigration reform has properly focused on giving the 11 million unauthorized immigrants in America a shot at citizenship. But broad reform should also include improvements to employment-based visas and green cards that make it possible to attract and keep highly skilled workers in technology, medical and educational fields, among others.
These individuals and their families often languish in a kind of immigration purgatory for a decade or more as they apply to become permanent residents and, eventually, citizens. Many are effectively required to stay with one employer for fear that they will lose their place in line for a green card. This employment trap can deprive the broader economy of their abilities and allows some companies to pay these workers below-market salaries.
There have been various proposals to improve the system, including measures that would increase the current limit of 85,000 first-time visas under the popular H-1B category used by skilled professionals. (That cap has already been reached for this year.) Others have suggested ''stapling'' a green card to the degrees of graduate students studying science, technology, engineering and math. And some have pushed for a start-up visa that would help potential entrepreneurs. Here are some sensible changes that should be part of comprehensive reform:
¶Instead of hard caps for work visas, Congress should use flexible limits that are adjusted based on economic conditions, allowing more immigration when there is a shortage of skilled workers. Policy makers should consider creating an advisory commission, as proposed by the Migration Policy Institute, that would examine the limit every year or two. In the past, lawmakers have raised or lowered the limit on H-1B visas, which stood at 195,000 from 2001 to 2003, in response to lobbying by technology companies or labor groups.
¶People admitted on work visas should be allowed to change employers after a probationary period of 12 months without losing their place in line for permanent status. This would deal with complaints of discriminatory pay practices. Also, spouses of skilled immigrants should be allowed to work if they choose; it makes no sense to waste their skills by forcing them to stay home.
¶The per-country limits that restrict immigrants from any one country to 7 percent of the 140,000 employer-sponsored green cards issued annually should be reviewed, and perhaps eliminated. These restrictions, which were first put in place in 1965 to replace racial quotas, create a green card bottleneck for workers from populous countries like India, China and Mexico.
Not every immigrant who comes on a work visa wants to settle here, and some will leave after getting a few years of work experience. But rational immigration policy should make it easier for skilled and hard-working immigrants to stay and contribute to this country.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/08/opinion/reforms-for-work-visas.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); IMMIGRATION (93%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); LABOR REGULATION & POLICY (77%); STEM EDUCATION (77%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); DISCRIMINATION (73%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (72%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (72%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (69%); NEGATIVE NEWS (69%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (66%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (60%); WAGE DISCRIMINATION (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (66%)

Geographic: CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: April 8, 2013


End of Document
Tech Roundup: Changes to the H-1B Visa Program Begin; Bits
The New York Times 
April 4, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 289 words
Byline: JIM KERSTETTER
Highlight: The federal government announced fairly small changes to the work visa program. Tech companies are still waiting for more significant alterations.
Body


While campaigning for president last year, Donald J. Trump promised changes to the H-1B visa program that brings skilled foreign workers to the United States. A critique of the program is that it can be used to replace American workers with cheaper foreign labor. Critics say that Indian outsourcing firms, in particular, use it as a shortcut to make low bids on contracts.
President Trump has yet to unveil a significant revamp of H-1Bs, but over the last few days, his administration has started to make changes.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced on Friday that entry-level computer programming jobs would no longer automatically qualify as a “specialty occupation,” which is a basic requirement for receiving an H-1B work visa. And on Monday,            the Justice Department warned that it would look closely at any employer that showed a preference for hiring H-1B workers instead of Americans.
The changes came just before the government started accepting applications for next year’s H-1B visas.
These steps will most likely fall short of dramatically affecting big tech companies like Google and Facebook. But the industry is still anticipating an executive order from Mr. Trump that could create additional changes to how H-1Bs and other work visas are issued.
More tech news:
Tesla has passed Ford in market value. While G.M. and Ford may have strong profits and healthy balance sheets, Elon Musk’s            electric vehicle company offers something Wall Street loves much more: the potential for dramatic growth.
Trump has completed the repeal of online privacy protections from the Obama era. The change will allow broadband internet service suppliers to track and sell a customer’s online information with greater ease.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); INTERNET PRIVACY (63%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (50%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (50%); Visas (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Foreign Workers (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); BIG TECH (79%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (74%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (68%); BROADBAND (63%); INTERNET PRIVACY (63%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 6, 2017


End of Document
China, Russia, Cardi B: Your Friday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
April 6, 2018 Friday 19:57 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 941 words
Byline: Karen Zraick and Sandra Stevenson
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1. Rising tensions between China and the U.S. pummeled stocks, as investors began to take seriously the risk of a trade war between the world’s two largest economies. The latest U.S.            jobs report didn’t help matters — it showed that job growth slowed in March.
Our correspondent in Shanghai says there’s a fundamental question at the heart of the dispute: Which country is more willing to endure short-term pain for the long-term gain of playing a leading role in high-tech industries?
____
2. The White House imposed new sanctions on seven of Russia’s richest oligarchs — and 17 top government officials. It’s the latest effort to punish the inner circle of President Vladimir Putin, above, for interference in the 2016 election and other alleged misdeeds.
And Facebook announced that it would require political advertisers to verify their identities. The rule is meant to prevent foreign interference in domestic politics, like the paid posts by Russian “trolls” ahead of the 2016 election.
____
3. John Kelly, above, President Trump’s chief of staff, urged him last week to fire Scott Pruitt, the E.P.A. leader mired in ethics questions. But Mr. Trump has resisted doing so.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Pruitt’s success in achieving items on the president’s agenda — including rolling back a large number of environmental regulations — may weigh heavily as a counterbalance to allegations that he misused taxpayer dollars.
“He likes the work product,” she said of Mr. Trump.
____
4. “We’re doing it for the kids.”
That was a Salvadoran woman we interviewed in the Texas border city of McAllen, explaining why she had crossed the Rio Grande on an inflatable mattress with her two sons. She said she was fleeing the threat of gang violence. Above, other migrants detained by Border Patrol agents near McAllen.
Some locals questioned President Trump’s plan to deploy the National Guard to the border. They said there was no security crisis, only the daily challenge of meeting the basic needs of migrants who arrive.
____
5. The Trump administration is also cracking down on H-1B visas, which allow skilled workers to enter the U.S. It plans to rescind a program that allowed spouses of those visa holders to work.
That would force thousands of Indian women — many of them highly educated and with sought-after skills — to leave their jobs. (The majority of H1-B visas go to Indian nationals.            Here’s how the visas work.)
“We were happily working and feeling settled down with the life we wanted,” said Deepika Jalakam, above with her parents and daughter. “Suddenly, this announcement came and there is instability.”
____
6. Park Geun-hye, South Korea’s impeached and ousted president, was sentenced to 24 years in prison on charges of bribery, coercion and abuse of power.
The corruption scandal exposed the deep ties between the country’s government and huge businesses like Samsung.
Ms. Park did not appear in court. Her supporters, mostly elderly South Koreans, have insisted on her innocence, and hundreds of them protested outside the courthouse, above.
____
7. Palestinian demonstrators and Israeli soldiers faced off along the Gaza border for the second Friday in a row. The demonstrations were smaller than last week’s, with a lower death toll: The Gaza Health Ministry said at least 10 Palestinians had been killed, and hundreds wounded.
The protests are aimed at Israel’s blockade of Gaza, which began after Hamas seized control in 2007. Our reporters say the demonstrators have already achieved a crucial aim: changing the international conversation to one in which Gaza is portrayed as a prison, with Israel as the jailer.
____
8. Can architecture help protect human rights? A firm called Forensic Architecture, based in London, is using tools of the trade to investigate violence and armed conflict around the world.
A survey of their work is now on view at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in London, and our architecture critic says it’s changing the definition of the profession. Above, a rendering of the 2014 Israel-Gaza war.
____
9. Cecil Taylor, the jazz pianist who defied the genre’s orthodoxy and became one of its most original improvisers, has died at 89.
He was a supreme example of an uncompromising artist, arguing — mainly through his work, but in principled and prickly interviews as well — against reductive definitions of what a musician of his training and background could or should do.
“What I am doing,” he once explained, “is creating a language. A different American language.”
____
10. Finally, as the hit show “Fixer Upper” ends, HGTV is looking for some new power couples. Or couples who use power tools, at least. Above, Joanna and Chip Gaines, who became stars on the series.
On the late-night shows, Jimmy Fallon said he didn’t have high hopes for President Trump’s trip to Peru for the Summit of the Americas next week: “When he saw it on his schedule, Trump was like, ‘Wait, there’s more than one America? What is this?’”
On Monday night, Mr. Fallon will have a co-host for the first time: The rapper Cardi B, who just released her first album, “Invasion of Privacy.”
Have a great weekend.
____
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning.
Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Lucas Jackson/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (87%); BORDER CONTROL (86%); ETHICS (78%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (77%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (77%); TRADE DISPUTES (77%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (75%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (74%); FACTORY WORKERS (74%); NEGATIVE POLITICAL NEWS (74%); OLIGARCHIES (74%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (73%); ELECTION CRIME (73%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (73%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING (73%); POLITICS (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (72%); POLITICAL DETAINEES (72%); IMPEACHMENT (69%); LITIGATION (69%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (69%); ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION & POLICY (67%); CORRECTIONS (65%); PRISONS (65%); SENTENCING (60%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (55%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (87%); FACTORY WORKERS (74%); POLITICAL ADVERTISING (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOHN F KELLY (79%); PARK GEUN-HYE (79%); SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS (79%); SCOTT PRUITT (71%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%)

Geographic: MCALLEN, TX, USA (86%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (73%); EAST CHINA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); CHINA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIA (90%)

Load-Date: January 24, 2020


End of Document
Do Restrictions on H-1B Visas Create American Jobs?; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
May 8, 2021 Saturday 13:11 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1579 words
Byline: Youyou Zhou
Highlight: Demand for the visas has increased despite Trump administration policies that made them less likely to be approved.
Body


Demand for the visas has increased despite Trump administration policies that made them less likely to be approved.
The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, providing reporting and analysis that offers a better understanding of an important issue in the news. If you don’t already receive the daily newsletter, sign up here.
There are millions fewer jobs in the United States than there were at the start of the pandemic, and data released on Friday showed an unexpected slowdown in hiring. In a speech to a joint session of Congress last month, President Biden said a priority of his economic rescue plan was to create “good-paying jobs that can’t be outsourced.”
Also last month, Madhur Parashar moved to Vancouver, British Columbia — and took with him his job as a product manager at a company based in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving a master’s degree from the University of Rochester, Mr. Parashar, who emigrated from India, had worked in the United States on an H-1B visa for almost 11 years.
Mr. Parashar decided to leave the United States after his wife, who is also Indian, lost her job as a corporate lawyer in April last year. Her application for the work permit granted to spouses of immigrants working legally in the United States is still pending, part of a backlog that emerged after the Trump administration changed the approval process and that grew during pandemic-related office closures.
Canada approved Mr. Parashar and his family for permanent residency through Express Entry, an immigration program for skilled workers. He asked his employer to let him work from Canada, and the company agreed.
“They kept saying that H-1Bs take away jobs from Americans,” Mr. Parashar told DealBook. “They have kind of pushed us to the point where we have to leave,” he said, noting that he works with the same clients as before.
Efforts to restrict the H-1B program, which is intended for workers with special skills though has in some cases been exploited by companies to hire cheaper labor, are often framed as a way to protect American jobs. The visas “should never, ever be used to replace American workers,” President Donald J. Trump said in 2017 when he signed a “Buy American and Hire American” executive order, which increased scrutiny of H-1B visa applications.
But does making it harder to obtain an H-1B visa result in more American jobs?
Interviews with immigration lawyers and H-1B visa applicants suggest that when the Trump administration introduced additional scrutiny of H-1B applications, companies often shifted workers or hired elsewhere instead of filling the roles with American workers.
This is consistent with research by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. In a working paper last year, she analyzed the data on U.S.-based multinational companies between 2004 and 2014 and found that those dependent on H-1B visas were more likely to expand overseas when facing immigration restrictions, like when the cap on visas was lowered in 2004.
Ms. Glennon calculated that for every 10 unfilled H-1B positions, an equivalent of three jobs were created overseas. The work that would have been done in the other seven jobs was spread around. Some was outsourced to other companies, some was done by industry-university partnerships, and a “much, much smaller” amount was done by newly hired American workers, she said.
The chances of getting an H-1B visa have never been lower. In a randomized lottery each year, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services chooses 85,000 applicants to receive the visa, a cap that has remained unchanged since 2004. This year, the lottery pool contained about 308,000 applicants, meaning only one in four applicants was selected.
Meanwhile, the chances of an application’s approval after it has been selected in the lottery have also gone down. After the “Buy American and Hire American” executive order went into effect in 2017, Citizenship and Immigration Services issued policy memos that took a stricter stance on the qualifications of workers in computer-related jobs and on requirements for consultants who typically work at client sites.
From 2016 to 2019, the percentage of H-1B applicants asked to submit additional supporting materials after being selected in the lottery increased from 21 to 40, while the approval rate dropped from 94 percent to 85 percent, according to Citizenship and Immigration Services. (The agency accounts for some denials in the lottery so that all 85,000 visas are granted regardless of the approval rate.)
The additional scrutiny of applications hit Indian outsourcing companies that operate in the United States — six of the top 15 H-1B sponsors — the hardest. But within a couple of years they recovered and hired even more H-1B workers. All but two of the top H-1B visa sponsors followed a similar pattern: The number of visas they sponsored decreased in 2018, after the new policy, but then recovered.
Lauren Jo, an immigration lawyer in New York, told DealBook that when one of her former clients, an information technology consulting company, tried to avoid compliance requirements for H-1B workers on third-party client sites by hiring only American workers for these positions, the company couldn’t make it work.
“Two or three years went by, and they just couldn’t find the right qualified workers for these jobs for U.S. workers and said, ‘OK, we have to start hiring H-1B workers for these positions,’” Ms. Jo said.
Like large outsourcing companies, tech companies are particularly reliant on H-1B visas. Foreign students make up almost half of graduates with advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering and math in the United States, and many foreign nationals who apply for U.S. work visas are already working at tech companies with student work permits, which allow them to work in the United States for up to 36 months after graduation. After that period, not getting a work visa means the company has to either let the employee go or find another way to retain the person.
Seven current and former employees of Amazon, Facebook and Google, which are among the top H-1B users, told DealBook that if they weren’t chosen in the lottery, the company would provide the option of transferring them to an overseas office and asking them to apply for an H-1B visa again the next year. Six immigration lawyers and immigration consultants confirmed that this was a typical strategy. Amazon and Google declined a request to comment on the practice, and Facebook did not respond to a request to comment.
DealBook obtained an internal training video played for foreign workers at Cerner, a medical software provider and the largest H-1B visa user in Kansas City, Mo. In the video, the company provided three options for employees who didn’t win the H-1B visa lottery: Re-enroll in a degree program and work for the company on a student visa, a practice embraced by companies and universities in recent years; move to India if they had authorization to work there; or leave the company. Cerner declined to comment on the training video.
Obtaining a work visa is getting marginally easier. The Biden administration has already lifted some of the Trump administration’s changes to the application process. Spouses of immigrants applying for work permits will no longer need to be fingerprinted and photographed, a requirement that was put in place in 2019 and lengthened processing time, forcing tens of thousands of workers, like Mr. Parashar’s wife, to wait in visa backlogs during the pandemic.
In late April, the Biden administration issued policy guidance that asked immigration officers to defer to prior decisions when reviewing visa extension cases, a long-existing practice that was rescinded in 2017. The policy memo that made it more difficult for entry-level computer programmers to get a work visa was also rescinded in January.
These changes are taking place against a backdrop of a long-term trend in work force globalization that is driven by many factors, including the availability of skills and the relative cost of labor in other countries. For example, according to a review of jobs posted on top H-1B users’ websites by the data provider Thinknum, since 2018 the share of job openings outside the United States at Accenture, Capgemini and Cognizant has grown while the share of advertised U.S. jobs has shrunk.
If companies can’t get the visas they want to sponsor foreign workers in the United States, there is little stopping them from hiring workers outside the United States. And the increasing acceptance of remote work after the pandemic may mean even more types of jobs can be filled anywhere in the world.
Ben Wright, the chief executive of Velocity Global, a professional employer organization that hires workers overseas for clients while they wait for U.S. visas, said companies had been willing to accommodate foreign workers who could not come to the United States because of pandemic restrictions.
“You’re also seeing hiring managers say, ‘My gosh, my eyes are opened to the fact that we really can work from anywhere,’” he said. “That’s pulling these companies globally in a way that has never happened.”
This article was reported with support from the McGraw Center for Business Journalism at the City University of New York’s Newmark Graduate School of Journalism.
What do you think? Let us know: dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); APPROVALS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); JOB CREATION (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (79%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (79%); EMIGRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (77%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); DISMISSALS (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); LAWYERS (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%); LICENSES & PERMITS (66%); CLOSINGS (64%); saturdaynewsletter (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Labor and Jobs (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); JOE BIDEN (79%)

Geographic: COLUMBUS, OH, USA (79%); VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (56%); OHIO, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (56%); UNITED STATES (98%); CANADA (92%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: May 11, 2021


End of Document
Waiting and Waiting for Green Cards
The New York Times
April 12, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1187 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Vishal Sankhla, an Indian engineer, is among those at the center of a storm over how to fix the nation's immigration system.
Mr. Sankhla got a master's degree in electrical engineering nine years ago from the University of Southern California, followed by a job at Cisco, then at a start-up that attracted $4.5 million in financing from Silicon Valley investors. There was only one wrinkle: he was in the country on a temporary work visa, with no idea whether or when he would get permanent residence.
He remains in limbo, which preoccupies him almost as much as running his business. ''It's a constant distraction,'' said Mr. Sankhla, who is 32. ''You can't really settle down because your visa status is uncertain.''
Silicon Valley is battling in Washington to make the immigration process easier for thousands of people like Mr. Sankhla, many of them Indian engineers, while also pushing to hire many more guest workers from abroad.
Rarely has the industry been so single-mindedly focused on a national policy issue, with executives like Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and John T. Chambers of Cisco personally involved. Its efforts seem to be paying off, as a group of eight senators negotiate details of a comprehensive immigration deal to be announced early next week.
Several lobbyists and advocates who have spoken to Senate staff members say they are optimistic about at least two items high on their wish list: a fast-track green card line for math and science graduates like Mr. Sankhla, no matter which country they come from, and a near doubling of the visas for temporary workers.
''I think we are going to get a balanced outcome, which takes advantage of the value that immigrants bring to the economy and be protective of U.S. workers,'' said Scott Corley, director of Compete America, an industry coalition that includes Google and Intel.
The contentious piece of this is the potential increase in temporary workers from abroad. Critics fear that is a ruse for lowering wages. Those critics are likely to get at least one boon from a revamped law: a requirement that companies try to find qualified American workers before hiring from abroad. The law may also make it more expensive to bring in guest workers.
The new immigration measure will almost certainly fix a situation that keeps people like Mr. Sankhla stuck in limbo for so long. The current law limits how many green cards can be issued to people from any single country, no matter how populous.
That effectively means that applicants from countries like India and China, with a large supply of young engineers often educated in American universities, wait far longer for permanent residence than those from almost every other country. The temporary employment visa, usually an H-1B, has become a kind of way station for them.
The Senate is considering eliminating the per-country quotas for those who graduate from United States universities with math, science and engineering degrees. The debate in Congress perfectly illustrates how immigration law, codified in 1965 and last revamped substantially in 1990, has lagged behind the demands of a rapidly changing economy. Unemployment in the technology industry hovers below 4 percent, far less than the national average.
In that climate, temporary visas are in such heavy demand that the total number available for the coming year -- 65,000 for skilled workers and 20,000 for those with a master's degree or higher -- were snatched up in less than five days. The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said Monday that it had received 124,000 applications in that time and had resorted to a lottery to make the final cut.
The measure being considered by lawmakers could nearly double the H-1B visas allotted yearly and possibly admit more temporary workers during periods of high demand, said several advocates who have discussed the matter with Congressional staff members and who declined to be named because the final language has not yet been released.
''If you were the human resources vice president of the United States, you would want to have a rule that says if things get busy and you need skilled people you can bring in people,'' said Dan Siciliano, a law professor at Stanford. ''At the same time you would want a way to bring highly skilled people in and perhaps at your choosing convert them to status that lets them stay much longer.''
A vast range of American organizations seek H-1B workers for technical jobs, from the Boston Red Sox baseball team to the chain store Nordstrom to technology companies like Google and Microsoft. Some of the largest blocs of H-1B petitions are taken by outsourcing companies, which makes them even more contentious, and critics say those firms import engineers with basic skills and pay them poorly.
''It invites employers to play a game of wage arbitrage,'' said Ron Hira, assistant professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology and a critic of the program. By Mr. Hira's calculation, nine out of the 10 largest chunks of H-1B petitions went to outsourcing companies, including Cognizant, which is based in New Jersey, followed by the Indian firm Tata Consultancy Services.
Guest workers themselves can be subject to unfair labor practices under American law. In one of the largest cases, Tata Consultancy Services recently settled a $29 million class-action lawsuit in California, in which it was accused of seizing the federal tax refunds of about 12,800 temporary workers from 2002 to 2005.
The settlement will award an average of $1,600 to each worker. Tata did not admit to any wrongdoing. A company spokesman declined to comment on its use of H-1B visas, citing forthcoming quarterly earnings.
A 2011 report by the Government Accountability Office found that half of all H-1Bs were brought in at entry-level wages. The new bill may require companies to pay higher wages for temporary workers. It is unclear whether that would apply only to outsourcing firms.
Supporters of the program point out that new H-1B workers admitted every year represent less than 1 percent of the total American work force, and that outsourcing firms represent a minority of employers. Stuart Anderson, executive director of the National Foundation for American Policy, concluded that in the last five years, the 25 largest outsourcing firms accounted for 7 percent to 27 percent of all new H-1Bs issued.
As for the rest, many are used by would-be immigrants to find jobs and then wait for green cards.
Mr. Sankhla switched from an H-1B to another temporary category reserved for people of ''extraordinary ability,'' which allowed him to continue with his start-up, Viralheat, which is based in San Mateo, Calif., and mines consumer sentiment on social media platforms like Facebook. Among his 16 employees, nearly half are on temporary visas while they wait for green cards. Mr. Sankhla's own green card application was rejected once. He is trying again.
A new immigration law will have a great impact on his entire family. His wife, an engineer at Netflix, is on an H-1B visa, and his brother, headed here from Bombay, has one, too.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/12/technology/tech-firms-push-to-hire-more-workers-from-abroad.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Vishal Sankhla, center, has a temporary work visa. He said: ''It's a constant distraction. You can't really settle down because your visa status is uncertain.'' (B1)
Vishal Sankhla is the founder of the start-up Viralheat
both he and his wife, who works for Netflix, have temporary work visas. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Scott Corley, center, of Compete America, and Rebecca Peters of American Council on International Personnel with Enrique Gonzalez of Marco Rubio's office. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL ROSENBAUM FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (77%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (77%); ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (73%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (72%); LOBBYING (72%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (57%);  FACEBOOK INC (55%);  GOOGLE INC (52%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA (58%); GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (55%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (57%); FB (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (89%); ENGINEERING (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (77%); ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (73%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (72%)

Person: JOHN T CHAMBERS (56%); MARK ZUCKERBERG (56%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (91%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (89%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 12, 2013


End of Document
Tech Roundup: Changes to the H-1B Visa Program Begin
The New York Times
April 5, 2017 Wednesday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. ; BITS
Length: 292 words
Byline: By JIM KERSTETTER
Body


While campaigning for president last year, Donald J. Trump promised changes to the H-1B visa program that brings skilled foreign workers to the United States. A critique of the program is that it can be used to replace American workers with cheaper foreign labor. Critics say that Indian outsourcing firms, in particular, use it as a shortcut to make low bids on contracts.
President Trump has yet to unveil a significant revamp of H-1Bs, but over the last few days, his administration has started to make changes. 
  The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services announced on Friday that entry-level computer programming jobs would no longer automatically qualify as a ''specialty occupation,'' which is a basic requirement for receiving an H-1B work visa. And on Monday, the Justice Department warned that it would look closely at any employer that showed a preference for hiring H-1B workers instead of Americans.
  The changes came just before the government started accepting applications for next year's H-1B visas.
  These steps will most likely fall short of dramatically affecting big tech companies like Google and Facebook. But the industry is still anticipating an executive order from Mr. Trump that could create additional changes to how H-1Bs and other work visas are issued.
  More tech news:
  Tesla has passed Ford in market value. While G.M. and Ford may have strong profits and healthy balance sheets, Elon Musk's electric vehicle company offers something Wall Street loves much more: the potential for dramatic growth.
  Trump has completed the repeal of online privacy protections from the Obama era. The change will allow broadband internet service suppliers to track and sell a customer's online information with greater ease.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/04/technology/tech-roundup-changes-to-the-h-1b-visa-program-begin.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); ANNUAL FINANCIAL RESULTS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); ELECTRIC VEHICLE INDUSTRY (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (68%); INTERNET PRIVACY (63%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (50%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (50%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (55%);  FACEBOOK INC (55%)

Organization: US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (56%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (93%); BIG TECH (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (74%); ELECTRIC VEHICLE INDUSTRY (73%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (68%); BROADBAND (63%); INTERNET PRIVACY (63%); ELECTRIC VEHICLES (50%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); ELON MUSK (78%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 5, 2017


End of Document
Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy
The New York Times 
April 6, 2018 Friday 10:54 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1886 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Spouses of skilled workers from India have been told that their work permits, which can mean the difference between struggling and thriving, are likely to be revoked.
Body


LIVERMORE, Calif. — For seven years, Deepika Jalakam sat at home. Bored, unfulfilled and dependent on her husband for every dime, she struggled with the notion that her professional life was doomed in the land of opportunity.
So when the employment card arrived in the mail in 2015, Ms. Jalakam did what she often does when good fortune comes her way: She placed it before the gods in the Hindu shrine mounted in her kitchen cabinet, blessed it with a dab of red “kum kum” powder and recited a prayer of gratitude.
Within weeks, Ms. Jalakam, who has a degree in biotechnology, landed a job as an analyst at an insurance company. The next year, she and her husband, Vinay Kumar, a software engineer, bought a house. In 2017, the finances of the Indian immigrant couple were secure enough that they decided to have a second child.
All that planning, though, is in jeopardy. Ms. Jalakam and thousands of other spouses of skilled workers have been told that their special work permits — authorization that can mean the difference between struggling and thriving in their adopted homeland — are likely to be revoked.
[Do H-1B visas harm American workers? Read more here.]
The Trump administration announced last fall that, as part of a crackdown on H-1B visas issued for skilled workers to enter the United States, it plans to rescind an Obama-era program that allowed spouses to work. The change, expected in June, would mean that thousands of mainly Indian women who followed their husbands to the United States will have to give up their jobs — even though many are highly educated workers with sought-after skills.
“We were happily working and feeling settled down with the life we wanted. Suddenly, this announcement came and there is instability,” said Ms. Jalakam, 32, who now finds herself worrying about everything from day-to-day spending to vacation plans.
Across the country, thousands of Indian families are caught in a similar dilemma because of the outsized role that they play in the H-1B visa program.
The annual visa scramble began this week, with applications delivered by the truckload to government processing centers. The petitions represent tens of thousands of foreigners vying for the opportunity to work in the United States for three years or longer.
Many are Indian software engineers and computer programmers recruited by American technology companies that say they cannot find enough talent in this country. Among the applicants are Indian math and science teachers headed for rural schools, as well as physicians and other professionals.
But the H-1B program has spawned controversy. During his campaign, President Trump invited Americans displaced by H-1B workers to his rallies. Since taking office, he has ordered the program’s overhaul, and his administration has taken steps to tighten scrutiny of applications.
Still, demand for the visas continues unabated. In 2018, for the sixth consecutive year, the federal government was so flooded with petitions it stopped accepting them within a week. On Friday, officials announced they had reached their annual cap within five days and would resort again to a computer lottery to select the targeted 85,000 recipients. Universities and research organizations are exempt from the cap.
Nearly 365,000 H-1B petitions were approved in the 2017 fiscal year. This number includes first-time applications subject to the cap and renewals, which are not capped. Three-quarters of them went to Indian nationals.
Their success has been a mixed blessing. Tens of thousands of Indians on the temporary visas were later sponsored by their employers to remain permanently in the United States, but their families are in limbo, stuck in a ballooning backlog of green cards that are approved but cannot yet be issued.
While skilled workers from most countries receive permanent residency a year or two after applying, Indians must wait a decade or longer because of their large numbers. The delays have meant that until recently thousands of women, many highly educated, remained at home while their husbands worked.
Children must also wait. If their family’s green card is not approved before they turn 21, the children are no longer eligible for legal residency as dependents and must leave the country, though they may have spent much of their lives in the United States. The much-debated legal protection for so-called Dreamers, the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, applies to children who entered the country illegally, not to the offspring of legal immigrants.
The Obama administration attempted a partial fix to the problem in 2015, authorizing temporary work permits for spouses of H-1B visa holders who were in the pipeline to get a green card. Under the program, known as H-4EAD, an estimated 100,000 spouses, overwhelmingly women, have obtained work permits.
“I felt like I was free from a cage to fly in any direction I want,” Ms. Jalakam said of her work authorization that year.
Last fall’s announcement that the temporary work program would soon be scrapped has energized Indian women. Many who had sunk money into property and other investments with earnings from their jobs took to Twitter, using #standwithh4ead and #saveh4ead to raise awareness of their plight.
“We’re determined to save our jobs,” said Jansi Kumar of Seattle, a founder of a Facebook page started in December, “Save H4EAD,” which has attracted nearly 5,000 followers. In early February, about 500 Indians descended on Capitol Hill to press for a solution to the green card backlog. At a rally, they hoisted posters that read, “Legal Immigrants Matter Too” and “#H4EAD Let Spouses Work.”
On the other hand, a group of information technology workers who lost their jobs to imported workers has filed suit to overturn the spousal work authorization program. The Department of Homeland Security, the federal agency which oversees the program, said it was completing an economic analysis and was likely to render its decision in June.
L. Francis Cissna, director of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the Department of Homeland Security agency that issues the permits, said the Trump administration’s priority was to protect American workers. “The reason there is a lot of concern about Americans being displaced is because it is happening,” he said in a recent interview.
In January, the Information Technology Industry Council, which represents titans like Apple, IBM and Microsoft, argued in a letter to the administration that revoking spousal work permits could prompt foreign talent to leave the United States and put American companies at a competitive disadvantage.
“Their valued, long-term employees will choose to leave their companies for other employment opportunities in countries that allow these workers and their families to raise their standard of living,” the council warned.
Doug Rand, former assistant director for entrepreneurship in the Obama administration, said Indian immigrants have long been “essential for American technological innovation” and offering work permits to spouses makes sense. “If it weren’t for these outrageous backlogs, they would be Americans already,” he said.
The backlog that is creating the problem is a byproduct of immigration laws drafted decades ago.
In 1965, Congress established that no country could receive more than 7 percent of green cards issued in a year. In 1990, it determined that only 140,000 employment-based green cards could be granted annually, and each family member requires a separate card.
Then the rise of the tech sector created a surge in demand for workers. Indians had the skills that American companies prized, so employers turned to the nonimmigrant H-1B visa to import them. Down the road, companies chose to sponsor many of the visa holders for green cards, which because of the annual caps created the current backlog.
In June 2015, the latest year for which official data is available, about 300,000 Indians, including spouses and children, were waiting for their permanent residency cards. Indians in the green-card process since 2008 are only now receiving them.
“No one should be stuck waiting more than 10 years for a green card. It hurts employers and employees and their families,” said Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor of immigration law at Cornell Law School. “Indians are being held hostage by our broken immigration system.”
Some families have had to wait so long that they fear their children will reach adulthood and be forced to leave. Lakshmi Vishnubhotla, who has worked for 10 years as a teacher in Marion County, S.C., is currently sponsored for an H-1B by the school district. He was named teacher of the year for the district in 2015-16.
Mr. Vishnubhotla’s green card application, which includes his family, was approved in 2012. They are still waiting for the cards to be issued. Given that the wait time is 10 years, and getting longer, he is worried. In seven years, his 14-year-old daughter, Sivani, will be considered an adult. His son, Sarvan, will turn 21 in nine years. At that time, they will no longer be eligible for green cards as Mr. Vishnubhotla’s dependents and could be forced to return to India.
“We don’t want to split our family,” Mr. Vishnubhotla said.
Teachers who arrived after him, including some whom he trained from Jamaica, Venezuela and elsewhere, already have permanent residency.
Jigar Madlani, a software engineer in Parsippany, N.J., came on an H-1B and hisgreen card was approved in 2013. But none of the family’s cards have been issued, and he fears his wife, Heta, will soon lose her ability to work.
Armed with an H-4EAD permit, she was hired in late 2015 as a case manager for New Jersey’s 211 line, handling calls from drug addicts, homeless families, victims of domestic violence and others in crisis seeking help.
“I had no identity in this country. I got it, and now they want to take it away from me,” Ms. Madlani said.
Back in California, Ms. Jalakam dreads returning to the days when she filled her time tutoring students in math and taking online technology courses.
“I would see a woman all dressed up as an executive and wonder, ‘Will I ever be like that?’” recalled Ms. Jalakam, whose family’s green card was approved in 2010 but is still unissued.
Now that she has a well-paying job, Ms. Jalakam’s main fear is losing it. She was pregnant with their second child when the administration announced plans to rescind the work authorizations. She began fretting about how they would afford their $4,800 monthly mortgage.
She found like-minded women on the “SaveH4EAD” Facebook page, and felt better, she said. “I realized there are strong-willed women like me who really want to work.”
PHOTO: Deepika Jalakam held her daughter Reya with her parents Rukmini, left, and Sadanand Jalakam, right, at her home. Ms. Jalakam fears that she will be forced to give up her job because of changes in visa programs by the Trump adminstration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jim Wilson/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
    • Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump
    • ‘I Am a Pawn’: Trump’s Immigration Fight With California Squeezes Those Caught in the Middle
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • When the Elderly Call for Help, a ‘Chain’ Immigrant Often Answers
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LICENSES & PERMITS (90%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (77%); FAMILY (77%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (76%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (74%); ENGINEERING (74%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (68%); RURAL SCHOOLS (66%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (63%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (50%); Trump, Donald J (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); India (%); Women and Girls (%); H1-B visas (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (88%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (88%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (74%); ENGINEERING (74%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (74%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); RURAL SCHOOLS (66%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (59%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: April 10, 2018


End of Document
Restrictions on H-1B Visas May Not Actually Create Lots of American Jobs
The New York Times
May 10, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2; DEALBOOK NEWSLETTER
Length: 1582 words
Byline: By Youyou Zhou
Body


Demand for the visas has increased despite Trump administration policies that made them less likely to be approved.
The DealBook newsletter delves into a single topic or theme every weekend, providing reporting and analysis that offers a better understanding of an important issue in the news. If you don't already receive the daily newsletter, sign up here. 
  There are millions fewer jobs in the United States than there were at the start of the pandemic, and data released on Friday showed an unexpected slowdown in hiring. In a speech to a joint session of Congress last month, President Biden said a priority of his economic rescue plan was to create ''good-paying jobs that can't be outsourced.''
  Also last month, Madhur Parashar moved to Vancouver, British Columbia -- and took with him his job as a product manager at a company based in Columbus, Ohio. After receiving a master's degree from Rochester University, Mr. Parashar, who emigrated from India, had worked in the United States on an H-1B visa for almost 11 years.
  Mr. Parashar decided to leave the United States after his wife, who is also Indian, lost her job as a corporate lawyer in April last year. Her application for the work permit granted to spouses of immigrants working legally in the United States is still pending, part of a backlog that emerged after the Trump administration changed the approval process and that grew during pandemic-related office closures.
  Canada approved Mr. Parashar and his family for permanent residency through Express Entry, an immigration program for skilled workers. He asked his employer to let him work from Canada, and the company agreed.
  ''They kept saying that H-1Bs take away jobs from Americans,'' Mr. Parashar told DealBook. ''They have kind of pushed us to the point where we have to leave,'' he said, noting that he works with the same clients as before.
  Efforts to restrict the H-1B program, which is intended for workers with special skills though has in some cases been exploited by companies to hire cheaper labor, are often framed as a way to protect American jobs. The visas ''should never, ever be used to replace American workers,'' President Donald J. Trump said in 2017 when he signed a ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order, which increased scrutiny of H-1B visa applications.
  But does making it harder to obtain an H-1B visa result in more American jobs?
  Interviews with immigration lawyers and H-1B visa applicants suggest that when the Trump administration introduced additional scrutiny of H-1B applications, companies often shifted workers or hired elsewhere instead of filling the roles with American workers.
  This is consistent with research by Britta Glennon, an assistant professor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. In a working paper last year, she analyzed the data on U.S.-based multinational companies between 2004 and 2014 and found that those dependent on H-1B visas were more likely to expand overseas when facing immigration restrictions, like when the cap on visas was lowered in 2004.
  Ms. Glennon calculated that for every 10 unfilled H-1B positions, an equivalent of three jobs were created overseas. The work that would have been done in the other seven jobs was spread around. Some was outsourced to other companies, some was done by industry-university partnerships, and a ''much, much smaller'' amount was done by newly hired American workers, she said.
  The chances of getting an H-1B visa have never been lower. In a randomized lottery each year, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services chooses 85,000 applicants to receive the visa, a cap that has remained unchanged since 2004. This year, the lottery pool contained about 308,000 applicants, meaning only one in four applicants was selected.
  Meanwhile, the chances of an application's approval after it has been selected in the lottery have also gone down. After the ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order went into effect in 2017, Citizenship and Immigration Services issued policy memos that took a stricter stance on the qualifications of workers in computer-related jobs and on requirements for consultants who typically work at client sites.
  From 2016 to 2019, the percentage of H-1B applicants asked to submit additional supporting materials after being selected in the lottery increased from 21 to 40, while the approval rate dropped from 94 percent to 85 percent, according to Citizenship and Immigration Services. (The agency accounts for some denials in the lottery so that all 85,000 visas are granted regardless of the approval rate.)
  The additional scrutiny of applications hit Indian outsourcing companies that operate in the United States -- six of the top 15 H-1B sponsors -- the hardest. But within a couple of years they recovered and hired even more H-1B workers. All but two of the top H-1B visa sponsors followed a similar pattern: The number of visas they sponsored decreased in 2018, after the new policy, but then recovered.
  Lauren Jo, an immigration lawyer in New York, told DealBook that when one of her former clients, an information technology consulting company, tried to avoid compliance requirements for H-1B workers on third-party client sites by hiring only American workers for these positions, the company couldn't make it work.
  ''Two or three years went by, and they just couldn't find the right qualified workers for these jobs for U.S. workers and said, 'OK, we have to start hiring H-1B workers for these positions,''' Ms. Jo said.
  Like large outsourcing companies, tech companies are particularly reliant on H-1B visas. Foreign students make up almost half of graduates with advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering and math in the United States, and many foreign nationals who apply for U.S. work visas are already working at tech companies with student work permits, which allow them to work in the United States for up to 36 months after graduation. After that period, not getting a work visa means the company has to either let the employee go or find another way to retain the person.
  Seven current and former employees of Amazon, Facebook and Google, which are among the top H-1B users, told DealBook that if they weren't chosen in the lottery, the company would provide the option of transferring them to an overseas office and asking them to apply for an H-1B visa again the next year. Six immigration lawyers and immigration consultants confirmed that this was a typical strategy. Amazon and Google declined a request to comment on the practice, and Facebook did not respond to a request to comment.
  DealBook obtained an internal training video played for foreign workers at Cerner, a medical software provider and the largest H-1B visa user in Kansas City, Mo. In the video, the company provided three options for employees who didn't win the H-1B visa lottery: Re-enroll in a degree program and work for the company on a student visa, a practice embraced by companies and universities in recent years; move to India if they had authorization to work there; or leave the company. Cerner declined to comment on the training video.
  Obtaining a work visa is getting marginally easier. The Biden administration has already lifted some of the Trump administration's changes to the application process. Spouses of immigrants applying for work permits will no longer need to be fingerprinted and photographed, a requirement that was put in place in 2019 and lengthened processing time, forcing tens of thousands of workers, like Mr. Parashar's wife, to wait in visa backlogs during the pandemic.
  In late April, the Biden administration issued policy guidance that asked immigration officers to defer to prior decisions when reviewing visa extension cases, a long-existing practice that was rescinded in 2017. The policy memo that made it more difficult for entry-level computer programmers to get a work visa was also rescinded in January.
  These changes are taking place against a backdrop of a long-term trend in work force globalization that is driven by many factors, including the availability of skills and the relative cost of labor in other countries. For example, according to a review of jobs posted on top H-1B users' websites by the data provider Thinknum, since 2018 the share of job openings outside the United States at Accenture, Capgemini and Cognizant has grown while the share of advertised U.S. jobs has shrunk.
  If companies can't get the visas they want to sponsor foreign workers in the United States, there is little stopping them from hiring workers outside the United States. And the increasing acceptance of remote work after the pandemic may mean even more types of jobs can be filled anywhere in the world.
  Ben Wright, the chief executive of Velocity Global, a professional employer organization that hires workers overseas for clients while they wait for U.S. visas, said companies had been willing to accommodate foreign workers who could not come to the United States because of pandemic restrictions.
  ''You're also seeing hiring managers say, 'My gosh, my eyes are opened to the fact that we really can work from anywhere,''' he said. ''That's pulling these companies globally in a way that has never happened.''
  This article was reported with support from the McGraw Center for Business Journalism at the City University of New York's Newmark Graduate School of Journalism.
  What do you think? Let us know: dealbook@nytimes.com

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/08/business/dealbook/h1b-visas-us-jobs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); APPROVALS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); EMIGRATION (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (77%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (77%); OUTSOURCING (77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (75%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (73%); DISMISSALS (72%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%); LAWYERS (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (67%); LICENSES & PERMITS (65%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAWYERS (71%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (67%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); JOE BIDEN (79%)

Geographic: COLUMBUS, OH, USA (79%); VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (56%); OHIO, USA (79%); BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (56%); UNITED STATES (99%); CANADA (92%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: May 10, 2021


End of Document
Migrant Bill Seems to Fit Tech Sector Wish List
The New York Times
April 17, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 5
Length: 523 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- This could be Silicon Valley's biggest win yet in Washington.
The proposed overhaul of immigration law contains much of what the technology industry wished for: An easier green card route for foreigners educated at American universities in math and science; a new visa category for entrepreneurs; and more guest workers to be deployed on short-term projects.
Beyond the specific provisions, which are likely to be debated extensively once legislation is introduced on Capitol Hill, a summary released Tuesday by a bipartisan committee of eight senators is a clear nod to a prospering and more politically powerful technology industry.
It shifts the emphasis in immigration policy from one that prioritized family ties to one that will prioritize professional degrees, making it easier for people with math and science skills to settle here. ''That major reorganization tells me this Congress recognizes that the knowledge economy is going to drive the overall economy,'' said Robert Hoffman, a longtime Washington lobbyist and vice president of the Information Technology Industry Council, a group of some of the largest technology employers, including I.B.M. and Microsoft.
''The devil is in details,'' Mr. Hoffman said. ''We've got to look under the legislative hood, which is what we'll do when we get the bill.''
The summary contains an important nod to critics of the temporary employment visas, known as H-1Bs. It makes it significantly more expensive for the mostly Indian outsourcing companies that supply engineers and other computer specialists to American companies for short-term projects and that are accused of depressing wages in the industry.
The summary released by the so-called Gang of Eight would raise fees for those companies with United States work forces made up mostly of guest workers.
In effect, a company like Tata Consultancy Services, of India, which brings computer workers from abroad to work temporarily at American companies, would pay a surcharge to import guest workers.
By contrast, a company like Microsoft would not, because although it imports thousands of guest workers, a majority of its employees are United States citizens or residents. Eventually, companies with a preponderance of guest workers would be ineligible to bring in more, according to the summary.
It also proposes to raise wages for all guest workers here on an H-1B visa and requires employers to advertise job openings to prospective American workers. It would raise the total number of H-1B visas to 110,000 a year, from the current 65,000, with a provision for as many as 180,000 during years of demonstrably high demand.
''From my read of it, it has Silicon Valley with protections for American workers, if indeed all of this is eventually passed,'' said Neil Ruiz, an associate fellow at the Brookings Institution.
The summary also seeks to reduce the wait for math and science graduates who apply for green cards, regardless of their home country. Today, because every country is eligible for the same share of employment-based green cards, applicants from China and India wait far longer than virtually anywhere else.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/17/technology/tech-sector-seen-as-benefiting-in-immigration-bill.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); IMMIGRATION (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); NEW ECONOMY (78%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (78%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (77%); LABOR FORCE (77%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (77%); US CONGRESS (77%); BIPARTISANSHIP (76%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); OUTSOURCING (76%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (72%); EMPLOYMENT LISTINGS & SITES (71%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (71%); LOBBYING (71%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (68%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (55%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (53%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (55%); TCS (NSE) (53%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (55%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (53%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (53%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (53%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (53%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (53%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (53%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (73%); CONSULTING SERVICES (71%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (89%); UNITED STATES (98%)

Load-Date: April 17, 2013


End of Document
How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 05:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1525 words
Byline: VINDU GOEL
Highlight: No immediate changes are expected. But the order asks various federal agencies to recommend changes.
Body


Correction Appended
President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that directs federal agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote “Hire American” policies.
The order makes no immediate changes to work visa programs but tells the Departments of Labor, Justice, Homeland Security and State to study existing laws and procedures and recommend changes.
In the case of one program, H-1B temporary visas, the order directs the agencies to suggest changes to help ensure that the visas are awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers. “Right now, H-1B visas are awarded in a totally random lottery, and that’s wrong,” Mr. Trump said at the signing in Kenosha, Wis.
The order also calls for a crackdown on fraud and abuse in the current system of work visas — which the agencies had already signaled they would do.
What is the H-1B program, and why is the president focused on it?
The H-1B program grants 65,000 work visas a year to foreigners, with 20,000 more visas granted to foreigners with advanced degrees and an unlimited number of extra visas available for universities, teaching hospitals and other nonprofit organizations. The program is aimed at highly skilled workers, and most of the visas are awarded to technology companies, although other specialty industries such as fashion also use the visas. (Melania Trump, the first lady, worked as a model on an H-1B visa.)
Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. All H-1B employers are also required to pay prevailing wages to the immigrant workers who receive the visas.
Labor Department data shows that about 40 percent of the visas go to entry-level workers and another 40 percent go to people with limited experience and skills. The Trump administration says that more of the jobs performed by those people could and should be filled by Americans.
How are the visas allocated?
Visa applications must be sponsored by employers. Every April 1, the government begins accepting applications for the next fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1. This year, the government received 199,000 H-1B applications in the first five days and then stopped accepting them.
Because there are more applicants than visas, the visas are awarded by lottery. Each visa is good for three years and can be renewed for three more years. Immigrants who are applying for a permanent residency visa, known as a green card, can typically stay longer while waiting for approval.
In 2015, President Obama expanded the program to allow the spouses of H-1B visa holders to also work in the United States, but in a recent court filing, the Trump administration said it was reviewing that policy.
It is not clear exactly how many foreigners are in the United States on H-1B visas, but analysts estimate 650,000 to 900,000. In recent years, about 70 percent of the visas have been issued to citizens of India.
Who employs these H-1B visa holders?
The biggest employers are India-based outsourcing companies like Wipro Technologies, Infosys, Tech Mahindra and Tata Consultancy Services. These firms contract with banks, health care companies and other businesses to handle various computing tasks and bring in thousands of immigrants to do the work. Outsourcing companies based in the United States, particularly IBM and Cognizant, also use large numbers of H-1B workers.
The leading American technology companies, including Google, Microsoft and Apple, employ thousands of H-1B workers. Two companies, Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm, are heavily dependent on H-1B visas, with at least 15 percent of their American workforces holding the visas, according to federal filings. Thousands of Silicon Valley start-ups also hire some H-1B workers.
How do these foreign workers contribute to the American economy?
American technology companies argue that there is a shortage of qualified Americans for scientific and programming jobs, forcing them to turn overseas for workers to meet their hiring needs.
In addition, immigrants or their children have played key roles in founding many technology companies, including giants like Apple, Google and Intel and up-and-comers like WhatsApp and Airbnb.
The Indian outsourcers, which generally pay lower wages and operate in a different part of the technology ecosystem, say they are helping American companies cut spending on certain basic services so they can keep employing higher-paid workers in other parts of their businesses. R. Chandrashekhar, the president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, a group that represents the Indian technology industry, says that more than three-quarters of the Fortune 500, America’s largest companies by sales, use the Indian outsourcers for some operations.
“These services play a critical role in ensuring that corporate America remains a job-creation engine,” Mr. Chandrashekhar said.
Still, Indian outsourcing companies are preparing for a world of fewer visas, shifting the work to people in India and other countries.
Are American workers hurt by immigrant work visa programs?
Some studies suggest that universities grant technology degrees to more than enough American students to fill all the open jobs in the United States, so critics of the visas say the program is unnecessary. Silicon Valley companies often do not cast a wide net for American job candidates. Instead, they compete to hire the same graduates of the top colleges for many jobs and rely heavily on immigrants to fill out their workforces.
Under the H-1B program, all companies have to attest that they are paying foreign workers prevailing wages and that their existing workers will not be adversely affected, said Russ Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, the American branch of IEEE, the largest professional association for computer scientists and electrical engineers. “But all you have to do is check a box.”
In some cases — at Walt Disney and at the            University of California, San Francisco, for instance — employers laid off workers and replaced them with cheaper immigrants employed by outsourcing companies.
Foreign workers can also be abused by the visa programs. The H-1B visa is tied to a specific employer, which means the visa holder cannot easily change jobs. Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, who has long pushed for changes, said some H-1B holders earned less than their stated salaries because they were forced to repay their employer for various expenses, such as travel.
What changes are under consideration for visa programs?
The Trump administration was vague about what it would like to change. In a background briefing with reporters, officials said they were considering changing the wage levels that would qualify for visas, raising fees for H-1B applications and steering more visas to immigrants with advanced degrees.
The government will also publicly release more data about other visa programs, such as the L-1, which allows workers officially employed overseas by a company to work in the United States. “We don’t know how many L-1s are here, who employs them, where they are located and what they are paid,” said Ronil Hira, an associate professor of political science at Howard University who has extensively studied immigrant visa programs.
Many in Congress support changing the H-1B lottery system to give preference to the highest-paying jobs. “We should allocate visas based on who wants to pay the highest salary to avoid undercutting the wages of American workers,” said Ms. Lofgren, who has sponsored one of several bills on the topic.
Such a change would favor established American technology companies, which tend to pay high wages, and hurt the outsourcing companies, which hire immigrants to do more basic work at lower wages. But there is a risk of collateral damage to start-ups, which pay less in cash but award stock to new hires, and to hospitals, which recruit immigrants for nursing and other nontech jobs.
Changes to work visas could also be wrapped into a broader immigration bill. Mr. Trump recently told members of Congress that he was open to discussing that approach.
Correction: June 29, 2017, Thursday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article on April 19 about President Trump’s “Hire American” order referred incorrectly to the application process for employers seeking to hire H-1B workers. The employers must attest that they are paying the foreign workers prevailing wages and that the working conditions of existing workers will not be adversely affected. They do not have to attest that they tried to find an American first. This correction was delayed because the error was pointed out to editors only recently.
PHOTO: Infosys, an Indian outsourcing company facing more pressure in the U.S. as a major employer of H-1B visa holders, has opened offices in countries like Poland. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM LACH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
    • Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
    • Changes to Tech Worker Visas Are Cosmetic. For Now.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); PREVAILING WAGES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Trump, Donald J (%); H-1B Visa Program (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); SPONSORSHIP (78%); ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS (72%); HOSPITALS (51%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); MELANIA TRUMP (79%); BARACK OBAMA (78%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: WISCONSIN, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: December 21, 2017


End of Document
What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
The New York Times
April 7, 2018 Saturday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 
Length: 1283 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


It is H-1B visa season, and American companies seeking high-skilled foreign workers have been rushing to submit applications for visas since the government started accepting them on Monday. For the sixth consecutive year, the federal government was flooded with so many petitions that it announced Friday that it had already reached its annual cap of 85,000 of these visas in just five days.
Hailed by proponents as vital to American innovation, the program has also been criticized for displacing United States workers with cheaper foreign labor. 
  [Read how a planned change by the Trump administration puts the jobs of thousands on Indian women in jeopardy.]
  Critics also want to end special work permits issued to some spouses of workers on H-1B visas.
  What is the H-1B visa?
  It is a temporary visa that employers use to hire foreigners in ''specialty occupations'' for which there are not enough skilled American workers to fill available jobs. The workers must have at least a bachelor's degree. It enables those employed to legally work in the United States for three years, with the possibility of extensions.
  How does a worker get a visa?
  Companies identify a worker they wish to hire and submit a petition on the candidate's behalf. The typical petition is a collection of forms and documents describing the job and the unique qualifications of the person chosen to fill it.
  Are all H-1B recipients in the technology sector?
  Many are software engineers, computer programmers and other workers in the technology sector. However, H-1B recipients work in a variety of jobs. They can be architects, scientists, models and tattoo artists. Some are math and science teachers in rural school districts that have trouble recruiting American instructors.
  How many visas are issued each year?
  Congress established that 65,000 H-1B visas are available each year for workers with bachelor's degrees, and 20,000 more are earmarked for those with master's degrees or higher. Universities and research organizations are exempt from the cap.
  Why is there a lottery to choose petitions?
  In the past several years, the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services has received more petitions than there are visas. If the maximum number of applications is reached during the first five business days of April, the agency holds a lottery to randomly select which petitions it will process.
  Can the visas lead to permanent residence?
  Very often they do. Companies can choose to sponsor an H-1B worker for permanent residence. The green card applications are often approved, though they can take years to be issued.
  Where are most foreign workers from?
  India is the country of origin for more than 80 percent of H-1B recipients, with China a distant second. Next in line during the 2016 fiscal year were the Philippines, South Korea and Canada.
  Do H-1B workers compete with Americans?
  Supporters of the visa program say they fill a critical need for talent that is not available in the United States, especially when the economy is strong and the labor market is tight. Employers must attest that an H-1B worker will not adversely impact the wages and working conditions of American workers.
  Critics say that employers often hire H-1B workers for lower salaries than they would pay Americans to do the same job. They point to Americans who have been displaced when companies have outsourced areas like technology maintenance to a company that brings in H-1B workers.
  Who's right?
  As usual with immigration policy, it's complicated. More than 40,500 companies sponsored workers for H-1B visas in the 2017 fiscal year. Many employers specifically target a worker with hard-to-find expertise whom they wish to hire to do specialized work -- obviously because they could not find someone in the United States to do the job. In many cases, H-1B workers have gone on to create start-ups and develop cutting-edge technology that keeps America competitive.
  But there are questions about who's benefiting, collectively. About 20 companies accounted for 32 percent of approved H-1B petitions, according to an analysis by the Migration Policy Institute. Many of the employers are global outsourcing companies from India that supply entry-level workers to retailers, insurance companies and banks. Not all. Among them are also American firms who appear to be using the program to create a pool of cheap labor.
  ''Big household-name American companies are just as culpable as the outsourcing companies of abusing the program,'' said Norman Matloff, a professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies the H-1B program.
  So there has been some misuse?
  Almost everybody agrees that there has, though it is probably not as widespread as critics claim. Abuses rarely result in penalties for the companies, experts say. In one highly publicized case in 2015, some Disney employees said they were told to train their foreign replacements if they wanted severance payments. Workers filed suit, but the judge dismissed the case; new litigation is pending in state court. Workers at other companies, including Toys ''R'' Us and New York Life Insurance Company, also said they lost their jobs to imported workers.
  Last May, the former acting director of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the agency had started ''multiple investigations'' into ''possible misuse'' of the H-1B visa program and would turn the findings over for enforcement as warranted.
  Ultimately, though, it is up to Congress to change laws that govern the program, since in most cases, practices that workers may claim as abusive are not necessarily illegal as the law is written.
  What changes did the Trump administration start?
  At campaign rallies, Mr. Trump introduced laid-off Americans who had been asked to train their foreign successors, saying, ''We won't let this happen anymore.''
  Once in office, he ordered a review of the H-1B and other visa programs. In April 2017, he signed a ''Buy American, Hire American'' executive order, which has served to justify several recent changes.
  For one thing, United States Citizen and Immigration Services, the federal agency that reviews the petitions, has tightened its oversight. Between January and August of last year, it issued 45 percent more challenges or requests for more evidence. That has delayed the issuance of visas, and some immigration lawyers report an increase in denials.
  The agency has also stepped up the number of surprise visits by fraud teams to sites where large numbers of H-1B workers are employed. And in a policy memo earlier this year, it expanded its review of H1-B workers who are employed at third-party work sites. Now, it is requiring more details about what work will be performed, why a foreigner is needed to do it, and what wages are being paid.
  What more does the administration plan to do?
  The administration says it will end an Obama-era program that has allowed spouses of H-1B visa holders to work, as long as they had been approved and were waiting for a green card. Those work permits have been issued under a program known as H-4EAD.
  Federal authorities have also suggested they may change the selection process for H-1B visas to ensure that they are granted to the ''most skilled or highest-paid'' job candidates.
  Finally, Trump says he would like to scrap the lottery.
  What about the role of Congress?
  More sweeping changes can occur only if Congress passes new laws or overhauls the immigration system. The Trump administration's call to end the lottery and raise wages for H-1B visa candidates as a means of recruiting qualified American workers has support among some Democrats and Republicans.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/06/us/what-are-h1b-visas.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); FOREIGN LABOR (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (87%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (78%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); RURAL EMPLOYMENT (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (76%); LICENSES & PERMITS (73%); WORKER CATEGORIES (73%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (70%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (67%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (67%); RURAL SCHOOLS (67%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (64%); ENGINEERING (64%); MATHEMATICS (64%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); RURAL SCHOOLS (67%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (64%); ENGINEERING (64%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (64%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%); PHILIPPINES (79%)

Load-Date: April 7, 2018


End of Document
New Mask Rules Are Tricky for Business
The New York Times 
May 14, 2021 Friday 21:04 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1974 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Jason Karaian, Sarah Kessler, Lauren Hirsch and Ephrat Livni
Highlight: Companies are navigating conflicting guidance on pandemic precautions.
Body


Companies are navigating conflicting guidance on pandemic precautions.
Want this newsletter delivered directly to your inbox? Sign up here.
Now what?
The C.D.C. surprised health experts, political leaders and others yesterday when it announced that vaccinated people could go maskless in most places, including indoors. The agency’s advice doesn’t override local and state rules, though at least seven states adopted its mask guidelines. Others, like New York, said they would study the new guidance before deciding whether to adopt it. That puts businesses in a tricky spot.
Companies with frontline workers aren’t sure what to do. Retailers like Macy’s and the Gap said they were reviewing the new guidance, while Home Depot has not changed its rules requiring customers and workers to wear masks in its stores. Airlines and other transportation companies didn’t need to react, because federal guidelines still require masks for their industry.
Unions are unhappy about it. “Millions of Americans are doing the right thing and getting vaccinated, but essential workers are still forced to play mask police for shoppers who are unvaccinated and refuse to follow local Covid safety measures,” the president of the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, Marc Perrone, said in a statement. “Are they now supposed to become the vaccination police?”
H.R. departments have yet another headache. Companies coming up with protocols for a return to the office haven’t prepared for the C.D.C.’s sharp turnabout, Douglas Brayley, an employment lawyer at Ropes &amp; Gray, told DealBook. Companies need to abide by local guidelines, but the change in federal guidance raises questions. How do large companies establish a common policy when local public health agencies may not agree? How to handle employees who are still uncertain about safety when protocols shift? How will companies find out whether employees are vaccinated, and thus determine if they need to wear a mask?
And what about the Yankees? Eight fully vaccinated members of the baseball team tested positive for the virus. Some may interpret it as a lesson for businesses when workplaces loosen their protocols for things like masking, even if a majority of employees are vaccinated. “For a little bit there, we were getting pretty comfortable, because that’s what the rules called for. Now, we’ll tighten it back up and hopefully everyone stays safe,” the Yankees pitcher Jameson Taillon told The Times. Others argue that the Yankees’ frequent testing makes asymptomatic cases more likely to be caught, and given that only one of the eight has shown symptoms, it’s a sign that the vaccines are effective.
What are the rules where you are? See reopening plans and mask mandates for all 50 states.
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
Colonial Pipeline paid a $5 million ransom to hackers. The payment, made in Bitcoin, came shortly after the company shut down its network — and, as a result, the pipeline that supplies almost half of the East Coast’s fuel — in response to a ransomware attack. In other hacking news, Ireland’s health system operator shut down today because of a ransomware attack, and a unit of Toshiba said that it had been targeted by DarkSide, the group blamed for the Colonial infiltration.
McDonald’s is raising its wages, sort of. After moves by other fast-food chains, the company will increase pay at its 650 company-owned restaurants to an average of $13 per hour. But about 95 percent of McDonald’s restaurants in the U.S. are independently owned and will not be affected by the move.
A major teachers’ union called for schools to reopen. Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, which has 1.7 million members, said of the next academic year, “There is no doubt: Schools must be open. In person. Five days a week.” Teachers’ unions have sought strict virus mitigation measures that some say have slowed reopening timelines.
Delta will require new hires to be vaccinated, making it one of the first major corporations to enact such a provision. The airline’s C.E.O., Ed Bastian, told CNN that the requirement wouldn’t extend to current employees, but he said that he expected up to 80 percent to get shots.
DoorDash tripled its revenue in the first quarter. Demand for food delivery does not seem to be dropping as restaurants reopen dining rooms. “The negative impact that we were expecting in consumer behavior was smaller than we were anticipating,” the company’s C.F.O., Prabir Adarkar, told The Wall Street Journal.
Crypto’s first earnings call
The crypto exchange Coinbase yesterday held its first earnings call since going public. Its bumper profit for the first quarter largely matched expectations set in its filings ahead of its I.P.O. last month, so the numbers didn’t raise many pressing questions from investors, who were able to submit queries online and vote for their favorites to put to management.
“When will users be able to trade Doge?” Of more than 100 shareholder questions, one about Dogecoin, the high-flying crypto token based on a meme, was, inevitably, the most popular and so it was asked first. “We plan to list Doge in six to eight weeks,” said Coinbase’s C.E.O., Brian Armstrong, noting that the company was looking to expand its assets and aimed to list new products faster.
Coinbase says it won’t be too hasty. Armstrong noted that “certain products” that the exchange’s competitors allow users to trade make Coinbase “uncomfortable,” whereas “from the earliest days,” the company embraced regulation. Indeed, Coinbase representatives just met with regulators in Washington, Armstrong said, providing no specifics.
    • The company’s C.F.O., Alesia Haas, said that Coinbase was “bullish on the global market” and eager to expand internationally but that it needed licenses and bank partnerships, which take time.
Armstrong loves an internet reference. The company’s co-founder referred to this period in the crypto industry as similar to the internet’s infancy at least three times and at one point likened Coinbase to Google. The exchange welcomes competition, he said, just as “in the early days of the internet, Google wanted more websites out there.” But Coinbase isn’t looking to compete with rivals on fees, so if users had dreams of trading for free, as on the Robinhood app, they were dashed. “We do not believe in fee-less crypto trading,” Haas said.
“The fortune of Bill Gates and Melinda French Gates exceeds the size of Morocco’s annual economy, combines the value of Ford, Twitter and Marriott International and is triple the endowment of Harvard. While few know how their wealth will be divided in the divorce, one thing is clear: breaking it up can’t be easy.”
— The Times digs into the Gates family fortune, estimated to be worth at least $124 billion, which includes a stake in the Four Seasons hotel chain, huge tracts of farmland, a beachfront mansion in Southern California and one of Leonardo da Vinci’s notebooks.
In the papers
Some of the academic research that caught our eye this week, summarized in one sentence:
    • The gap in earnings between similarly qualified women and men is explained by both “glass ceilings” and “sticky floors.” (Gabriele Ciminelli, Cyrille Schwellnus and Balazs Stadler)
    • Bigger banks mostly benefit bankers. (Kilian Huber)
    • Companies with in-house M.&amp;A. specialists make more successful acquisitions than those that rely on outside experts. (Sinan Gokkaya, Xi Liu and René M. Stulz)
‘To our clients’ — Marty Lipton’s letters
Martin Lipton is one of the most consequential figures in modern corporate finance. Throughout the 89-year-old’s career as a high-powered M.&amp;A. lawyer, he has chronicled the ups and downs of deal making in thoughtful and widely followed notes to clients, known as “Marty Memos.” The notes, which span poison pills, shareholder primacy and the purpose of companies, are now available in a digital archive.
The back story: Leo Strine, former chief justice of the Delaware Supreme Court and now at Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, helped create the archive. “It has taken several years to do the coding of the memos, to draft a narrative that situates ML’s work in historical context, and that also, critically, provides links to the key cases, regulatory developments and scholars and advocates involved in the policy debates in which ML participated,” Strine said in an email. He worked on it with teams at Wachtell and Penn Law, where he teaches. An in-depth essay that serves as a guide to the archive, “Lipton and His Impact,” is the place to start.
Here are two of our favorite letters. One comes from the 1980s takeover era, when junk bonds drove Wall Street and the poison pill was invented by Lipton in response, and the other from more recently, 2018, in which Lipton frames his early thinking on anti-takeover measures in the context of focusing on all stakeholders, not just shareholders:
    • “Our Nation is blindly rushing to the precipice.” In his Oct. 28, 1988, memo, “Is This the End of Takeovers,” Lipton warned that “abusive takeover tactics” were saddling American companies with too much debt and forcing them to focus on short-term market results. “As with tulip bulbs, South Sea bubbles, pyramid investment trusts, Florida land, REITs, LDC loans, Texas banks and all the other financial market frenzies of the past, the denouement will be a crash,” he wrote, urging rules to rein in investors who “show no restraint and no regard for the public good.”
    • “It promotes inequality and strikes at the very heart of our society.” In his April 10, 2018, memo, “The Purpose of the Corporation,” Lipton took aim at Milton Friedman’s mantra that companies should serve shareholders above all, which he said led to the damaging short-termism that he had fought against in takeover battles throughout his career. Noting “important new support for counterbalancing shareholder primacy and promoting long-term sustainable investment” at firms like BlackRock (and later the Business Roundtable, among others) he lent his voice to a burgeoning movement.
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
    • The rail operator Kansas City Southern said it had accepted Canadian National’s $33.6 billion takeover bid, upending a previous deal agreed with Canadian Pacific. (Reuters)
    • The activist short-seller Carson Block sent the insurer Lemonade a salty letter about alleged security flaws in its site, dropping the F-bomb in the opening sentence. (TechCrunch)
    • The “SPAC King” Chamath Palihapitiya isn’t worried about the blank-check boom turning to bust. (Bloomberg Businessweek)
Politics and policy
    • Amazon, Apple, Google and other tech companies filed an amicus brief in a court case in support of spouses of H-1B visa holders’ right to work legally in the U.S. And in an op-ed, the Bridgewater C.E.O., David McCormick, calls for the U.S. to raise the cap on visas for highly skilled foreign workers. (Google, National Review)
    • “Beneath Joe Biden’s Folksy Demeanor, a Short Fuse and an Obsession With Details” (NYT)
Tech
    • Alibaba reported its first quarterly loss since going public, after paying a big antitrust penalty that China levied on the e-commerce giant. (NYT)
    • The I.R.S. and Justice Department have reportedly sought information about illicit activity on Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange. (Bloomberg)
    • An IBM executive said that the computer chip shortage could last another two years. (BBC)
Best of the rest
    • Tom Montag, Bank of America’s No. 2 executive, runs its markets and corporate banking division with favoritism and an iron fist, employees say. (NYT)
    • “How the superrich soaked up Covid cash.” (FT)
    • A conversation with a Dogecoin millionaire. (NYT)
We’d like your feedback! Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: The new guidance comes with caveats. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Whitten Sabbatini for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EPIDEMICS (99%); FACE MASK MANDATES (91%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LABOR UNIONS (90%); PUBLIC HEALTH (90%); VACCINES (90%); PANDEMICS (89%); SAFETY (89%); CYBERCRIME (85%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); ESSENTIAL BUSINESSES & WORKERS (78%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (78%); SAFETY REGULATION & POLICY (78%); VACCINATION & IMMUNIZATION (78%); WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (78%); BUSINESS CLOSINGS (74%); BASEBALL (72%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (72%); NEGATIVE TECHNOLOGY NEWS (66%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (64%); CYBERATTACKS (61%); HACKING (61%); MALICIOUS SOFTWARE (61%); RANSOMWARE (61%); DIGITAL CURRENCY (60%); Workplace Hazards and Violations (%); Vaccination and Immunization (%); Lipton, Martin (%)

Organization: UNITED FOOD & COMMERCIAL WORKERS INTERNATIONAL UNION (55%)

Industry: VACCINES (90%); CYBERCRIME (85%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (79%); TRANSPORTATION & WAREHOUSING (79%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (78%); VACCINATION & IMMUNIZATION (78%); RETAILERS (70%); CYBERATTACKS (61%); HACKING (61%); MALICIOUS SOFTWARE (61%); RANSOMWARE (61%); DIGITAL CURRENCY (60%)

Person: Lipton, Martin

Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: May 14, 2021


End of Document
Beside a Path to Citizenship, a New Course for Immigration
The New York Times
April 17, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10; NEWS ANALYSIS
Length: 1340 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON; Michael D. Shear contributed reporting.
Body


WASHINGTON -- A sweeping immigration bill that a bipartisan group of eight senators completed on Tuesday seeks not only to fix chronic problems in the system and bring an estimated 11 million illegal immigrants to the right side of the law. It would also reorient future immigration with the goal of bringing foreigners to the country based increasingly on the job skills and personal assets they can offer.
The bill, by four Democrats and four Republicans, is the most ambitious effort in at least 26 years to repair, update and reshape the American immigration system.
The part of the bill expected to draw the most controversy is a 13-year pathway to citizenship for immigrants who have been living here illegally. In an effort to make that proposal acceptable to Republicans who fear it could unleash a new wave of illegal immigration, the senators placed a series of conditions, or triggers, along the pathway, that would require the Department of Homeland Security to spend as much as $6.5 billion over 10 years to increase enforcement and extend fencing along the Southwest border.
The border security programs would have to be fully operational before any immigrants who had been here illegally would be able to apply for permanent resident cards, the first step toward becoming American citizens.
But the proposal for illegal immigrants is only one part of the complex bargain. Created by the senators in tough closed-door negotiations, the legislation codifies other novel compromises designed to break logjams that have clogged the immigration system.
President Obama praised the legislation as ''largely consistent'' with the principles he had laid out for an immigration overhaul. After a meeting with two senators from the group, Charles E. Schumer of New York, a Democrat, and John McCain of Arizona, a Republican, the president said in a statement that the provisions of their bill are ''all common-sense steps that the majority of Americans support.''
Mr. McCain said his onetime rival for the presidency was ''very supportive'' but understands that ''everybody didn't get everything they wanted.''
Mr. Schumer praised Mr. Obama for giving the senators room to craft the bipartisan legislation. ''I thanked him for that. John thanked him for that.''
Mr. Schumer said the process would begin formally with hearings on Friday in the Judiciary Committee, with the goal of voting on the bill in the Senate in late May or early June.
For the first time, the legislation would create a merit-based program to award the visa for legal permanent residents, known as a green card, based on a point system. When the merit system takes effect, five years after the bill is passed, at least 120,000 foreign-born people each year would be able to gain green cards by accumulating points based on their skills and education, as well as their family ties and the time they have lived in the United States.
Over a decade, the balance in the immigration system would gradually shift away from the 75 percent of visas that now go to family members of immigrants already here. As a result of the merit program, closer to 50 percent of visas annually would go to immigrants based on their family ties, while about half would be based on job skills.
As part of the border security triggers, the bill would require all employers, within five years, to verify the legal status of new hires using a federal photo-matching system. It would also require the federal government to create an electronic system within 10 years for checking foreigners as they leave the country through airports and seaports.
The bill also would also create two new guest-worker programs, one for farmworkers and another for low-wage laborers.
It would give employers in technology and science fields tens of thousands of new temporary and permanent resident visas annually, which they have been urgently seeking for computer engineers and foreign graduates with advanced degrees from American universities. It raises current annual caps on temporary high-skilled visas, known as H-1B, to 110,000 from 65,000, while adding 5,000 more of those visas for the foreign graduates. The cap would gradually rise to 180,000.
And the bill would allow young illegal immigrants who came to the United States as children, known as Dreamers, to become citizens after only five years.
The senators are gambling that the bill would repair enough longstanding problems to attract support from a broad array of groups that would benefit, including Latinos, religious groups and labor unions; big technology companies like Microsoft and Facebook, which have been clamoring for more visas; agricultural growers and other employers in labor-intensive businesses; and immigrant families who stand to be united more quickly with family members coming here legally.
Many groups responded initially with surprise at the bill's ambitious scope and its practical approach.
''The heart of immigration reform is fixing the legal immigration system so it works for America,'' said Tamar Jacoby, president of ImmigrationWorks USA, a group representing small businesses. ''The first draft doesn't get the future exactly right, but it's a good start.''
Several other business and conservative groups praised the framework but said the guest worker programs were too limited.
Leaders of United We Dream, an organization of youths here illegally, called the five-year path to citizenship for young people a ''major victory for the movement.'' They also said the path for other illegal immigrants was too long.
Opponents said the legislation favored illegal immigrants over American workers and foreigners who came legally. ''It legalizes almost everyone in the country illegally before the border is secured,'' said Representative Lamar S. Smith of Texas, a leading Republican on immigration issues. ''This of course will encourage even more illegal immigration.''
Perhaps the most original compromise is the path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. Several Republicans, especially Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, insisted that there could be no special, separate path for them. But Democrats, led by Mr. Schumer, fought for a direct, manageable pathway that would ensure that most immigrants here illegally get a chance to earn their way to becoming citizens.
In a first phase, those immigrants would spend a minimum of 10 years in Registered Provisional Immigrant Status, which would allow them to work and travel. After 10 years, they would be eligible to apply for green cards through the merit system.
That system would have two tracks: one based on the number of points immigrants could accumulate, with a fixed annual numerical cap, and another for foreigners who had been legally employed in the United States for 10 years or more. The second track would not have a cap. Formerly illegal immigrants would be eligible to apply, after 10 years in provisional status, for those green cards.
However, many other immigrants would also be eligible for the merit system. They include those who had applied legally for green cards and had been stuck in backlogs for 10 years or more. The solution satisfied both Republicans' and Democrats' demands.
The other senators in the group, who have been called the Gang of Eight, are Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, Robert Menendez of New Jersey and Michael Bennet of Colorado, all Democrats; and Mr. McCain and Jeff Flake, both of Arizona, and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, all Republicans.
In other compromises, the bill would reduce the categories of family members eligible for green cards, eliminating siblings of United States citizens, and limiting sons and daughters of citizens to those younger than 31. It would eliminate a lottery that has distributed 55,000 visas each year, using those visas to reduce other backlogs. Republicans have sought to limit what they call family chain migration.
But among the victories for Democrats is a provision to allow immigrants who had been deported on noncriminal grounds to apply to return, if they have spouses or minor children here.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/17/us/senators-set-to-unveil-immigration-bill.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News Analysis

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (96%); CITIZENSHIP (91%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); US PRESIDENTS (69%)

Organization: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%)

Person: CHARLES SCHUMER (78%); JOHN MCCAIN (78%); BARACK OBAMA (58%)

Geographic: ARIZONA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 17, 2013


End of Document
Australian Rules Would Make So-Called 457 Visa Harder for Migrants
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; australia
Length: 566 words
Byline: JACQUELINE WILLIAMS
Highlight: Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said he was “putting Australians first” by replacing a special category of visas that allows certain temporary foreign workers into the country.
Body


SYDNEY, Australia — Saying he was “putting Australians first,” Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull announced plans on Tuesday to replace a special visa category that allows some temporary foreign workers to enter Australia.
The rules would make it harder for skilled migrants to work in the country. Mr. Turnbull said that the special category, the so-called 457 visa, would be abolished in favor of two new temporary visas requiring more work experience and, in some cases, greater English skills. Current holders of the visa, who number about 95,000, would not be affected.
“We will no longer allow 457 visas to be passports to jobs that could and should go to Australians,” Mr. Turnbull said. “We’re putting jobs first, and we’re putting Australians first.”
The prime minister said the changes would attract better-skilled workers and encourage the hiring of Australians instead of cheaper foreign labor.
The government’s action mirrors another effort in the United States, where President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that could limit the number of H1-B visas, under which the government admits 85,000 immigrants each year. During his campaign, Mr. Trump pledged to end the H-1B visa program, which he said was allowing companies to fire Americans and replace them with lower-cost foreign employees.
Joanna Howe, an associate professor of law at the University of Adelaide, said that Australia was hewing to a similar argument.
“That rhetoric is very consistent with the rhetoric from Donald Trump around protecting American jobs and also from Theresa May’s government in the United Kingdom post-‘Brexit,’ ensuring that U.K. workers get first access to jobs,” she said.
The 457 visa in Australia was expected to bolster the country’s economy by enlisting foreign workers to fill skill shortages. “The scheme has blown out significantly from its original numbers,” Dr. Howe said. “It’s being used in occupations where Australian graduates are struggling to find work — occupations like accounting and teaching and nursing. There have been concerns around exploitation of the 457 visa holders but also around whether Australian workers are getting first access to jobs.”
Far-right parties like One Nation and left-leaning labor unions have expressed concerns about the number of temporary migrant workers in Australia. But Dean McEvoy, chief executive of the technology industry group TechSydney, said he was worried about the abolition of the program.
“Any plans to cut back on the tech industry’s ability to bring in expertise from overseas before more Australians have been adequately trained in I.T. will only harm the industry and the future of jobs in this country,” Mr. McEvoy said.
Workers in about 650 occupations can qualify under the 457 program in Australia. That will be reduced to no more than 435 under the new system.
The new visas will be available in two-year and four-year versions, with the longer one being targeted to higher-skilled positions and requiring greater English proficiency.
“Australia is the most successful multicultural nation in the world — we are an immigrant nation,” Mr. Turnbull said. “But the fact remains, Australian workers must have priority for Australian jobs.”
Related Articles
    • Planned Trump Order Will Discourage Hiring of Low-Wage Foreign Workers
    • As New Zealand Courts Tech Talent, Isolation Becomes a Draw
    • For Millionaire Immigrants, a Global Welcome Mat
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (91%); PRIME MINISTERS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (90%); MIGRANT WORKERS (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); FAR RIGHT POLITICS (73%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (72%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (71%); EXECUTIVES (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (65%); Visas (%); Australia (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Turnbull, Malcolm (1954- ) (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Politics and Government (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (65%)

Person: MALCOLM TURNBULL (94%); DONALD TRUMP (87%); Turnbull, Malcolm (1954- )

Geographic: ADELAIDE, AUSTRALIA (79%); SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA (79%); NEW SOUTH WALES, AUSTRALIA (79%); AUSTRALIA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%)

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
Indian Women's American Dreams in Jeopardy
The New York Times
April 7, 2018 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11
Length: 1797 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN
Body


LIVERMORE, Calif. -- For seven years, Deepika Jalakam sat at home. Bored, unfulfilled and dependent on her husband for every dime, she struggled with the notion that her professional life was doomed in the land of opportunity.
So when the employment card arrived in the mail in 2015, Ms. Jalakam did what she often does when good fortune comes her way: She placed it before the gods in the Hindu shrine mounted in her kitchen cabinet, blessed it with a dab of red ''kum kum'' powder and recited a prayer of gratitude. 
  Within weeks, Ms. Jalakam, who has a degree in biotechnology, landed a job as an analyst at an insurance company. The next year, she and her husband, Vinay Kumar, a software engineer, bought a house. In 2017, the finances of the Indian immigrant couple were secure enough that they decided to have a second child.
  All that planning, though, is in jeopardy. Ms. Jalakam and thousands of other spouses of skilled workers have been told that their special work permits -- authorization that can mean the difference between struggling and thriving in their adopted homeland -- are likely to be revoked.
  [Do H-1B visas harm American workers? Read more here.]
  The Trump administration announced last fall that, as part of a crackdown on H-1B visas issued for skilled workers to enter the United States, it plans to rescind an Obama-era program that allowed spouses to work. The change, expected in June, would mean that thousands of mainly Indian women who followed their husbands to the United States will have to give up their jobs -- even though many are highly educated workers with sought-after skills.
  ''We were happily working and feeling settled down with the life we wanted. Suddenly, this announcement came and there is instability,'' said Ms. Jalakam, 32, who now finds herself worrying about everything from day-to-day spending to vacation plans.
  Across the country, thousands of Indian families are caught in a similar dilemma because of the outsized role that they play in the H-1B visa program.
  The annual visa scramble began this week, with applications delivered by the truckload to government processing centers. The petitions represent tens of thousands of foreigners vying for the opportunity to work in the United States for three years or longer.
  Many are Indian software engineers and computer programmers recruited by American technology companies that say they cannot find enough talent in this country. Among the applicants are Indian math and science teachers headed for rural schools, as well as physicians and other professionals.
  But the H-1B program has spawned controversy. During his campaign, President Trump invited Americans displaced by H-1B workers to his rallies. Since taking office, he has ordered the program's overhaul, and his administration has taken steps to tighten scrutiny of applications.
  Still, demand for the visas continues unabated. In 2018, for the sixth consecutive year, the federal government was so flooded with petitions it stopped accepting them within a week. On Friday, officials announced they had reached their annual cap within five days and would resort again to a computer lottery to select the targeted 85,000 recipients. Universities and research organizations are exempt from the cap.
  Nearly 365,000 H-1B petitions were approved in the 2017 fiscal year. This number includes first-time applications subject to the cap and renewals, which are not capped. Three-quarters of them went to Indian nationals.
  Their success has been a mixed blessing. Tens of thousands of Indians on the temporary visas were later sponsored by their employers to remain permanently in the United States, but their families are in limbo, stuck in a ballooning backlog of green cards that are approved but cannot yet be issued.
  While skilled workers from most countries receive permanent residency a year or two after applying, Indians must wait a decade or longer because of their large numbers. The delays have meant that until recently thousands of women, many highly educated, remained at home while their husbands worked.
  Children must also wait. If their family's green card is not approved before they turn 21, the children are no longer eligible for legal residency as dependents and must leave the country, though they may have spent much of their lives in the United States. The much-debated legal protection for so-called Dreamers, the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, applies to children who entered the country illegally, not to the offspring of legal immigrants.
  The Obama administration attempted a partial fix to the problem in 2015, authorizing temporary work permits for spouses of H-1B visa holders who were in the pipeline to get a green card. Under the program, known as H-4EAD, an estimated 100,000 spouses, overwhelmingly women, have obtained work permits.
  ''I felt like I was free from a cage to fly in any direction I want,'' Ms. Jalakam said of her work authorization that year.
  Last fall's announcement that the temporary work program would soon be scrapped has energized Indian women. Many who had sunk money into property and other investments with earnings from their jobs took to Twitter, using #standwithh4ead and #saveh4ead to raise awareness of their plight.
  ''We're determined to save our jobs,'' said Jansi Kumar of Seattle, a founder of a Facebook page started in December, ''Save H4EAD,'' which has attracted nearly 5,000 followers. In early February, about 500 Indians descended on Capitol Hill to press for a solution to the green card backlog. At a rally, they hoisted posters that read, ''Legal Immigrants Matter Too'' and ''#H4EAD Let Spouses Work.''
  On the other hand, a group of information technology workers who lost their jobs to imported workers has filed suit to overturn the spousal work authorization program. The Department of Homeland Security, the federal agency which oversees the program, said it was completing an economic analysis and was likely to render its decision in June.
  L. Francis Cissna, director of United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the Department of Homeland Security agency that issues the permits, said the Trump administration's priority was to protect American workers. ''The reason there is a lot of concern about Americans being displaced is because it is happening,'' he said in a recent interview.
  In January, the Information Technology Industry Council, which represents titans like Apple, IBM and Microsoft, argued in a letter to the administration that revoking spousal work permits could prompt foreign talent to leave the United States and put American companies at a competitive disadvantage.
  ''Their valued, long-term employees will choose to leave their companies for other employment opportunities in countries that allow these workers and their families to raise their standard of living,'' the council warned.
  Doug Rand, former assistant director for entrepreneurship in the Obama administration, said Indian immigrants have long been ''essential for American technological innovation'' and offering work permits to spouses makes sense. ''If it weren't for these outrageous backlogs, they would be Americans already,'' he said.
  The backlog that is creating the problem is a byproduct of immigration laws drafted decades ago.
  In 1965, Congress established that no country could receive more than 7 percent of green cards issued in a year. In 1990, it determined that only 140,000 employment-based green cards could be granted annually, and each family member requires a separate card.
  Then the rise of the tech sector created a surge in demand for workers. Indians had the skills that American companies prized, so employers turned to the nonimmigrant H-1B visa to import them. Down the road, companies chose to sponsor many of the visa holders for green cards, which because of the annual caps created the current backlog.
  In June 2015, the latest year for which official data is available, about 300,000 Indians, including spouses and children, were waiting for their permanent residency cards. Indians in the green-card process since 2008 are only now receiving them.
  ''No one should be stuck waiting more than 10 years for a green card. It hurts employers and employees and their families,'' said Stephen Yale-Loehr, a professor of immigration law at Cornell Law School. ''Indians are being held hostage by our broken immigration system.''
  Some families have had to wait so long that they fear their children will reach adulthood and be forced to leave. Lakshmi Vishnubhotla, who has worked for 10 years as a teacher in Marion County, S.C., is currently sponsored for an H-1B by the school district. He was named teacher of the year for the district in 2015-16.
  Mr. Vishnubhotla's green card application, which includes his family, was approved in 2012. They are still waiting for the cards to be issued. Given that the wait time is 10 years, and getting longer, he is worried. In seven years, his 14-year-old daughter, Sivani, will be considered an adult. His son, Sarvan, will turn 21 in nine years. At that time, they will no longer be eligible for green cards as Mr. Vishnubhotla's dependents and could be forced to return to India.
  ''We don't want to split our family,'' Mr. Vishnubhotla said.
  Teachers who arrived after him, including some whom he trained from Jamaica, Venezuela and elsewhere, already have permanent residency.
  Jigar Madlani, a software engineer in Parsippany, N.J., came on an H-1B and hisgreen card was approved in 2013. But none of the family's cards have been issued, and he fears his wife, Heta, will soon lose her ability to work.
  Armed with an H-4EAD permit, she was hired in late 2015 as a case manager for New Jersey's 211 line, handling calls from drug addicts, homeless families, victims of domestic violence and others in crisis seeking help.
  ''I had no identity in this country. I got it, and now they want to take it away from me,'' Ms. Madlani said.
  Back in California, Ms. Jalakam dreads returning to the days when she filled her time tutoring students in math and taking online technology courses.
  ''I would see a woman all dressed up as an executive and wonder, 'Will I ever be like that?''' recalled Ms. Jalakam, whose family's green card was approved in 2010 but is still unissued.
  Now that she has a well-paying job, Ms. Jalakam's main fear is losing it. She was pregnant with their second child when the administration announced plans to rescind the work authorizations. She began fretting about how they would afford their $4,800 monthly mortgage.
  She found like-minded women on the ''SaveH4EAD'' Facebook page, and felt better, she said. ''I realized there are strong-willed women like me who really want to work.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/06/us/indians-h1b-visas-trump-immigration-wives.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Deepika Jalakam, center, with her daughter and her parents. Her work permit allowed her and her husband to buy a house and have a second child. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (77%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (77%); FAMILY (77%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (76%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (74%); ENGINEERING (74%); IMMIGRATION (73%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (68%); LICENSES & PERMITS (67%); RURAL SCHOOLS (65%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (63%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (50%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (89%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (88%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (88%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (75%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (74%); ENGINEERING (74%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (74%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (73%); PHARMACEUTICALS & BIOTECHNOLOGY (73%); RURAL SCHOOLS (65%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (69%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (59%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: April 7, 2018


End of Document
They Live in the U.S., but They’re Not Allowed to Come Home
The New York Times 
May 17, 2021 Monday 11:48 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1188 words
Byline: Aishvarya Kavi
Highlight: Thousands of immigrants who live in the United States on temporary visas and traveled to India in recent weeks have been stranded there under the Biden administration’s travel ban.
Body


Thousands of immigrants who live in the United States on temporary visas and traveled to India in recent weeks have been stranded there under the Biden administration’s travel ban.
In early April, Payal Raj accompanied her family to India to renew the visas that permit them to live in the United States. She and her husband waited until they had been vaccinated, carefully preparing their paperwork according to the advice of their immigration lawyers. But the visa itself would soon strand her in India indefinitely, separating her from her husband and daughter in Hendersonville, Tenn.
“Our family is in a crisis,” said Ms. Raj, who is one of thousands of immigrants stuck in India, in part because the Biden administration’s restrictions on most travel from the country mean that temporary visa holders are explicitly barred from re-entering the United States. “Every morning is a struggle.”
The restrictions, issued as a devastating surge in coronavirus cases has overwhelmed India in recent weeks, prohibit Ms. Raj and others like her from returning to their homes, families and jobs in the United States. Even those exempt under the ban are in limbo as the outbreak forces the U.S. Embassy and consulates to close, leaving many with no clear path home.
Ms. Raj’s husband, Yogesh Kumar, an operations manager for a multinational corporation, lives in the United States on an H-1B visa, or a temporary permit for highly technical foreign workers. As dependents, Ms. Raj and their daughter hold H-4 visas, which allow temporary workers to bring immediate family and must be renewed about every three years at an embassy or consulate outside the United States.
Mr. Kumar and his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, renewed their visas, but Ms. Raj was asked to submit biometrics and complete an in-person interview, both of which would not be completed until after the travel restrictions went into effect two weeks ago.
As the primary breadwinner, Mr. Kumar said his employer would not allow him to work from India indefinitely given that some aspects of his job required in-person interaction. He returned to Tennessee with Saanvi, leaving Ms. Raj behind in Bangalore.
“If he quits his job, we won’t have any means to sustain ourselves,” Ms. Raj said of her husband, whose income also supports both their parents. “But in the middle of all of this, I’m sitting here, away from my family, for I don’t know — months? Years?”
The White House did not respond to questions about the restrictions on travel from India, but a State Department representative described them as “appropriate public health measures” that are “critical” to defeating the coronavirus.
“The pandemic is a global issue, and it will not be over for anyone until it’s over for everyone,” the representative said in a statement.
But critics say that the exemptions to the travel ban are unevenly applied and still risk spreading the virus. American citizens and permanent residents, for instance, can travel freely, while people who are fully vaccinated, test negative or quarantine before and after flying cannot. The administration has not indicated when or under what circumstances it would lift the restrictions.
“They just put the same blanket ban for India that they were using in the Trump administration,” said Greg Siskind, an immigration lawyer who is suing the Biden administration over the State Department’s inability to issue visas in countries experiencing lockdowns. “This was the same style ban that President Biden said last March was ineffective and was a bad idea.”
The United States has restricted entry from a number of countries, but the most recent ban has had a disproportionate effect on Indians in the United States given that Indian citizens claim more than two-thirds of H-1B visas issued each year. Including those on other kinds of nonimmigrant visas, immigration lawyers estimate that thousands of Indians living in the United States have been affected.
Some traveled to India when coronavirus case counts were low to renew their visas or see family. Others went to care for sick or dying relatives. Now some are unable to secure even emergency appointments to renew their visas at the embassy in New Delhi or any of the four U.S. consulates in India.
In late April, Gaurav Chauhan traveled to Agra to care for his father, who was hospitalized with the coronavirus. He is now separated from his wife and two children, who live in Atlanta.
As a parent of American citizens who are minors, Mr. Chauhan is exempt from the ban, but he has been unable to make an emergency appointment on the State Department’s website to renew his visa. His employer, a software company, has temporarily allowed Mr. Chauhan, who works in human resources, to do his job overseas. But others in similar situations say they have been asked to leave their jobs.
“If you are certain that in two months or three months things are going to be normal, we are going to get a visa issued, you have at least a timeline of when you are going to see your family,” Mr. Chauhan said. “But the uncertainty — that’s the thing that is killing us.”
Since the beginning of the pandemic, American embassy and consulate closings have bottlenecked visa processing. In early April, 76 percent of consulates were still fully or partly closed, according to an analysis of State Department data by the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank.
Such shutdowns should not stop visa processing, Mr. Siskind said, pointing to other immigration agencies that had successfully adapted to remote work and exceptions to in-person document submission.
“One of the issues with the State Department for the last 14 months is their lack of imagination in terms of how to change their procedures in a pandemic,” Mr. Siskind said. “They have, for example, not switched to video interviewing, which is something that they have the statutory authority to do.”
The State Department acknowledged that “services are limited” at U.S. outposts in India but said that it would “make every attempt to continue to honor approved emergency visa appointments.” The department could not provide a specific date for when other visa services would resume.
Abhiram, a professor in Broward County, Fla., whose wife and 3-year-old daughter remain outside Hyderabad after visiting family in January, said he did not fault the government for enforcing travel restrictions to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. But the situation has made him consider whether to stay in the United States.
“Every day my daughter asks me, ‘Daddy, where are you?’” said Abhiram, who asked to be identified only by his middle name. “I do feel sometimes like going back to my home country, rather than dealing with this.”
But for Ms. Raj and her family, home is Hendersonville.
“Our whole day-to-day life was interacting with our neighbors, going and visiting friends, getting together for backyard parties. It’s been wonderful,” she said. “I don’t want to uproot our lives.”
PHOTO: Yogesh Kumar with his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, at home. His wife, Payal Raj, is stranded in India under the U.S. travel ban. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM DESHAZER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); CORONAVIRUSES (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (89%); VIRUSES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); EPIDEMICS (77%); FAMILY (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); PANDEMICS (77%); PUBLIC HEALTH (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (73%); VACCINES (73%); RESIGNATIONS (72%); BIOMETRICS (50%); Indian-Americans (%); Visas (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Travel Warnings (%); Foreign Workers (%); State Department (%); United States International Relations (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); India (%); Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); TRAVEL BANS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); VACCINES (73%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); Biden, Joseph R Jr

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); TENNESSEE, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (96%)

Load-Date: October 15, 2021


End of Document
Visa Reforms for Skilled Workers
The New York Times
April 22, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20; EDITORIAL
Length: 399 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


The immigration reform bill introduced by a bipartisan group of senators last week would make it easier for skilled workers to come to this country while toughening rules to prevent abuse in temporary work visas.
Many skilled workers and their families spend a decade or more waiting for employment-based green cards, which are capped at 140,000 a year and are subject to per-country limits. The bill addresses this problem by temporarily raising limits to clear a backlog of 234,000 applications for employment-based permanent visas. It would also exempt spouses and children of workers from the limits, which should free up nearly 80,000 visas a year.
It also creates a ''merit based'' category of green cards while getting rid of permanent visas for siblings of citizens and for people from countries with low rates of immigration to the United States. These new visas would be given to people on the basis of points granted for factors like the college degrees they have earned; whether their siblings are citizens; how highly they score in an English proficiency test; and whether they are from an underrepresented country. This proposal is deeply troubling because it appears to buy into the zero-sum thinking that pits employment-based immigration against family-sponsored and diversity immigration. America should welcome both groups of people, not choose between them.
The senators also want to expand the popular H-1B category of work visas to 135,000, from 85,000 -- a quota that is often reached in a matter of weeks or months every year. The new, higher limit would be allowed to increase or decrease by as many as 10,000 visas a year based on demand for them and government unemployment data. In an important provision, people on such visas will be able to switch employers more easily, making it harder for companies to pay workers below-market salaries.
Another provision would clamp down on abuse by imposing higher fees and other restrictions on employers who have a large percentage of their work force on such visas. Over several years, the bill would force these companies, many of which are the United States operations of outsourcing firms from India, to reduce the number of their workers who are foreigners to less than 50 percent.
While some provisions need to be improved, the bill sets the right tone for making America more hospitable to skilled and hard-working immigrants.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/22/opinion/visa-reforms-for-skilled-workers.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); IMMIGRATION (92%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); LABOR FORCE (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); FAMILY (77%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 22, 2013


End of Document
Trump, Theresa May, Georgia: Your Tuesday Evening Briefing
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 819 words
Byline: KAREN ZRAICK and SANDRA STEVENSON
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know at the end of the day.
Body


(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good evening. Here’s the latest.
1.  Call it the saga of the wayward warship.
A week ago, the White House declared that ordering an American aircraft carrier into the Sea of Japan would send a powerful deterrent signal to North Korea.
But the ship was actually sailing in the opposite direction — a fact that came to light only after the photograph above was posted online by the Navy.
White House officials said on Tuesday they were relying on guidance from the Defense Department.
The carrier is now heading to the Sea of Japan. It should arrive sometime next week.
_____
2. It was everyone’s favorite day: Tax Day.
On a more serious note: It looks like President Trump’s efforts to overhaul the U.S. tax code are in serious jeopardy. The Democrats insist they won’t cooperate on it unless Mr. Trump releases his own.
If you’re wondering where your tax money goes, Steve Ballmer, the former chief executive of Microsoft, unveiled a new website to answer that question.
Above, a protest outside an I.R.S. office in Manhattan.
_____
3. “It’s America First, you better believe it.”
As he nears 100 days in office, President Trump spoke at a Wisconsin factory about an executive order authorizing studies and tweaks in government rules that could lead to restrictions on H-1B visas for foreign workers.
There are signs he’s drifting away from the populist, anti-establishment ideas that guided his campaign.
And here’s a selection of partisan writing you shouldn’t miss.
_____
4. Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain announced that she was reversing course and calling an early election.
She’s making a risky bet that voters will give her a strong mandate as she negotiates the terms of Britain’s exit from the European Union. The vote will be held June 8.
And the first round of voting in France’s presidential election starts Sunday. Critics are worried that Russia may be meddlingin the election to bolster favored candidates.
_____
5. The man suspected of fatally shooting a Cleveland man and then posting video of the killing on Facebook is dead.
Steve Stephens shot himself as he was chased by the police near Erie, Pa., the authorities said.
The pursuit began when a McDonald’s worker stalled him by holding on to his fries — and calling the police.
_____
6. Voters in a wealthy suburban district in Georgia are going to the polls to fill the seat vacated by former Representative Tom Price, who is now the health and human services secretary.
There are 18 candidates to replace him, and the front-runner is a bit of a surprise. Jon Ossoff is a 30           -           year-old Democrat and filmmaker whose slogan is “Make Trump Furious.”
_____
7. In Arkansas, two executions that were set to be carried out yesterday were delayed, one at the 11th hour. They were among eight executions scheduled over 10 days this month.
Others are scheduled for this Thursday and Monday. The legal challenges and protests continue, including over the lethal-injection cocktail the state plans to use.
_____
8. We visited two heavily patrolled borders that have become hot spots in the global refugee crisis — between the U.S. and Mexico, and Hungary and Serbia.
In southern Texas, the Border Patrol agents monitor the banks of the Rio Grande on horseback for drug smugglers and migrants, many of whom are Central Americans seeking asylum.
Hungary, above, which heavily fortified its border over the last two years, is letting in just a handful of asylum seekers these days, and putting them in detention centers while their cases are decided.
_____
9. In Hollywood, TV and movie writers begin voting tomorrow on whether to strike over raises and health benefits.
If no deal is reached between the Writers Guild of America and studios by May 1, they’ll stop work the next day, forcing the late-night comedy shows to immediately start running reruns.
That means we’d be without bits like the one Jimmy Fallon had about the White House Easter Egg Roll: “That bunny took a look at Trump and said, ‘Oh my God, a talking carrot!’”
Above, a scene from the last strike, in 2007-2008, which lasted 100 days.
_____
10. Finally, it’s springtime in Transylvania. Take a peek at this Hungarian village in Romania where they still celebrate a centuries-old seasonal tradition.
On Easter Monday, young men “water” young women like flowers, dousing them with freshly drawn well water and patchouli to bring them health, beauty and love.
Have a great night.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.
Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays.
Want to look back? Here’s last night’s briefing.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.
Related Articles
    • Mike Pence, Turkey, Facebook: Your Monday Evening Briefing
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (88%); VOTERS & VOTING (85%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); PHOTO & VIDEO SHARING (78%); POPULISM (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); PARTISANSHIP (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (77%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); TAXES & TAXATION (75%); ELECTIONS (74%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (74%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (74%); TAX LAW (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (71%); VISUAL ARTISTS (71%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (70%); FOREIGN LABOR (70%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (70%); EXECUTIVES (69%); EUROPEAN UNION (68%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (66%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (65%); PRIME MINISTERS (65%); SHOOTINGS (65%); POLICE PURSUITS (64%); SUBURBS (50%)

Industry: MILITARY VESSELS (90%); NAVAL VESSELS (90%); PHOTO & VIDEO SHARING (78%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); VISUAL ARTISTS (71%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (70%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (70%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (65%); WEBSITES (52%)

Person: THERESA MAY (91%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JON OSSOFF (79%); TOM PRICE (79%); STEVEN A BALLMER (53%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); ERIE, PA, USA (52%); PACIFIC OCEAN (90%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); NORTH KOREA (79%); EUROPE (78%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%)

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
California Today: Saudi Prince Tours Los Angeles and San Francisco; California Today
The New York Times 
April 9, 2018 Monday 13:01 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1156 words
Byline: Tim Arango and Inyoung Kang
Highlight: Monday: Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman in California, Mark Zuckerberg prepares to testify in Congress, and electric scooters take over San Francisco.
Body


Good morning.
(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
There were dinners at the homes of Hollywood moguls, meetings with tech titans in Silicon Valley, a visit to the desert to talk about space travel with Richard Branson and a stop at Lockheed Martin to check up on satellites and a missile defense system. Along the way, he made time for Eric Garcetti, the mayor of Los Angeles; Leon Panetta, the former defense secretary; and Oprah Winfrey.
As part of his three-week tour across America, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia, the 32-year-old heir to the throne, cruised through California last week, buying up Four Seasons hotels in Los Angeles and San Francisco, promoting a new, modernist image for his conservative nation and seeking investments to develop an entertainment industry in the desert kingdom.
The breadth and scope of the trip, which analysts described as extravagantly ambitious with few parallels in history, was on full display during the California leg of his journey. In Hollywood, the Saudis announced a deal with AMC to open the first movie theaters in the kingdom in decades, and reached pacts to open a Six Flags park and to host a Cirque du Soleil performance. In Silicon Valley, the prince discussed cloud computing services at Google headquarters and visited Apple, where he met with Tim Cook, Apple’s chief executive.
The tour came after a period in which the crown prince, who rose to next in line for the throne under his father King Salman last year, consolidated his power at home by jailing — in the Ritz Carlton hotel in Riyadh — some of the country’s wealthiest businessmen, including members of the royal family. He has also been dogged by criticism from human rights activists for waging a war in Yemen that has killed thousands of civilians.
But Prince Mohammed has been fully embraced by the Trump administration, which sees him as a reliable partner to push back on Iran, Saudi Arabia’s chief rival in the Middle East, and for the most part his trip was not overshadowed by human rights concerns. In California, though, he met some dissenting voices and drew gatherings of protesters.
Mayor Garcetti was one of the few luminaries who met with the prince and then spoke out in public about Yemen and other human rights issues.
California Online
(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)
 As Republicans gear up for midterm elections, some are turning to what was once political hyperbole: the notion that Democrats would move to impeach President Trump if they gained the House. [The New York Times]
 The so-called Pineapple Express drenched parts of Northern California with up to eight inches of rain over the weekend. The record-breaking storm raised concerns of flooding and has filled the Bay Area’s water reserves. [KQED]
 Parts of Yosemite National Park and Muir Woods reopened after the storm. [San Francisco Chronicle]
 A sixth body was found near the Mendocino County site where a couple and their children plunged off a cliff in their car last month. [Buzzfeed]
 Facebook has begun requiring purchasers of political ads to verify their identities and locations, and the company on Monday began notifying users who were affected by Cambridge Analytica’s data collection. [           The New York Times]
 Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, is getting a crash course in charm ahead of his congressional appearance this week. Mr. Zuckerberg will testify on Capitol Hill starting on Tuesday. [The New York Times]
 Elsewhere in Silicon Valley, a fatal shooting at YouTube headquarters last week highlighted the security risks of the tech industry’s open campuses. [The New York Times]
 At 22, he was gunned down in his grandmother’s backyard and touched off a movement for change: a look back at the short life of Stephon Clark. [The Sacramento Bee]
 And in Orange County, 59 percent of residents said they supported rent control. That’s a significant disconnect in a county where only one city — San Juan Capistrano — has any form of rent control. [The Orange County Register]
 A woman and her husband left India and settled in Livermore, where it took her seven years to obtain an employment card. She was elated to finally put her biotechnology degree to use, but all that could change with the Trump administration’s crackdown on H-1B visas. [The New York Times]
 California motorists already pay more at the pump than drivers in other states. But a Berkeley professor noticed a price discrepancy that could mean that $3 billion to $4 billion spent on gasoline in California is unaccounted for. [San Diego Union-Tribune]
 Tesla has been plagued by production delays and recent accidents. Our columnist wondered whether the Model 3 could carry the company to safety — and took one for a test drive. [The New York Times]
 Craving something sweet — and savory? This San Luis Obispo cafe is offering a doughnut burger. [The Tribune]
 Robert Haas, a California vintner and leading wine importer who introduced French brands to Americans, died at his home in Templeton, in San Luis Obispo County. He was 90. [The New York Times]
Coming Up This Week
 Melissa Clark, The Times’s food writer, will moderate a discussion on Tuesday with three of Los Angeles’s leading chefs — Jessica Koslow, Niki Nakayama and Susan Feniger — on the evolving state of California cuisine.
 The Sacramento Dog Show begins on Thursday.
 The 2018 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival kicks off on Friday.
And Finally ...
They’ve overrun the streets of San Francisco, to the bemusement — and annoyance — of residents.
Shared electric scooters are available to reserve and rent by app for as little as $1 a ride. They are billed as a way to “help make transportation better and more environmentally friendly” by one start-up, Bird, which has netted $100 million in venture capital funding.
The scooters don’t require docking stations, which means they can be left just about anywhere. Our tech reporter Mike Isaac spotted nearly a dozen within four square blocks.
“A few weeks ago, I had not noticed any electric scooters in SF,” one Twitter user wrote. “Now you can’t exit a building without tripping over one.”
“These Bird scooters went from nonexistent to a viable form of transit in San Francisco overnight,” another tweeted. “I’m impressed.”
The scooters are not explicitly covered by the city’s transportation code; the San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency is working with local officials on legislation to regulate scooter sharing.
California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.
PHOTO: Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman of Saudi Arabia visited Lockheed Martin in San Francisco on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Bandar Algaloud/Saudi Royal Court, via Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: ROYALTY, NOBILITY & GENTRY (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (78%); FILM (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (78%); NATIONAL PARKS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); WEATHER (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); CONSERVATISM (73%); ELECTIONS (73%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS SECTOR PERFORMANCE (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (73%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (73%); DESERTS (72%); SPACE EXPLORATION (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (71%); EXECUTIVES (70%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (68%); NEGATIVE NEWS (68%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (66%); FLOODS & FLOODING (61%); IMPEACHMENT (60%); SEVERE WEATHER (60%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (56%); California Today (%)

Company:  LOCKHEED MARTIN CORP (58%);  FOUR SEASONS HOTELS INC (56%);  GOOGLE INC (54%);  RITZ CARLTON HOTEL CO LLC (53%)

Ticker: LMT (NYSE) (58%)

Industry: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS334511 SEARCH, DETECTION, NAVIGATION, GUIDANCE, AERONAUTICAL & NAUTICAL SYSTEM & INSTRUMENT MFG (58%); SIC5088 TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT & SUPPLIES, EXCEPT MOTOR VEHICLES (58%); SIC3812 SEARCH, DETECTION, NAVIGATION, GUIDANCE, AERONAUTICAL & NAUTICAL SYSTEMS & INSTRUMENTS (58%); SIC3728 AIRCRAFT PARTS & AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT, NEC (58%); SIC3721 AIRCRAFT (58%); NAICS721110 HOTELS (EXCEPT CASINO HOTELS) & MOTELS (56%); SIC7011 HOTELS & MOTELS (56%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (54%); BIG TECH (90%); ROYALTY, NOBILITY & GENTRY (90%); HOTELS & MOTELS (89%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (78%); FILM (78%); SPACE INDUSTRY (78%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (77%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (77%); NATIONAL PARKS (77%); SATELLITE INDUSTRY (77%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS SECTOR PERFORMANCE (73%); MOTORIZED SCOOTERS (73%); SPACE EXPLORATION (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (71%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (71%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (66%); CLOUD COMPUTING (65%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (56%)

Person: MOHAMMED BIN SALMAN (92%); SALMAN BIN ABDUL AZIZ (79%); MARK ZUCKERBERG (78%); LEON E PANETTA (58%); RICHARD BRANSON (57%); OPRAH WINFREY (55%); TIM COOK (50%)

Geographic: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (93%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (93%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (90%); RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (78%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); YEMEN (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); MIDDLE EAST (58%)

Load-Date: April 25, 2018


End of Document
U.S. Residents, but Not Yet Allowed Home
The New York Times
May 18, 2021 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7
Length: 1171 words
Byline: By Aishvarya Kavi
Body


Thousands of immigrants who live in the United States on temporary visas and traveled to India in recent weeks have been stranded there under the Biden administration's travel ban.
In early April, Payal Raj accompanied her family to India to renew the visas that permit them to live in the United States. She and her husband waited until they had been vaccinated, carefully preparing their paperwork according to the advice of their immigration lawyers. But the visa itself would soon strand her in India indefinitely, separating her from her husband and daughter in Hendersonville, Tenn. 
  ''Our family is in a crisis,'' said Ms. Raj, who is one of thousands of immigrants stuck in India, in part because the Biden administration's restrictions on most travel from the country mean that temporary visa holders are explicitly barred from re-entering the United States. ''Every morning is a struggle.''
  The restrictions, issued as a devastating surge in coronavirus cases has overwhelmed India in recent weeks, prohibit Ms. Raj and others like her from returning to their homes, families and jobs in the United States. Even those exempt under the ban are in limbo as the outbreak forces the U.S. Embassy and consulates to close, leaving many with no clear path home.
  Ms. Raj's husband, Yogesh Kumar, an operations manager for a multinational corporation, lives in the United States on an H-1B visa, or a temporary permit for highly technical foreign workers. As dependents, Ms. Raj and their daughter hold H-4 visas, which allow temporary workers to bring immediate family and must be renewed about every three years at an embassy or consulate outside the United States.
  Mr. Kumar and his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, renewed their visas, but Ms. Raj was asked to submit biometrics and complete an in-person interview, both of which would not be completed until after the travel restrictions went into effect two weeks ago.
  As the primary breadwinner, Mr. Kumar said his employer would not allow him to work from India indefinitely given that some aspects of his job required in-person interaction. He returned to Tennessee with Saanvi, leaving Ms. Raj behind in Bangalore.
  ''If he quits his job, we won't have any means to sustain ourselves,'' Ms. Raj said of her husband, whose income also supports both their parents. ''But in the middle of all of this, I'm sitting here, away from my family, for I don't know -- months? Years?''
  The White House did not respond to questions about the restrictions on travel from India, but a State Department representative described them as ''appropriate public health measures'' that are ''critical'' to defeating the coronavirus.
  ''The pandemic is a global issue, and it will not be over for anyone until it's over for everyone,'' the representative said in a statement.
  But critics say that the exemptions to the travel ban are unevenly applied and still risk spreading the virus. American citizens and permanent residents, for instance, can travel freely, while people who are fully vaccinated, test negative or quarantine before and after flying cannot. The administration has not indicated when or under what circumstances it would lift the restrictions.
  ''They just put the same blanket ban for India that they were using in the Trump administration,'' said Greg Siskind, an immigration lawyer who is suing the Biden administration over the State Department's inability to issue visas in countries experiencing lockdowns. ''This was the same style ban that President Biden said last March was ineffective and was a bad idea.''
  The United States has restricted entry from a number of countries, but the most recent ban has had a disproportionate effect on Indians in the United States given that Indian citizens claim more than two-thirds of H-1B visas issued each year. Including those on other kinds of nonimmigrant visas, immigration lawyers estimate that thousands of Indians living in the United States have been affected.
  Some traveled to India when coronavirus case counts were low to renew their visas or see family. Others went to care for sick or dying relatives. Now some are unable to secure even emergency appointments to renew their visas at the embassy in New Delhi or any of the four U.S. consulates in India.
  In late April, Gaurav Chauhan traveled to Agra to care for his father, who was hospitalized with the coronavirus. He is now separated from his wife and two children, who live in Atlanta.
  As a parent of American citizens who are minors, Mr. Chauhan is exempt from the ban, but he has been unable to make an emergency appointment on the State Department's website to renew his visa. His employer, a software company, has temporarily allowed Mr. Chauhan, who works in human resources, to do his job overseas. But others in similar situations say they have been asked to leave their jobs.
  ''If you are certain that in two months or three months things are going to be normal, we are going to get a visa issued, you have at least a timeline of when you are going to see your family,'' Mr. Chauhan said. ''But the uncertainty -- that's the thing that is killing us.''
  Since the beginning of the pandemic, American embassy and consulate closings have bottlenecked visa processing. In early April, 76 percent of consulates were still fully or partly closed, according to an analysis of State Department data by the Cato Institute, a libertarian think tank.
  Such shutdowns should not stop visa processing, Mr. Siskind said, pointing to other immigration agencies that had successfully adapted to remote work and exceptions to in-person document submission.
  ''One of the issues with the State Department for the last 14 months is their lack of imagination in terms of how to change their procedures in a pandemic,'' Mr. Siskind said. ''They have, for example, not switched to video interviewing, which is something that they have the statutory authority to do.''
  The State Department acknowledged that ''services are limited'' at U.S. outposts in India but said that it would ''make every attempt to continue to honor approved emergency visa appointments.'' The department could not provide a specific date for when other visa services would resume.
  Abhiram, a professor in Broward County, Fla., whose wife and 3-year-old daughter remain outside Hyderabad after visiting family in January, said he did not fault the government for enforcing travel restrictions to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. But the situation has made him consider whether to stay in the United States.
  ''Every day my daughter asks me, 'Daddy, where are you?''' said Abhiram, who asked to be identified only by his middle name. ''I do feel sometimes like going back to my home country, rather than dealing with this.''
  But for Ms. Raj and her family, home is Hendersonville.
  ''Our whole day-to-day life was interacting with our neighbors, going and visiting friends, getting together for backyard parties. It's been wonderful,'' she said. ''I don't want to uproot our lives.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/17/us/politics/india-travel-restrictions.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Yogesh Kumar with his daughter, Saanvi Kumar, at home. His wife, Payal Raj, is stranded in India under the U.S. travel ban. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM DESHAZER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION (91%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); FAMILY (77%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); PANDEMICS (77%); PUBLIC HEALTH (77%); EPIDEMICS (76%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (76%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (73%); CORONAVIRUSES (72%); VACCINES (72%); VIRUSES (72%); RESIGNATIONS (71%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (71%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (68%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (65%); BIOMETRICS (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); TRAVEL BANS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (77%); VACCINES (72%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (89%)

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); TENNESSEE, USA (92%); INDIA (95%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: May 18, 2021


End of Document
Latest Product Of Tech Firms: Immigrant Bill
The New York Times
May 5, 2013 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1800 words
Byline: By ERIC LIPTON and SOMINI SENGUPTA; Eric Lipton reported from Washington, and Somini Sengupta from San Francisco. Neha Thirani contributed reporting from Mumbai, India.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The television advertisement that hit the airwaves in Florida last month featured the Republican Party's rising star, Senator Marco Rubio, boasting about his get-tough plan for border security.
But most who watched the commercial, sponsored by a new group that calls itself Americans for a Conservative Direction, may be surprised to learn who bankrolled it: senior executives from Silicon Valley, like Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook and Reid Hoffman of LinkedIn, who run companies where the top employees donate mostly to Democrats.
The advertising blitz reflects the sophisticated lobbying campaign being waged by technology companies and their executives.
They have managed to secure much of what they want in the landmark immigration bill now pending in Congress, provisions that would allow them to fill thousands of vacant jobs with foreign engineers. At the same time, they have openly encouraged lawmakers to make it harder for consulting companies in India and elsewhere to provide foreign workers temporarily to this country.
Those deals were worked out through what Senate negotiators acknowledged was extraordinary access by American technology companies to staff members who drafted the bill. The companies often learned about detailed provisions even before all the members of the so-called Gang of Eight senators who worked out the package were informed.
''We are very pleased with the progress and happy with what's in the bill,'' said Peter J. Muller, a former House aide who now works as the director of government relations at Intel. ''It addresses many of the issues we've been advocating for years.''
Now, along with other industry heavyweights, including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the technology companies are trying to make sure the law gets passed -- which explains the political-style television advertising campaign, sponsored by a group that has revealed no details about how much money it gets from its individual supporters.
The industry also hopes to get more from the deal by working to remove some regulatory restrictions in the proposal, including on hiring foreign workers and firing Americans.
Silicon Valley was once politically aloof before realizing in recent years that its future profits depended in part on battles here in Washington. Its effort to influence immigration legislation is one of its most sophisticated.
The technology industry ''understands there's probably not a tremendous amount of resistance to their part of the bill,'' Mr. Rubio said in an interview last week, saying he welcomed the industry support. ''But their future and getting the reform passed is tied to the overall bill.''
The bill has a good chance of winning passage in the Senate. The hardest sell will come in the House, where many conservative Republicans see the deal as too generous to immigrants who came to this nation illegally.
Rob Jesmer, a former top Republican Senate strategist who helps run the new Zuckerberg-backed nonprofit group that sponsored the Rubio ad, insisted that his organization's push is based on the personal convictions of the executives who donated to the cause and who believe immigration laws need to be changed. Those convictions just happen to line up with what their corporations are lobbying for as well, he said.
''It will give a lot of people who are educated in this country who are already here a chance to remain in the United States,'' Mr. Jesmer said, ''and encourage entrepreneurs from all over the world to come to the United States and create jobs.''
The profound transition under way inside Silicon Valley companies is illustrated by their lobbying disclosure reports filed in Congress. Facebook's lobbying budget swelled from $351,000 in 2010 to $2.45 million in the first three months of this year, while Google spent a record $18 million last year.
That boom in spending translates into hiring of top talent in the art of Washington deal-making. These companies have hired people like Joel D. Kaplan, a onetime deputy chief of staff in the Bush administration who now works for Facebook; Susan Molinari, a former House Republican from New York who is now a Google lobbyist; and outside lobbyists like Steven Elmendorf, a former chief of staff to Richard A. Gephardt, a former House majority leader, who works for Facebook.
The immigration fight, which has unified technology companies perhaps more than any other issue, has brought the lobbying effort to new heights. The industry sees it as a fix to a stubborn problem: job vacancies, particularly for engineers.
''We are not able to fill all the jobs that we are creating,'' Brad Smith, Microsoft's general counsel, told the Senate Judiciary Committee late last month.
Chief executives met with President Obama to discuss immigration. Venture capitalists testified in Congress. Their lobbyists roamed the Senate corridors to make sure their appeals were considered in the closed-door negotiations among the Gang of Eight, which included Mr. Rubio and Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, who have been particularly receptive.
In the many phone calls and hallway asides on Capitol Hill this year, those lobbyists realized that they had to give a little to get a lot of what they wanted. At the top of their wish list was an expansion of a temporary visa program called the H-1B, which allows companies to hire foreigners for jobs in the United States. There are a limited number of H-1Bs available each year, and competition for them is fierce.
Companies like Facebook and Intel use them largely to bring workers to their own offices. Consulting companies like Tata, based in India, use them to supply computer workers at American banks, oil companies and sometimes software firms.
Critics of H-1B visas point out that they mostly bring workers at the lowest pay scales. The technology industry's main rivals in these negotiations were lawmakers who have long been critical of guest worker visa programs, chiefly Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and groups that represent American engineers.
Silicon Valley lobbyists told Senate negotiators they agreed that the H1-B visa system had been subject to abuse. Go after the companies that take advantage of guest worker visas and give us the benefit of the doubt, they told the Senate staff members, according to interviews with several lobbyists.
''You know and we know there are some bad people in this system,'' is how Scott Corley, the president of Compete America, a technology industry coalition, recalled the conversation. ''We are simply trying to make sure that as they are pursuing the rats they are not sinking the ship.''
That acknowledgment, several lobbyists said privately, helped unlock an impasse in negotiations.
What emerged was a Senate measure that allows American technology companies to procure many more skilled guest worker visas, raising the limit to 110,000 a year from 65,000 under current law, along with a provision to expand it further based on market demand. The bill would also allow these companies to move workers on guest visas more easily to permanent resident visas, freeing up more temporary visas for these companies.
But it requires them to pay higher wages for guest workers and to post job openings on a Web site, so Americans can have a chance at them. And it draws a line in the sand between these technology firms and the mostly Indian companies that supply computer workers on H-1B visas for short-term jobs at companies in the United States.
''This provision accomplishes the goal of discouraging abuse of the program while providing an important incentive for companies to bring top talent to work in the United States for the long-term, where they will contribute to our economy,'' said Mr. Kaplan, the former Republican White House aide who is now the vice president for United States public policy at Facebook.
The bill is written in such a way that it penalizes companies that have a large share of foreign guest workers among their United States work forces, eventually making it impossible for them to bring in any more. It allows large American companies that have many more American workers to continue to import workers. And it includes a provision that exempts from the guest worker count those employees that companies sponsor for green cards, essentially a bonus to American businesses like Facebook whose work forces are growing fast.
Companies that provide temporary foreign workers say the move is intended to push them out of the American market.
These companies, mostly based in India, have far less good will on Capitol Hill. Their hope now rests with convincing lawmakers that it would be counterproductive to punish them.
''Why are we in the United States? We are there because American corporations want us,'' said Som Mittal, the president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, which represents Indian companies. ''We help them become competitive and serve their customers better.''
In interviews, Mr. Rubio and an aide to Mr. Schumer said the draft bill takes a balanced approach to penalize those who do not hire American workers for jobs here. They say the proposal is good for the country, even as it may benefit American technology firms.
In March, some of the biggest figures in the technology industry, including Mr. Zuckerberg, the Microsoft founder Bill Gates and the venture capitalist John Doerr, unveiled a new nonprofit advocacy group, called Fwd.Us, with its first mission being to push Congress to overhaul immigration law. The group has hired lobbyists and a staff of veteran political operatives.
One of its first campaigns was to bankroll the television ad for Mr. Rubio. Two other ads backed Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, and Senator Mark Begich, Democrat of Alaska, who is considered a critical swing vote, in a state where there are many critics of the legislation. Mr. Jesmer said the group spent ''in the seven figures'' on the ads.
Mr. Rubio has been a vocal ally. He says he understands the industry's need for talent and wants to prevent companies from having to ship work overseas.
To negotiate the details on the immigration bill, Mr. Rubio hired Enrique Gonzalez, who took a leave from a law firm that handles H-1B visa applications for many technology companies. Mr. Gonzalez said the assignment presented no conflict of interest because he works with universities handling visas, not technology companies.
The fact that technology lobbyists were given an unusual degree of access to the negotiators on the bill is entirely justified, he said. ''Because of the unique needs of the technology industry, the newness of it, the novelty of a lot of the issues they are confronting, I think that was why there were more engaged than some of the other industries were,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/05/us/politics/tech-firms-take-lead-in-lobbying-on-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, at lectern, with other senators who worked on an immigration overhaul now under consideration. The plan is being heavily promoted by senior executives from Silicon Valley, including Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook, left. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY J. SCOTT APPLEWHITE/ASSOCIATED PRESS
 JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A18)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); NEW PRODUCTS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (75%); LOBBYING (73%); PENDING LEGISLATION (73%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (70%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (66%)

Company:  INTEL CORP (57%);  FACEBOOK INC (57%)

Ticker: INTC (NASDAQ) (57%); FB (NASDAQ) (57%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (57%); MARKETING & ADVERTISING (90%); BROADCAST ADVERTISING (89%); MARKETING CAMPAIGNS (89%); SPONSORSHIP (89%); TELEVISION ADVERTISING (89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); NEW PRODUCTS (78%)

Person: MARK ZUCKERBERG (76%); REID HOFFMAN (72%); MARCO RUBIO (58%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: May 5, 2013


End of Document
Planned Trump Order Will Discourage Hiring of Low-Wage Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 531 words
Byline: MICHAEL D. SHEAR
Highlight: The president is expected to sign an executive order on Tuesday to make it harder for technology companies to recruit foreign workers with H-1B visas.
Body


WASHINGTON — President Trump is expected to sign an executive order on Tuesday aimed at making it harder for technology companies to recruit low-wage workers from foreign countries and undercut Americans looking for jobs.
Mr. Trump will also direct all federal agencies to systematically examine the effectiveness of government rules and trade agreements that require a preference for purchasing from American companies.
The president will announce the order during a visit to the headquarters of Snap-on Tools in Kenosha, Wis., senior administration officials told reporters during a briefing Monday afternoon. The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to preview the president’s announcement.
As a candidate, Mr. Trump often assailed the government’s H-1B visa program, under which the government admits 85,000 immigrants each year, mostly to work in high-tech jobs. Mr. Trump pledged to end the program, which he said was allowing companies to fire Americans and replace them with lower-cost foreign employees.
The expected executive order falls far short of ending that program, but the administration officials argued on Monday that the changes Mr. Trump sought would radically change it.
The officials said 80 percent of the immigrants who enter the United States under the current visa program are paid less than the median wage for workers in their fields.
The president’s order seeks changes to the program that would require applicants and their potential employers to demonstrate that the visas are going only to “the most highly skilled workers” in their fields.
As a result, the officials said, the H-1B visa would no longer be a cheap way for companies to replace American workers. But technology executives, who have argued that the program is vital to their ability to recruit talent, are likely to be frustrated by the change.
Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a research group sponsored by several tech companies, predicted in January that a crackdown on H-1B visas would be counterproductive.
“The effect would end up being exactly the opposite of what Trump wants,” he said. “Companies would go offshore, like Microsoft did with Vancouver, Canada,” to seek talent.
The changes Mr. Trump is seeking will take some time to carry out, the administration officials said. The order will call for a 220-day review of waivers and exceptions made to decades-old “Buy American” rules.
Those waivers are at the heart of about 60 trade deals with foreign countries, the officials said. If the review finds that the waivers are detrimental to American workers, the trade deals could be renegotiated, they added.
In addition, all federal agencies will be directed to strictly enforce “Buy American” rules, giving the highest priority to American companies when making purchasing decisions.
Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook,            Twitter and in            the Morning Briefing newsletter.
Related Articles
    • Changes to Tech Worker Visas Are Cosmetic. For Now.
    • Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
    • Not Everyone in Tech Cheers Visa Program for Foreign Workers
    • Tech Industry Frets Over Possible Immigration Changes
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: FOREIGN LABOR (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); WAGES & SALARIES (91%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (90%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (76%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (73%); United States Politics and Government (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Visas (%); Foreign Workers (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (93%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (52%); WISCONSIN, USA (79%); BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (52%); UNITED STATES (97%); CANADA (79%)

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
Fixing the ‘Involuntary Housewife Visa’; Op-Ed Contributor
The New York Times 
April 18, 2018 Wednesday 06:07 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 998 words
Byline: Shikha Dalmia
Highlight: Why is President Trump so determined to prevent spouses of H-1B visa holders from living the American dream?
Body


I came to America from India at age 23. That was in 1985, a golden age of immigration to this country. It didn’t feel like it, though, because it still took my husband, a medical physicist, and me a good seven years to trade up from our student visas for an H-1B for him and an H-4 spouse visa for me. Eventually we got the ultimate prize: green cards — which, to our amusement, weren’t even green back then.
In the decades since, wait times for green cards for Indian techies have become impossibly long, with particularly unfortunate consequences for H-4 spouses who want to work. And President Trump is now poised to undo a 2015 Obama-era regulation that took a small stab at addressing their plight.
An H-1B, which is primarily reserved for high-tech talent, allowed my now ex-husband to accept a job at a Detroit cancer hospital. But my H-4 barred me from working, even though I already had several years of journalism experience along with a degree in biology and chemistry. I had to wait another two years for my green card before I got the legal right to earn a living.
Putting my career on hold until I was 30 was frustrating, especially since we had a baby to support. But Indian spouses on H-4s — well over 90 percent of them women — who came after me envy my experience.
When I arrived, the wait times for green cards for Indian H-1Bs averaged about four years. But over the next several decades, the wait steadily grew. By 2005, it was more like 10 to 15 years. Today, according to the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research outfit, Indian H-1Bs can expect to stand in the green card queue for several decades.
This happened because in 1990, Congress imposed an annual limit on employment-based green cards that was far too low for America’s growing economy. This was on top of the overall green card cap and country-specific quotas. With the I.T. revolution taking off and Silicon Valley aggressively recruiting Indians on H-1Bs, the timing of this third blow couldn’t have been more inopportune.
The upshot is that Indians who’ve applied for their H-1B in the past six years may end up retiring before seeing their green cards. And their spouses may have to abandon hope of ever working in America unless they can get their own H-1B.
That was never easy. These visas have always been in short supply. Over the past six years, they’ve been running out within the first week after the government starts accepting applications. It also means finding an employer in the same town as your husband that is willing to hire and sponsor you despite the cost and the uncertainty involved. That’s why Indian women plaintively refer to the H-4 as an “involuntary housewife visa.”
Late in his term, after it became clear that comprehensive immigration reform wasn’t going anywhere, President Barack Obama issued a regulation giving 100,000 H-4 spouses work authorization so long as their husbands had scaled all the bureaucratic hurdles — like obtaining labor certification — and filed a completed green card application, which still takes a year. This was a huge boon to Indian spouses, who eagerly applied, landing about            93 percent of the authorizations.
But an anti-immigration outfit called Save Jobs USA sued the Obama administration, claiming that work authorization for H-1B spouses meant that the United States would end up “importing” two foreign workers for every one. Instead of defending the regulation in court, the Trump administration has decided, come June, to scrap it to advance its “Buy American, Hire American” agenda. Although there is nothing official yet, once the regulatory process is completed, the government may stop handing out new authorizations or renewing existing ones when they expire.
Restrictionists assume a zero-sum math for workers: A job gain for a foreigner is a job loss for an American. By that logic every college graduate who enters the job market would be cause for mourning. But that’s backward, given that skilled individuals create, not take away, jobs, and no economy succeeds by shackling qualified people.
These women are qualified because educated people tend to marry other educated people. The majority of H-4 women have college degrees, according to a 2014 survey by the blogger Rashi Bhatnagar, herself an H-4 visa holder. They also happen to be between the ages of 26 and 35 — peak productive years. It would be far better for the economy to accommodate their ambitions and turn them into productive, taxpaying individuals.
Not letting them do so is a personal tragedy for them. But it also turns the restrictionist worry that immigrants today prefer to live transnational lives rather than assimilate into a self-fulfilling prophecy. A job is not just income. It is also an assimilation program because it offers an entry into a new culture and a chance to form new friendships.
Because getting a green card took only a few years when I came, I, like many other spouses in my situation, used that time to obtain a graduate degree and build skills in preparation for entering the job market. However, what would be the point of investing that kind of time and effort in an advanced degree if there is so little certainty that it would actually offer a return one day? Many H-4 wives I know end up staying at home, Skyping with friends and family back home to escape the boredom and isolation of being confined to a “gilded cage” — their description of their life in America.
I remember feeling an exhilarating world of opportunities open up before me when I got my green card. It is sad — and senseless — that President Trump is so determined to prevent others like me from experiencing the full promise of America and participating fully in American life.
Shikha Dalmia is a senior writer at Reason magazine and a columnist at The Week. 
PHOTO: A newly sworn in United States citizen listening to a speech at a naturalization ceremony for new citizens. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Robert Nickelsberg/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (99%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); NUCLEAR MEDICINE (90%); IMMIGRATION (78%); BIOPHYSICS (77%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (77%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); BIPARTISANSHIP (73%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (68%); BIOLOGY (66%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); United States Politics and Government (%); National Foundation for American Policy (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Obama, Barack (%); India (%); United States (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); NUCLEAR MEDICINE (90%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); BARACK OBAMA (89%); Trump, Donald J; Obama, Barack

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (71%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: April 20, 2018


End of Document
An Easier Path For Foreigners In Biden's Plan
The New York Times
May 31, 2021 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1916 words
Byline: By Michael D. Shear and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Body


Documents obtained by The New York Times show far-reaching efforts by President Biden to remake the immigration system and undo much of his predecessor's legacy.
WASHINGTON -- If President Biden gets his way, it will soon be far easier to immigrate to the United States. There will be shorter, simpler forms and applicants will have to jump through fewer security hoops. Foreigners will have better opportunities to join their families and more chances to secure work visas. 
  A 46-page draft blueprint obtained by The New York Times maps out the Biden administration's plans to significantly expand the legal immigration system, including methodically reversing the efforts to dismantle it by former President Donald J. Trump, who reduced the flow of foreign workers, families and refugees, erecting procedural barriers tougher to cross than his ''big, beautiful wall.''
  Because of Mr. Trump's immigration policies, the average time it takes to approve employer-sponsored green cards has doubled. The backlog for citizenship applications is up 80 percent since 2014, to more than 900,000 cases. Approval for the U-visa program, which grants legal status for immigrants willing to help the police, has gone from five months to roughly five years.
  In almost every case over the last four years, immigrating to the United States has become harder, more expensive and takes longer.
  And while Mr. Biden made clear during his presidential campaign that he intended to undo much of his predecessor's immigration legacy, the blueprint offers new details about how far-reaching the effort will be -- not only rolling back Mr. Trump's policies, but addressing backlogs and delays that plagued prior presidents.
  The blueprint, dated May 3 and titled ''D.H.S. Plan to Restore Trust in Our Legal Immigration System,'' lists scores of initiatives intended to reopen the country to more immigrants, making good on the president's promise to ensure America embraces its ''character as a nation of opportunity and of welcome.''
  ''There are significant changes that need to be made to really open up all avenues of legal immigration,'' said Felicia Escobar Carrillo, the chief of staff at U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, of the efforts to reverse Mr. Trump's agenda. ''In the same way that they took a broad-stroke approach to closing off avenues, I think we want to take a broad approach toward opening up the legal avenues that have always been available but that they tried to put roadblocks up on.''
  Since taking office four months ago, Mr. Biden has struggled with a historic surge in migration by Central American children and teenagers that has prompted some Republicans to accuse the president of flinging open the nation's borders to people trying to enter the country illegally, a charge the White House rejects.
  In fact, Mr. Biden does want to open the country to more immigrants. His ambition, as reflected in the blueprint, is to rebuild and expand the opportunities for foreigners to enter the United States -- but to do so legally.
  Divided into seven sections, the document offers detailed policy proposals that would help more foreigners move to the United States, including high-skilled workers, trafficking victims, the families of Americans living abroad, American Indians born in Canada, refugees, asylum-seekers and farm workers. Immigrants who apply online could pay less in fees or even secure a waiver in an attempt to ''reduce barriers'' to immigration. And regulations would be overhauled to ''encourage full participation by immigrants in our civic life.''
  Even with a more restrictive and slower immigration system, about 1 million people obtained green cards in 2019, the last full year before the pandemic. Most had been waiting for years. In the final year of the Obama administration, 1.2 million people received green cards.
  But if Mr. Biden accomplishes everything in the document, he will have gone further than just reversing the downward trend. He will have significantly increased opportunities for foreigners around the globe to come to the United States, embracing robust immigration even as a divisive, decades-long political debate continues to rage over such a policy.
  Most of the changes could be put into practice without passage of Mr. Biden's proposed overhaul of the nation's immigration laws, which would provide a pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented people living in the United States but has stalled in a bitterly divided Congress. While surveys show that most Americans support increased immigration, many Republican voters have eagerly backed Mr. Trump's more restrictive policies.
  White House officials declined to comment directly on the Homeland Security Department's blueprint, saying that such documents go through many drafts and that decisions about specific steps to address legal immigration remain in flux. But they said the president remained committed to significantly rolling back the restrictions imposed by his predecessor.
  That effort will take time and has not yet caught the public's attention like the surge of crossings at the southwest border. But conservative activists who have for years demanded lower levels of legal immigration are vowing a fight to stop Mr. Biden and extract a political price for his actions.
  ''They just want to shovel people in here,'' said Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, a former Virginia attorney general who served as the acting head of Citizenship and Immigration Services under Mr. Trump. ''They are not running an immigration system for the benefit of America, and certainly not for the benefit of ordinary Americans. ''
  Most research has shown that legal immigration to the United States has benefits for the country's economy, especially at a time when the country's population growth is slowing. But Mr. Cuccinelli and others who favor severe restrictions on immigration say it is obvious to them that letting foreigners compete for jobs -- especially when the country is still recovering from an economic downturn like the one created by the pandemic -- will hurt the prospects for American citizens.
  ''The number one job for the immigration services is to make sure that immigration does not hurt Americans,'' said Roy Beck, the founder of NumbersUSA, a group dedicated to far lower levels of legal immigration.
  Motivated by that belief, Mr. Cuccinelli set in motion a transformation of the government's legal immigration system during the Trump administration -- changing his agency from one that confers benefits on foreigners into a ''vetting agency,'' in part by issuing numerous restrictions on offering asylum for immigrants and trying to raise fees.
  The increased vetting, as well as travel restrictions imposed during the pandemic, helped contribute to the result the Trump administration had sought: The influx of immigrants slowed significantly, as winning legal approval to enter the United States became much harder.
  With fewer immigrants coming through the pipeline, there has been less money to finance Citizenship and Immigration Services, which is supported almost entirely by fees paid by immigrants. Restoring the agency to full capacity is at the heart of Mr. Biden's effort to expand legal immigration, according to the document and interviews with administration officials.
  A central element of the blueprint is addressing backlogs in the immigration system.
  The administration is planning to fast-track immigration applications by expanding virtual interviews and electronic filing, as well as limiting the requests for evidence from applicants. Mr. Biden has tapped Cass R. Sunstein, a former Obama administration official and legal scholar at Harvard Law School, to remake the immigration system so it is ''more effective and less burdensome'' than it has been in decades by ''reducing paperwork and other administrative requirements.''
  Mr. Biden wants to restore opportunities for foreign employees through the existing H-1B visa program, which is intended for workers with special skills. The administration also intends to create new pathways for foreign entrepreneurs who wish to ''start-up businesses and create jobs for U.S. workers,'' according to the document.
  Officials are working on a regulation that could allow migrants to win asylum in the United States if they are victims of domestic violence or their relatives were persecuted. During the Trump era, Attorney General William P. Barr moved to end asylum protection for those who claimed they deserved it for those reasons.
  Mr. Biden is also aiming to expand immigration opportunities for L.G.B.T.Q. refugees from countries where they are persecuted or where same-sex marriages are not recognized.
  In addition, he wants to revamp a program that provides a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who help law enforcement by cooperating with police or testifying in court.
  The waiting list for the U-Visa program has ballooned, leaving crime victims and survivors of domestic abuse vulnerable to abusers who may threaten to report them for deportation if they continue to talk to the police, said Leslye E. Orloff, director of the national immigrant women's advocacy project at American University.
  The Biden administration is considering extending protections to immigrants who cooperate even before they make it on the official waiting list for the visa, according to the document.
  ''They're recognizing that there's danger for these victims,'' Ms. Orloff said.
  Critics say the Biden administration is ignoring the negative consequences of their efforts. The H-1B program has been attacked as a loophole for tech companies to import cheap foreign workers to compete for jobs. Granting asylum to the victims of domestic abuse could open the door to accepting millions of additional people. And some Republicans say Mr. Biden should not loosen vetting of foreigners, though officials insist they will continue to screen for terrorists and other threats.
  As the Biden administration pushes forward with the changes, officials appear willing to use emergency rules and presidential memos to avoid the lengthy regulatory process, in much the same way that Mr. Trump put his own agenda in place. But that could make Mr. Biden's immigration legacy subject to a similar reversal by a Republican president in the future.
  ''The question looming over all of this work is how do you do this in a way that isn't easily so capsized next time around,'' said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship.
  Change could not come soon enough for Jenn Hawk, 37, who is currently living in with her Argentine husband in Poland, where he works, even though her autistic son is in the Washington area with his father.
  Because of delays in processing her husband's immigration application, she is faced with a choice: stay in Poland with the man she married, or go back to the United States alone to be with her 10-year-old son.
  Ms. Hawk filed to sponsor her husband's immigration to the United States in October of 2020, spending $575 on the application. But they are facing a delay of more than a year and a half before they can even submit their financial and medical information, let alone get an interview with an immigration officer.
  ''I just want to go home,'' Ms. Hawk said. ''It seems like they're doing everything in their power to restrict that from being a possibility.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/30/us/politics/biden-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Dozens of asylum-seeking migrants waiting to be taken to a U.S. Border Patrol facility after crossing the Rio Grande into Texas on May 5. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADREES LATIF/REUTERS) (A15)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (93%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (90%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); REFUGEES (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (73%); APPROVALS (72%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (71%); PUBLIC POLICY (70%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (64%)

Organization: US CUSTOMS & BORDER PROTECTION (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (90%); DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL AMERICA (67%)

Load-Date: May 31, 2021


End of Document
Tech Industry Pushes to Amend Immigration Bill
The New York Times
May 20, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1185 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- The technology industry got much of what it wanted in a bill that overhauls federal immigration law.
But in the give-and-take of political bargaining, the legislation emerged with some provisions the industry considers unappealing. Now its lobbyists are feverishly working to get rid of them.
Whether it gets its way could shape, in part, the fate of the overall package -- and with it, the fate of millions of migrants to this country.
The industry achieved its main goals in the draft Senate bill: an easing of the green card process and an expansion of the number of skilled guest worker visas. That draft, though, includes language that it considers excessive regulatory oversight of when a company can hire a temporary foreign worker and lay off an existing American worker.
Executives from Silicon Valley companies say such language would effectively keep them from using the larger numbers of temporary work permits, known as H-1B visas. They also warn of more jobs being shipped overseas. They are backing proposed amendments that would reverse those provisions.
''The amendments are very important because they allow high-tech companies to use the visas as intended rather than creating regulations that make it so difficult they cannot practically be used,'' the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, which includes I.B.M. and Oracle, said in an e-mailed statement on Friday. It added that most technology companies already hire a preponderance of American workers.
''Companies are willing to show they have tried to hire Americans, but we want to do it in a way that works with their current hiring practices and does not place a heavy administrative burden on them,'' the statement continued. ''The more difficult it is to get H-1B visas, the more likely that jobs will go abroad because there is no American that fits the needed skill set.''
The industry has a powerful ally in Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah. His vote for the bill in the Judiciary Committee is coveted because it is expected to give the legislation crucial conservative support. He has filed several amendments that technology companies favor but that other senators, who insist on additional protections for American workers, have resisted.
Lawmakers were trying to work out compromise language on the bill before Monday, when the committee resumes its deliberations.
Silicon Valley has wasted no time in weighing in. Executives have called senators to press their case, industry lobbyists say. And those lobbyists have themselves been on hand when the committee has taken up their issues, ready to huddle with Senate aides during breaks.
As if to underscore the industry's concern in passing the bill, the secretary of homeland security, Janet Napolitano, traveled to San Francisco on Friday to discuss revamping the immigration law with technology executives.
Critics of Silicon Valley counter that its demands could imperil the overhaul as a whole, including the fate of millions of migrants who stand to gain legal papers.
How can the tech companies threaten to kill comprehensive legislation ''when it contains almost all they have said they wanted?'' said Bruce Morrison, a former chairman of the House immigration committee who now lobbies for the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. ''All of America should lose the good the bill does so that they can fire Americans and replace them with H-1Bs? Ridiculous.''
The industry is unlikely to actively sabotage the bill if it does not get its way. It could, though, stop supporting the cause, as it has enthusiastically done this year. A well-financed group led by Facebook's chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has backed television advertisements for Republicans who support the immigration overhaul. A ''virtual march'' is planned for Wednesday; the event is intended to mobilize tech employees to bombard Congress with automated messages in favor of the bill.
The draft bill makes it easier to sponsor foreign math and science graduates from United States universities for permanent residency. It creates a visa program for entrepreneurs. And it expands, to 110,000, from 65,000, the number of temporary workers allowed into the country every year on H-1B visas, in addition to several thousand more when there is additional demand for workers.
''Over all, tech has gotten, by any metric, the best bill they've ever seen on this issue in terms of H-1Bs,'' said an aide to the Judiciary Committee, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because negotiations were continuing.
To assuage the concerns of American worker groups, like the one Mr. Morrison represents, lawmakers put a provision in the bill that raises minimum wages for guest workers, effectively making it tougher to use the temporary visas to drive down wages in the overall industry. Additionally, the draft makes it all but impossible for outsourcing companies, which are mostly Indian, to bring temporary workers to the United States -- leaving many more for companies based in the United States to recruit.
Technology sector lobbyists are generally pleased with the bill. But they are now objecting to language that requires employers to ensure that an ''equally qualified'' American is not available for a job opening before hiring a foreign temporary worker and allows the Labor Department to regulate. One lobbyist said that could put federal labor officials in the position of ''second-guessing hiring decisions.''
One of Mr. Hatch's amendments would tweak this language so that companies would have to follow only industry standards on hiring, effectively eliminating regulatory oversight.
Tech companies also object to language that would compel companies to show that they have not laid off an American employee 90 days before or after hiring a temporary foreign worker. The companies see this as bureaucratic interference. They support another amendment by Mr. Hatch that would require employers to state on paper that they have not replaced an American employee with a foreign guest worker.
The restrictions on hiring and firing, one industry lobbyist said, would make it difficult for companies to use the additional H-1B visas. ''The numbers mean nothing if you can't use them,'' said the lobbyist, who declined to be named because of the delicate political negotiations. ''The restrictions are so onerous and impose high-cost bureaucratic requirements that they carry too much risk. And if the better option is to hire foreign workers outside the U.S., they'll pursue it.''
Michael Moritz, chairman of the venture capital firm Sequoia Capital, said the industry was lobbying for policies that would buoy the United States economy as a whole. ''The message from Silicon Valley is about the future of America -- it's not about the hiring needs of a few technology companies,'' he said on Friday. ''America's place will be assured if we can continue to be the magnet for the smartest and most energetic young people from all over the world. We need to attract them to the U.S. and keep them here. There's a danger that this sentiment gets lost amidst all the mindless politicking.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/20/technology/tech-industry-pushes-to-amend-immigration-bill.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO:   Scott Corley of Compete America, a coalition of technology companies, wants some language  modified. Whether the industry gets its way could shape, in part, the fate of the overall package. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL ROSENBAUM FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (89%); LOBBYING (89%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (77%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (74%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (69%); REGULATORY ACTIONS (69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Person: JANET NAPOLITANO (78%); ORRIN HATCH (57%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: May 20, 2013


End of Document
Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
The New York Times 
April 18, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1265 words
Byline: GLENN THRUSH, NICK WINGFIELD and VINDU GOEL
Highlight: The president said the executive order was a way to end the “theft of American prosperity,” which he said had been brought on by low-wage immigrant labor.
Body


KENOSHA, Wis. — President Trump, hammering his “America First” campaign theme, signed an order on Tuesday that he said would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the visa program for foreign technical workers.
After recent policy reversals that have angered his populist base, Mr. Trump described the visa program as an initiative gone awry that has driven down wages for Americans. The order was a means to end the “theft of American prosperity,” which he said had been brought on by low-wage immigrant labor.
Yet the order calls for a series of relatively modest steps, like a multiagency report on changes needed for the H-1B program, under which the government admits 85,000 foreign workers annually, many of them in the high-tech, industrial, medical and science fields. Collectively, the efforts outlined in the order could take years to carry out.
The H1-B program has become a focus in the debate over the impact of foreign workers. Mr. Trump has criticized employers for abusing the program and using it to avoid hiring higher-paid American counterparts. He vowed to revamp its lottery-based selection process.
The order, signed at the sprawling Snap-on tool factory here, represents a small win for bigger tech companies, which have been in pitched battles for those visas. Companies like Google and Microsoft, which rely heavily on high-skilled foreign workers, had worried that President Trump would make drastic curbs to worker programs that could cripple them.
“I think people are cautiously optimistic that this will be O.K., and maybe even better,” said Tom Alberg, a venture capitalist at Madrona Venture Group, a Seattle firm that invests in high-tech start-ups.
But the order would likely hurt the biggest users of the visa program, technology outsourcing firms that bring foreign workers to the United States to perform technical jobs, typically from India.
On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump stoked outrage from his supporters with accounts of companies like Walt Disney forcing laid-off technical workers to train their overseas replacements.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump spoke in terms of an apple-pie populism that helped him pull off upset victories in November in Midwestern states like Wisconsin.
H-1B visas “should include only the most skilled and highest-paid applicants and should never, ever be used to replace American workers,” Mr. Trump told a gathering of about 500 workers and local luminaries, including the White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus, who hails from Kenosha.
On this point, many executives at American technology companies agree with Mr. Trump. They argue that they mostly apply for H-1Bs for workers when they can’t find qualified American workers, usually those with advanced degrees like a masters or Ph.D.
In recent years, there has been so much demand for H-1B visas that the whole fiscal year’s allocation has run out in a few days in April, when applications are accepted. The visas are then awarded by lottery to qualified applicants. Some 600,000 to 900,000 immigrants are currently in the United States on H-1B visas, researchers estimate.
Outsourcing firms — the top 13 of which accounted for a third of all granted visas in 2014, the last year for which information is publicly available — typically flood the system with visa applications. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all from India.
India’s leading tech trade group, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, said Indian companies were being treated unfairly. “We believe that the current campaign to discredit our sector is driven by persistent myths, such as the ideas that H-1B visa holders are ‘cheap labor’ and ‘train their replacements,’ neither of which is accurate,” the group said in a statement.
Companies like Microsoft, Intel and Amazon are also big recipients. At least 15 percent of the American workforces of Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm hold H-1Bs, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department.
The announcement came at a jittery time for the White House, as Mr. Trump faces the 100th day of his presidency without much to show for it in the way of legislative accomplishment, after the defeat of his health care overhaul. And his two high-profile executive orders cracking down on immigration from predominantly Muslim nations have been stymied by the courts.
“This does nothing,” said Senator Charles Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader. “Like all the other executive orders, it’s just words — he’s calling for new studies. It’s not going to fix the problem. It’s not going to create a single job.”
Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat whose district includes Silicon Valley, said the issue of foreign workers was real, but dismissed the president’s order as poorly targeted and unlikely to achieve its desired result.
“Half of the start-ups in Silicon Valley were created by highly skilled people from other countries,” she said. “I don’t think the president and his staff fully appreciates that fact.”
In a briefing with reporters on Monday, White House officials said the “Buy American and Hire American” order would also overhaul federal procurement practices to increase the selection of products from American companies, especially in the domestic steel industry, which has faced stiff competition from China.
One reform advocated by the Trump administration, which has drawn bipartisan support from Congress, would change the lottery system for awarding H-1B visas, giving extra preference to the highest-paying jobs — a proposal favored by many in the American technology industry.
Representatives from Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Google either declined to comment or didn’t respond to requests for comment.
Blake Irving, the chief executive of domain name and web hosting firm GoDaddy, said he supported the idea of changing the system for issuing H-1Bs to give priority to higher-skilled workers. He said GoDaddy typically receives only about 20 percent of the H-1B visas it applies for.
“If anything, it moves the policy towards something that’s preferential to the expert work force,” said Mr. Irving. “Anything that gets us closer to that is goodness.”
But some smaller technology companies said they were concerned about the changes proposed by the Trump administration.
Punit Soni, the chief executive of Learning Motors, a six-person company in Silicon Valley that is trying to apply artificial intelligence to health care, said the visa changes proposed by the Trump administration would hurt start-ups.
Small companies cannot afford to pay high salaries and are already struggling to attract talent in a tight market, he said. A visa system that favors the highest-paid workers will steer immigrants only to already successful big companies like Google, his former employer.
“We’re a small start-up. Everyone is getting way below-market average salary,” he said.
Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook,            Twitter and in            the Morning Briefing newsletter.
Glen Thrush reported from Kenosha, Nick Wingfield from Seattle and Vindu Goel from San Francisco. Miriam Jordan contributed reporting from Los Angeles.
PHOTO: Facebook is heavily dependent on H-1B visas. Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)
Related Articles
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Planned Trump Order Will Discourage Hiring of Low-Wage Foreign Workers
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); WAGES & SALARIES (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POPULISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); VENTURE CAPITAL (85%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (79%); TRUMPISM (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); LAYOFFS (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (78%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (78%); OUTSOURCING (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (78%); STARTUPS (63%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Visas (%); Foreign Workers (%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Labor and Jobs (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); VENTURE CAPITAL (85%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (92%); REINCE PRIEBUS (79%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WISCONSIN, USA (92%); MIDWEST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 20, 2017


End of Document
Teacher Pay Is So Low in Some U.S. School Districts That They’re Recruiting Overseas
The New York Times 
May 2, 2018 Wednesday 19:11 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 2710 words
Byline: Dana Goldstein
Highlight: Citing a dearth of qualified local candidates, schools are increasingly turning to foreign educators in the Philippines to fill core teaching jobs.
Body


GLENDALE, Ariz. — The latest wave of foreign workers sweeping into American jobs brought Donato Soberano from the Philippines to Arizona two years ago. He had to pay thousands of dollars to a job broker and lived for a time in an apartment with five other Filipino workers. The lure is the pay — 10 times more than what he made doing the same work back home.
But Mr. Soberano is not a hospitality worker or a home health aide. He is in another line of work that increasingly pays too little to attract enough Americans: Mr. Soberano is a public school teacher.
As walkouts by teachers protesting low pay and education funding shortfalls spread across the country, the small but growing movement to recruit teachers from overseas is another sign of the difficulty some districts are having providing the basics to public school students.
Among the latest states hit by the protests is Arizona, where teacher pay is more than $10,000 below the national average of $59,000 per year. The Pendergast Elementary School District, where Mr. Soberano works, has recruited more than 50 teachers from the Philippines since 2015. They hold J-1 visas, which allow them to work temporarily in the United States, like au pairs or camp counselors, but offer no path to citizenship. More than 2,800 foreign teachers arrived on American soil last year through the J-1, according to the State Department, up from about 1,200 in 2010.
“In these times, you have to be innovative and creative in recruiting,” said Patricia Davis-Tussey, Pendergast’s head of human resources. “We embrace diversity and really gain a lot from the cultural exchange experience. Our students do as well.”
The district, which covers parts of Glendale, Avondale and north Phoenix, is a hotbed of activism in the teacher walkout movement, known as #RedforEd. Picketing educators say they have had to move in with their parents, apply for food stamps and pay out of pocket for classroom essentials like graph paper and science supplies. They argue that taxes are too low to adequately fund schools, or for teachers to secure a middle-class lifestyle.
In response to the teacher walkout, Republican lawmakers introduced a budget that provides new funding for salaries and classrooms. But leaders of the #RedForEd movement said the bill fell far short of their demands, and would restore only about a quarter of the $1.1 billion in annual cuts that they say schools have weathered since the last recession.
[Read: Teacher strikes are illegal in many of the walkout states. That hasn’t stopped educators.]
In Pendergast, where salaries of around $40,000 are a source of pain and protest for the district’s American educators, Mr. Soberano is thankful for the pay.
Much like other foreign workers, he went into debt to find a job in the United States. He said he used savings and a bank loan to pay $12,500, about three years’ worth of his salary in the Philippines, to Petro-Fil Manpower Services. That is a Filipino company of Ligaya Avenida, a California-based consultant who recruits and screens teachers for the J-1.
The payment covered Mr. Soberano’s airfare and rent for his first few months in Arizona, as well as a $2,500 fee for Ms. Avenida and a fee of several thousand dollars to Alliance Abroad Group, a Texas-based company that is an official State Department sponsor for J-1 visa holders. The J-1 lasts three years, with the option for two one-year extensions. For each year he works in the United States, Mr. Soberano will owe Alliance Abroad an additional $1,000 visa renewal fee.
“You have to make some sacrifices to leave your family way back home,” Mr. Soberano said. Every night, he prepares lessons for his seventh- and eighth-grade science students, and every morning, he wakes up at 4 a.m. to video chat with his wife and two teenage daughters, who are ending their day in Manila. Despite their separation, he said the experience has been rewarding, “teaching in a different culture, but also, financially.”
The school districts that recruit teachers like Mr. Soberano say that they have few other options, because they can’t find enough American educators willing to work for the pay that’s offered. They say that the foreign teachers are being given valuable opportunities, and that American students are enriched by learning from them. But critics argue the teachers are being taken advantage of in a practice that helps keep wages low and perpetuates yearslong austerity policies.
[Read: Why are teachers walking out? What’s the difference between a walkout and a strike?]
Though J-1 teachers account for only a tiny share of Arizona’s 60,000 public schoolteachers, international recruitment has spread quickly in recent years, as sponsor companies market themselves to districts facing shortages and word spreads among administrators. According to the State Department, 183 Arizona teachers were granted new J-1 visas last year, up from 17 in 2010.
“Rather than increase salaries, districts may once again resort to recruiting internationally as a way to solve the teacher shortage,” Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, a national teachers’ union, said in a statement. She added that while her union “will fight for everyone working in our communities and educating our kids to have fair wages, rights and workplace protections regardless of where they’re from, the use of the J-1 visa program to fill long-term shortages is an abuse of an exchange program.”
Administrators and researchers say experienced foreign educators can be a better option for students than the substitutes who would otherwise fill these positions. But research is clear that teacher churn negatively impacts academic achievement. J-1 teachers are, because of the visa’s limitations, temporary; and without higher pay and regular raises, administrators in these districts say it will be impossible to attract enough American teachers and keep them in the classroom.
 Recruiting in Manila
During the recession, districts found it easier to hire American workers, since more of them were looking to teach. But as the economy picked back up, hiring became difficult in states like Arizona, which have pursued years of tax cuts that have dampened school budgets and teacher pay. The Pendergast district has lost $1.6 million over the past five years because of state and local cuts, according to administrators.
The superintendent, Lily Matos DeBlieux, has sought private donations to fund a Spanish-English dual-language program, a monthly lunch discussion to help parents navigate their children’s education and many other efforts. “With the little we have, we have done an incredible job,” she said.
But hiring remains a challenge. Even with 48 J-1 visa-holders teaching this year, Pendergast has still had to rely on 20 long-term substitutes, said Ms. Davis-Tussey, the chief of human resources.
In addition to interviewing international candidates via Skype, district staff members have traveled to Manila several times since 2015 to interview teachers. Mr. Soberano met with the district there in June 2016, and just two months later, arrived in Arizona to teach at Sunset Ridge Elementary School in Glendale. The Philippines was the top sender of J-1 teachers to the United States in 2017, followed by Jamaica and China.
The 15,000-mile round-trips made sense, Ms. Davis-Tussey said. Many short-staffed schools turn to Teach for America, which recruits recent college graduates and career-changers for two-year stints in the classroom. But to hire a Teach for America recruit, who may have no teaching experience or coursework in education, the district must pay $5,000 per teacher, in addition to salaries.
For a similar amount, a single trip to the Philippines can net dozens of candidates, all of whom, as required by the J-1 program, have degrees in education or the subjects they teach, and at least two years of experience in a Filipino school.
Mr. Soberano holds one bachelor’s degree in education, with a focus on physics, and another in philosophy. He has also studied theology. He has over 20 years of classroom experience.
Mukul Bakhshi, director of the Alliance for Ethical International Recruitment Practices, in Philadelphia, said the Philippines purposefully trains teachers, nurses and other workers “in a way that it’s easy for them to pass muster from licensing authorities here. They obviously speak English, and they are willing to work.” Remittances from foreign workers account for about 10 percent of the Philippines’ gross domestic product.
The Pendergast district did not owe any money to the companies that connected it with recruits in Manila. Those costs were borne by the Filipino teachers.
James Bell, president of Alliance Abroad, the visa sponsor, said a financial arrangement like Mr. Soberano’s is just one of several models the company uses, and that in some cases, school districts pay visa3,5 renewal fees. Alliance Abroad sponsors several hundred J-1 visa holders each year, according to Mr. Bell, working primarily in Arizona, California, Nevada, Texas and Utah. He said the biggest demand was for special-education teachers, though districts also looked to hire in science, math and foreign languages.
In Gila Bend, a small town 70 miles southwest of Phoenix, 11 Filipino teachers who room together in several shared apartments commute to work by van 100 miles round-trip each day, according to Peggy Perry, a secretary in the district’s central office. In Casa Grande, halfway between Phoenix and Tucson, about 25 Filipino teachers with J-1 visas are teaching science, math, special education and English, said Mary Ann Amerson, head of human resources for the Casa Grande Union High School District.
The district works with Ms. Avenida, the California-based consultant, to find the teachers and interview them via Skype. “We don’t pay any money for it,” Ms. Amerson said. The recruits pay the fees.
Ms. Avenida said her company, which uses the name Avenida International Consultants in the United States, recruited 250 Filipino teachers with J-1 visas in 2017. According to State Department data, that would account for more than half the total number of J-1 visa holders who arrived from the Philippines last year.
Ms. Avenida joined union representatives in a working group, assembled by the Alliance for Ethical International Recruitment Practices, that drafted a 2015 code of conduct for international teacher recruitment. The code calls for districts to bear all recruitment and legal costs, and for foreign educators not to be charged more than a nominal application processing fee, under $150. It has not been widely adopted, and Ms. Avenida said she disagreed with the group’s conclusions.
“Somebody has to foot the bill,” she said — and in a climate of tight school budgets, that somebody is the teacher.
[Read: How will the protests against education cuts affect the midterm elections?]
Lessons and Challenges
In Mr. Soberano’s case, it was not until his second year on the job that he had paid back the money he owed and was able to begin sending some home to his family. He has had to live austerely. In his first year in Arizona, he shared an apartment with five other Filipino teachers, and he now rents a room in the home of a Filipino-American family.
Still, he said he was nothing but grateful for the opportunity. “The district is very supportive,” he said. Pendergast created a welcome committee to assist the Filipino teachers, and colleagues pitched in by buying groceries and driving the newcomers to work.
In addition to financial challenges, foreign educators face instructional ones. Administrators across the country who work with J-1 visa holders say the teachers must learn the federal requirement for inclusion, which requires that disabled children be taught alongside nondisabled peers, in the least restrictive environment possible.
And classroom management techniques differ across cultures. “In the Philippines, the teacher there is really an authority figure,” Mr. Soberano said. “Once I stood in front of the class, everybody kept quiet.” That wasn’t the case in Arizona.
“One thing I also learned is to be friends with the students,” Mr. Soberano added, “to know more about each one and especially their family. How are they doing? When you understand them, I remove that kind of problem.”
State Department regulations require J-1 teachers to engage in cultural exchange activities with their students. The J-1 program was created by the 1961 Fulbright-Hayes Act, with the purpose of fostering understanding between nations. Mr. Soberano said that once a month, he teaches a lesson on Filipino culture, and that his students have been most interested in discussing the differences between the Filipino and American education systems. In the Philippines, Mr. Soberano tells them, school is stricter and more academically challenging.
New regulations from the State Department, which went into effect in 2016, require J-1 holders to return to their home countries for at least two years after their visas expire before reapplying. Mr. Soberano said he may do that. But his wish is to reside legally in the United States and work long-term as a teacher. “I would love to bring my family here,” he said.
Ms. Weingarten, the union president, suggested that the H-1B visa for high-skilled immigrants, which offers a pathway toward permanent residence, would be a more appropriate visa for a teacher like Mr. Soberano. But Pendergast and other school districts say long wait times and high legal costs can make the H-1B prohibitive. The Trump administration has also tightened oversight of that program.
In Denver public schools, 20 bilingual education teachers hold H-1Bs and about three hold J-1s. But in the future, the district said, it may expand its use of the J-1.
“We still don’t have enough people to fill the openings,” said Bart Muller, the managing director of employee and labor relations for the system. “The political environment has been a little challenging over the last year and a half. The bottom line is there are a lot more hoops to jump through with H-1B, while J-1 is fairly simple. You can do it expeditiously.”
Lora Bartlett, an education professor who has written a book about migrant teachers, argued that there should be a new visa category that meets the needs of public schools while allowing effective teachers to achieve legal residency. But, she added, “there are people who have a vested interest in not finding a long-term solution. There is a whole industry that makes money every time a new teacher comes into the country. They don’t make money when a teacher stays.”
[Read:  How our reporter came across this story.]
And in Arizona, where many teachers are expected to improve test scores using aging textbooks inside buildings in need of repair, districts worry that a modest increase in teacher salaries and school funding won’t be enough to persuade more local candidates to enter the profession.
“Quite frankly, for a lot of the teachers, some of the fun and creativity has been taken out of it with mandates,” said Ms. Amerson, the head of human resources in Casa Grande. “It seems like we spend the whole entire second semester testing kids.”
In Pendergast, Ms. Davis-Tussey agreed that higher pay alone would not be enough to fill the empty jobs that have forced her to look to the Philippines.
“That respect for the profession is just as important as the money,” she said. “And for a long time, teachers have felt, not only did they not have money, but what they were doing was being brushed aside and not respected.”
PHOTO: Donato Soberano, center, and his seventh-grade science students at Sunset Ridge Elementary School in Arizona. Budget cuts and stagnant salaries have prompted his district and others to recruit educators in his native Philippines to fill core teaching jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Deanna Alejandra Dent for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • How a Times Education Reporter Discovered a Pipeline of Foreign Teachers
    • Teacher Walkouts: What to Know and What to Expect
    • Their Pay Has Stood Still. Now Oklahoma Teachers Could Be the Next to Walk.
    • Teachers in Arizona and Colorado Walk Out Over Education Funding
    • Teacher Walkouts Threaten Republican Grip on Conservative States
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: TEACHING & TEACHERS (92%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (91%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (90%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (90%); TEACHER COMPENSATION (90%); TEACHER RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); EDUCATION FUNDING (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); STRIKES (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (79%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (79%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (78%); RECESSION (77%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (68%); WELFARE BENEFITS (61%); FOOD STAMPS (50%); Teachers and School Employees (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Foreign Workers (%); Education (K-12) (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Philippines (%); Arizona (%); Hiring and Promotion (%); Visas (%)

Industry: EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (90%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (79%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); BUDGETS (77%); PERSONAL DEBT (68%)

Geographic: PHOENIX, AZ, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (94%); UNITED STATES (95%); PHILIPPINES (94%)

Load-Date: January 24, 2020


End of Document
Biden Aims to Rebuild and Expand Legal Immigration
The New York Times 
May 31, 2021 Monday 21:27 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1928 words
Byline: Michael D. Shear and Zolan Kanno-Youngs
Highlight: Documents obtained by The New York Times show far-reaching efforts by President Biden to remake the immigration system and undo much of his predecessor’s legacy.
Body


Documents obtained by The New York Times show far-reaching efforts by President Biden to remake the immigration system and undo much of his predecessor’s legacy.
WASHINGTON — If President Biden gets his way, it will soon be far easier to immigrate to the United States. There will be shorter, simpler forms and applicants will have to jump through fewer security hoops. Foreigners will have better opportunities to join their families and more chances to secure work visas.
A 46-page draft blueprint obtained by The New York Times maps out the Biden administration’s plans to significantly expand the legal immigration system, including methodically reversing the efforts to dismantle it by former President Donald J. Trump, who reduced the flow of foreign workers, families and refugees, erecting procedural barriers tougher to cross than his “big, beautiful wall.”
Because of Mr. Trump’s immigration policies, the average time it takes to approve employer-sponsored green cards has doubled. The backlog for citizenship applications is up 80 percent since 2014, to more than 900,000 cases. Approval for the U-visa program, which grants legal status for immigrants willing to help the police, has gone from five months to roughly five years.
In almost every case over the last four years, immigrating to the United States has become harder, more expensive and takes longer.
And while Mr. Biden made clear during his presidential campaign that he intended to undo much of his predecessor’s immigration legacy, the blueprint offers new details about how far-reaching the effort will be — not only rolling back Mr. Trump’s policies, but addressing backlogs and delays that plagued prior presidents.
The blueprint, dated May 3 and titled “D.H.S. Plan to Restore Trust in Our Legal Immigration System,” lists scores of initiatives intended to reopen the country to more immigrants, making good on the president’s promise to ensure America embraces its “character as a nation of opportunity and of welcome.”
“There are significant changes that need to be made to really open up all avenues of legal immigration,” said Felicia Escobar Carrillo, the chief of staff at U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, of the efforts to reverse Mr. Trump’s agenda. “In the same way that they took a broad-stroke approach to closing off avenues, I think we want to take a broad approach toward opening up the legal avenues that have always been available but that they tried to put roadblocks up on.”
Since taking office four months ago, Mr. Biden has struggled with a historic surge in migration by Central American children and teenagers that has prompted some Republicans to accuse the president of flinging open the nation’s borders to people trying to enter the country illegally, a charge the White House rejects.
In fact, Mr. Biden does want to open the country to more immigrants. His ambition, as reflected in the blueprint, is to rebuild and expand the opportunities for foreigners to enter the United States — but to do so legally.
Divided into seven sections, the document offers detailed policy proposals that would help more foreigners move to the United States, including high-skilled workers, trafficking victims, the families of Americans living abroad, American Indians born in Canada, refugees, asylum-seekers and farm workers. Immigrants who apply online could pay less in fees or even secure a waiver in an attempt to “reduce barriers” to immigration. And regulations would be overhauled to “encourage full participation by immigrants in our civic life.”
Even with a more restrictive and slower immigration system, about 1 million people obtained green cards in 2019, the last full year before the pandemic. Most had been waiting for years. In the final year of the Obama administration, 1.2 million people received green cards.
But if Mr. Biden accomplishes everything in the document, he will have gone further than just reversing the downward trend. He will have significantly increased opportunities for foreigners around the globe to come to the United States, embracing robust immigration even as a divisive, decades-long political debate continues to rage over such a policy.
Most of the changes could be put into practice without passage of Mr. Biden’s proposed overhaul of the nation’s immigration laws, which would provide a pathway to citizenship for millions of undocumented people living in the United States but has stalled in a bitterly divided Congress. While surveys show that most Americans support increased immigration, many Republican voters have eagerly backed Mr. Trump’s more restrictive policies.
White House officials declined to comment directly on the Homeland Security Department’s blueprint, saying that such documents go through many drafts and that decisions about specific steps to address legal immigration remain in flux. But they said the president remained committed to significantly rolling back the restrictions imposed by his predecessor.
That effort will take time and has not yet caught the public’s attention like the surge of crossings at the southwest border. But conservative activists who have for years demanded lower levels of legal immigration are vowing a fight to stop Mr. Biden and extract a political price for his actions.
“They just want to shovel people in here,” said Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II, a former Virginia attorney general who served as the acting head of Citizenship and Immigration Services under Mr. Trump. “They are not running an immigration system for the benefit of America, and certainly not for the benefit of ordinary Americans. ”
Most research has shown that legal immigration to the United States has benefits for the country’s economy, especially at a time when the country’s population growth is slowing. But Mr. Cuccinelli and others who favor severe restrictions on immigration say it is obvious to them that letting foreigners compete for jobs — especially when the country is still recovering from an economic downturn like the one created by the pandemic — will hurt the prospects for American citizens.
“The number one job for the immigration services is to make sure that immigration does not hurt Americans,” said Roy Beck, the founder of NumbersUSA, a group dedicated to far lower levels of legal immigration.
Motivated by that belief, Mr. Cuccinelli set in motion a transformation of the government’s legal immigration system during the Trump administration — changing his agency from one that confers benefits on foreigners into a “vetting agency,” in part by issuing numerous restrictions on offering asylum for immigrants and trying to raise fees.
The increased vetting, as well as travel restrictions imposed during the pandemic, helped contribute to the result the Trump administration had sought: The influx of immigrants slowed significantly, as winning legal approval to enter the United States became much harder.
With fewer immigrants coming through the pipeline, there has been less money to finance Citizenship and Immigration Services, which is supported almost entirely by fees paid by immigrants. Restoring the agency to full capacity is at the heart of Mr. Biden’s effort to expand legal immigration, according to the document and interviews with administration officials.
A central element of the blueprint is addressing backlogs in the immigration system.
The administration is planning to fast-track immigration applications by expanding virtual interviews and electronic filing, as well as limiting the requests for evidence from applicants. Mr. Biden has tapped Cass R. Sunstein, a former Obama administration official and legal scholar at Harvard Law School, to remake the immigration system so it is “more effective and less burdensome” than it has been in decades by “reducing paperwork and other administrative requirements.”
Mr. Biden wants to restore opportunities for foreign employees through the existing H-1B visa program, which is intended for workers with special skills. The administration also intends to create new pathways for foreign entrepreneurs who wish to “start-up businesses and create jobs for U.S. workers,” according to the document.
Officials are working on a regulation that could allow migrants to win asylum in the United States if they are victims of domestic violence or their relatives were persecuted. During the Trump era, Attorney General William P. Barr moved to end asylum protection for those who claimed they deserved it for those reasons.
Mr. Biden is also aiming to expand immigration opportunities for L.G.B.T.Q. refugees from countries where they are persecuted or where same-sex marriages are not recognized.
In addition, he wants to revamp a program that provides a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who help law enforcement by cooperating with police or testifying in court.
The waiting list for the U-Visa program has ballooned, leaving crime victims and survivors of domestic abuse vulnerable to abusers who may threaten to report them for deportation if they continue to talk to the police, said Leslye E. Orloff, director of the national immigrant women’s advocacy project at American University.
The Biden administration is considering extending protections to immigrants who cooperate even before they make it on the official waiting list for the visa, according to the document.
“They’re recognizing that there’s danger for these victims,” Ms. Orloff said.
Critics say the Biden administration is ignoring the negative consequences of their efforts. The H-1B program has been attacked as a loophole for tech companies to import cheap foreign workers to compete for jobs. Granting asylum to the victims of domestic abuse could open the door to accepting millions of additional people. And some Republicans say Mr. Biden should not loosen vetting of foreigners, though officials insist they will continue to screen for terrorists and other threats.
As the Biden administration pushes forward with the changes, officials appear willing to use emergency rules and presidential memos to avoid the lengthy regulatory process, in much the same way that Mr. Trump put his own agenda in place. But that could make Mr. Biden’s immigration legacy subject to a similar reversal by a Republican president in the future.
“The question looming over all of this work is how do you do this in a way that isn’t so easily capsized next time around,” said Doug Rand, a founder of Boundless Immigration, a technology company in Seattle that helps immigrants obtain green cards and citizenship.
Change could not come soon enough for Jenn Hawk, 37, who is currently living in with her Argentine husband in Poland, where he works, even though her autistic son is in the Washington area with his father.
Because of delays in processing her husband’s immigration application, she is faced with a choice: stay in Poland with the man she married, or go back to the United States alone to be with her 10-year-old son.
Ms. Hawk filed to sponsor her husband’s immigration to the United States in October of 2020, spending $575 on the application. But they are facing a delay of more than a year and a half before they can even submit their financial and medical information, let alone get an interview with an immigration officer.
“I just want to go home,” Ms. Hawk said. “It seems like they’re doing everything in their power to restrict that from being a possibility.”
PHOTO: Dozens of asylum-seeking migrants waiting to be taken to a U.S. Border Patrol facility after crossing the Rio Grande into Texas on May 5. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADREES LATIF/REUTERS) (A15)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: IMMIGRATION (96%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (95%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (91%); CITIZENSHIP (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (79%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (79%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); NATURALIZATION (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); REFUGEES (78%); APPROVALS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (71%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Asylum, Right of (%); Visas (%); Refugees and Displaced Persons (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); Sunstein, Cass R (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Trump, Donald J (%); United States (%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (94%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); Biden, Joseph R Jr; Sunstein, Cass R; Trump, Donald J

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%); CENTRAL AMERICA (67%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2021


End of Document
Veteran Senator Emerges as Player on Immigration Overhaul
The New York Times
May 21, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1225 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER; Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from San Francisco.
Body


WASHINGTON -- As proponents of a new immigration overhaul cast about for a Republican ally to help give their bill an extra boost, they have focused on a 79-year-old lawmaker with new hipster glasses (from Costco), black Nike sneakers (for his bad arches) and, perhaps most important, a deep and complicated relationship with immigration policy: Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah.
Members of the bipartisan group of eight senators who drafted an overhaul of the nation's immigration laws see Mr. Hatch as a potentially influential partner. He was an original co-sponsor of the Dream Act for younger immigrants and has shown a willingness to embrace other immigration legislation as well. Though he ran to the right during a primary challenge in the 2012 election, they believe he might be brought back into the fold now that he is safely ensconced in his seventh Senate term.
''Senator Hatch is somebody who understands these issues well, has a long history, and it would very valuable to have him support our bill, both in committee and on the floor,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York and a member of the bipartisan group, who also sits on the Judiciary Committee with Mr. Hatch.
In an effort to increase Mr. Hatch's investment in the legislation, Mr. Schumer and other members of the bipartisan group on Monday threw their support behind a Hatch initiative to begin collecting biometric information like fingerprints at airports to register immigrants when they leave the country.
With the exception of two Republican members of the bipartisan group who also sit on the Judiciary Committee -- Senators Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina -- Mr. Hatch is considered the other Republican member most likely to support the bill, which would give it some conservative gravitas as it heads to the Senate floor.
The bipartisan group is hoping for a large Senate vote in support of the bill -- some members have suggested as many as 70 votes -- to place pressure on House Republicans to also get behind the legislation. And Mr. Hatch's ''yes'' vote is seen as a driver for what they hope will be a groundswell of support. Mr. Hatch, who hails from a state with a dynamic immigration culture, meanwhile finds himself with a final chance to help pass a broad immigration overhaul, something in which he has both publicly and privately expressed a genuine interest.
But Mr. Hatch's ''yes'' vote in committee comes with a major caveat -- the acceptance of provisions of his that would, among other things, help technology companies by increasing the number of temporary visas available for high-skilled workers (known as H-1B visas) and ease restrictions around the hiring and firing of workers. He also is offering some provisions on the finance side, including one that would require immigrants to show they have paid back taxes and are staying current with them as they proceed toward legal status.
''I personally believe we need immigration reform,'' said Mr. Hatch, adding that his tweaks to the bill are ''amendments that clean it up and make it a better bill, and may even be able to get it more votes.'' The provisions are also, he explained, an all-but-ironclad requirement for earning his vote: ''They know my point is I've got to have those,'' he said, referring to the message he has communicated to the group.
And so last week, as the committee met twice to discuss the bill publicly, the behind-the-scenes negotiating and arm-twisting picked up in earnest, with Mr. Schumer's office taking the lead in trying to work out an agreement with Mr. Hatch.
''He's made it clear that having his support will be dependent on the committee accepting his proposals to improve the bill,'' said Alex Conant, a spokesman for Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, one of the Republican authors. ''We think accepting his improvements and having his support is critical to getting the broad Republican support we want.''
A particular source of tension is Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, the No. 2 Senate Democrat and another member of the bipartisan group, who opposes many of Mr. Hatch's amendments because he thinks they would hurt American workers.
''Some of them are absolutely unacceptable,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''What he wants to do is make it easier for firms seeking H-1B visas not to hire Americans.''
Still, Mr. Durbin acknowledged the delicate political realities: ''We want all the support we can get, but if the price of support of any Republican member is for us to turn this carefully crafted, politically balanced deal on its head, it's not worth it.''
If Mr. Hatch succeeds in getting what he wants, it would be a coup both for the senator and the technology industry. Mr. Hatch can fall back on the high-tech community to strengthen his hand, as he did in a committee meeting last week when he warned, ''There's a whole tech world that's getting up in arms if we don't do this right, and they alone can make this bill very difficult to pass.'' And the tech industry will have found a strong advocate in Mr. Hatch to further push their cause in Congress.
By late Monday night, Senate aides said, Mr. Hatch was closing in on a deal with the bipartisan group, and was expected to offer his high-tech amendments on Tuesday.
''Senator Hatch has a long history of leadership on high-tech issues,'' said Dan Turrentine, the vice president of government relations and business development at TechNet, a trade group that advocates for a range of Silicon Valley companies. ''His interest in immigration and efforts to ensure the workability of well-intentioned high-skilled reforms proposed by the Gang of Eight makes him a natural to be at the center of negotiations as he seeks to strengthen the bill and broaden support.''
Utah has been nicknamed the ''Silicon Slopes'' for the more than 5,000 high-tech companies that populate the state, and in some ways, Utah itself is as diverse on the topic of immigration as its two senators. In contrast to Mr. Hatch, Senator Mike Lee, a Republican who also sits on the Judiciary Committee, has advocated breaking up the legislation into smaller pieces and does not necessarily support a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants already in the country.
In 2010, the state's business, political, religious and law-enforcement leaders got behind the Utah Compact, a document intended to offer an open-minded and holistic approach to immigration. The Mormon Church, of which Mr. Hatch is a member, also endorsed the compact and has offered a similarly broad view toward immigration.
In addition to being one of the original co-sponsors of the Dream Act, a bill that surfaced more than a decade ago and would create a formal path to citizenship for young people brought to the United States illegally as children, Mr. Hatch has worked on other components of the immigration debate. He helped draft the agricultural workers program that is part of the Senate bill.
Though he backed away from immigration reform when he faced a tough primary challenge in 2012, many immigration advocates believe he is now ready to come around to their side.
''I think there is the political space now for Senator Hatch to talk about these issues that he has a track record of being supportive of,'' said Ben Johnson, the executive director of the American Immigration Council.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/21/us/politics/senator-hatch-emerges-as-key-player-on-immigration-reform.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah during an interview at the Capitol last week. He added provisions to an immigration bill drafted by a bipartisan group of senators. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHRISTOPHER GREGORY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION REFORM (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); CONSERVATISM (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (78%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); BIOMETRICS (64%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (60%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (60%)

Organization: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (57%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Person: ORRIN HATCH (89%); JEFF FLAKE (79%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: May 21, 2013


End of Document
Trump Prepares Order on Foreign Workers
The New York Times
April 18, 2017 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 497 words
Byline: By MICHAEL D. SHEAR
Body


WASHINGTON -- President Trump is expected to sign an executive order on Tuesday aimed at making it harder for technology companies to recruit low-wage workers from foreign countries and undercut Americans looking for jobs.
Mr. Trump will also direct all federal agencies to systematically examine the effectiveness of government rules and trade agreements that require a preference for purchasing from American companies. 
  The president will announce the order during a visit to the headquarters of Snap-on Tools in Kenosha, Wis., senior administration officials told reporters during a briefing Monday afternoon. The officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to preview the president's announcement.
  As a candidate, Mr. Trump often assailed the government's H-1B visa program, under which the government admits 85,000 immigrants each year, mostly to work in high-tech jobs. Mr. Trump pledged to end the program, which he said was allowing companies to fire Americans and replace them with lower-cost foreign employees.
  The expected executive order falls far short of ending that program, but the administration officials argued on Monday that the changes Mr. Trump sought would radically change it.
  The officials said 80 percent of the immigrants who enter the United States under the current visa program are paid less than the median wage for workers in their fields.
  The president's order seeks changes to the program that would require applicants and their potential employers to demonstrate that the visas are going only to ''the most highly skilled workers'' in their fields.
  As a result, the officials said, the H-1B visa would no longer be a cheap way for companies to replace American workers. But technology executives, who have argued that the program is vital to their ability to recruit talent, are likely to be frustrated by the change.
  Robert D. Atkinson, president of the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, a research group sponsored by several tech companies, predicted in January that a crackdown on H-1B visas would be counterproductive.
  ''The effect would end up being exactly the opposite of what Trump wants,'' he said. ''Companies would go offshore, like Microsoft did with Vancouver, Canada,'' to seek talent.
  The changes Mr. Trump is seeking will take some time to carry out, the administration officials said. The order will call for a 220-day review of waivers and exceptions made to decades-old ''Buy American'' rules.
  Those waivers are at the heart of about 60 trade deals with foreign countries, the officials said. If the review finds that the waivers are detrimental to American workers, the trade deals could be renegotiated, they added.
  In addition, all federal agencies will be directed to strictly enforce ''Buy American'' rules, giving the highest priority to American companies when making purchasing decisions.
  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/18/us/politics/trump-executive-order-h1b-visas-technology-workers.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (90%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (76%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (73%)

Company:  SNAP-ON INC (57%);  MICROSOFT CORP (52%)

Ticker: SNA (NYSE) (57%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (52%)

Industry: NAICS333991 POWER-DRIVEN HANDTOOL MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS332216 SAW BLADE & HANDTOOL MANUFACTURING (57%); SIC3546 POWER-DRIVEN HANDTOOLS (57%); SIC3423 HAND & EDGE TOOLS, EXCEPT MACHINE TOOLS & HANDSAWS (57%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (52%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (52%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (52%); WISCONSIN, USA (79%); BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (52%); UNITED STATES (98%); CANADA (79%)

Load-Date: April 18, 2017


End of Document
Schools Fill Low-Pay Jobs From Abroad
The New York Times
May 3, 2018 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 2561 words
Byline: By DANA GOLDSTEIN
Body


GLENDALE, Ariz. -- The latest wave of foreign workers sweeping into American jobs brought Donato Soberano from the Philippines to Arizona two years ago. He had to pay thousands of dollars to a job broker and lived for a time in an apartment with five other Filipino workers. The lure is the pay -- 10 times more than what he made doing the same work back home.
But Mr. Soberano is not a hospitality worker or a home health aide. He is in another line of work that increasingly pays too little to attract enough Americans: Mr. Soberano is a public school teacher. 
  As walkouts by teachers protesting low pay and education funding shortfalls spread across the country, the small but growing movement to recruit teachers from overseas is another sign of the difficulty some districts are having providing the basics to public school students.
  Among the latest states hit by the protests is Arizona, where teacher pay is more than $10,000 below the national average of $59,000 per year. The Pendergast Elementary School District, where Mr. Soberano works, has recruited more than 50 teachers from the Philippines since 2015. They hold J-1 visas, which allow them to work temporarily in the United States, like au pairs or camp counselors, but offer no path to citizenship. More than 2,800 foreign teachers arrived on American soil last year through the J-1, according to the State Department, up from about 1,200 in 2010.
  ''In these times, you have to be innovative and creative in recruiting,'' said Patricia Davis-Tussey, Pendergast's head of human resources. ''We embrace diversity and really gain a lot from the cultural exchange experience. Our students do as well.''
  The district, which covers parts of Glendale, Avondale and north Phoenix, is a hotbed of activism in the teacher walkout movement, known as #RedforEd. Picketing educators say they have had to move in with their parents, apply for food stamps and pay out of pocket for classroom essentials like graph paper and science supplies. They argue that taxes are too low to adequately fund schools, or for teachers to secure a middle-class lifestyle.
  In response to the teacher walkout, Republican lawmakers introduced a budget that provides new funding for salaries and classrooms. But leaders of the #RedForEd movement said the bill fell far short of their demands, and would restore only about a quarter of the $1.1 billion in annual cuts that they say schools have weathered since the last recession.
  In Pendergast, where salaries of around $40,000 are a source of pain and protest for the district's American educators, Mr. Soberano is thankful for the pay.
  Much like other foreign workers, he went into debt to find a job in the United States. He said he used savings and a bank loan to pay $12,500, about three years' worth of his salary in the Philippines, to Petro-Fil Manpower Services. That is a Filipino company of Ligaya Avenida, a California-based consultant who recruits and screens teachers for the J-1.
  The payment covered Mr. Soberano's airfare and rent for his first few months in Arizona, as well as a $2,500 fee for Ms. Avenida and a $3,500 fee to Alliance Abroad Group, a Texas-based company that is an official State Department sponsor for J-1 visa holders. The J-1 lasts three years, with the option for two one-year extensions. For each year he works in the United States, Mr. Soberano will owe Alliance Abroad an additional $1,000 visa renewal fee.
  ''You have to make some sacrifices to leave your family way back home,'' Mr. Soberano said. Every night, he prepares lessons for his seventh- and eighth-grade science students, and every morning, he wakes up at 4 a.m. to video chat with his wife and two teenage daughters, who are ending their day in Manila. Despite their separation, he said the experience has been rewarding, ''teaching in a different culture, but also, financially.''
  The school districts that recruit teachers like Mr. Soberano say that they have few other options, because they can't find enough American educators willing to work for the pay that's offered. They say that the foreign teachers are being given valuable opportunities, and that American students are enriched by learning from them. But critics argue the teachers are being taken advantage of in a practice that helps keep wages low and perpetuates yearslong austerity policies.
  Though J-1 teachers account for only a tiny share of Arizona's 60,000 public schoolteachers, international recruitment has spread quickly in recent years, as sponsor companies market themselves to districts facing shortages and word spreads among administrators. According to the State Department, 183 Arizona teachers were granted new J-1 visas last year, up from 17 in 2010.
  ''Rather than increase salaries, districts may once again resort to recruiting internationally as a way to solve the teacher shortage,'' Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, a national teachers' union, said in a statement. She added that while her union ''will fight for everyone working in our communities and educating our kids to have fair wages, rights and workplace protections regardless of where they're from, the use of the J-1 visa program to fill long-term shortages is an abuse of an exchange program.''
  Administrators and researchers say experienced foreign educators can be a better option for students than the substitutes who would otherwise fill these positions. But research is clear that teacher churn negatively impacts academic achievement. J-1 teachers are, because of the visa's limitations, temporary; and without higher pay and regular raises, administrators in these districts say it will be impossible to attract enough American teachers and keep them in the classroom.
   Recruiting in Manila
  During the recession, districts found it easier to hire American workers, since more of them were looking to teach. But as the economy picked back up, hiring became difficult in states like Arizona, which have pursued years of tax cuts that have dampened school budgets and teacher pay. The Pendergast district has lost $1.6 million over the past five years because of state and local cuts, according to administrators.
  The superintendent, Lily Matos DeBlieux, has sought private donations to fund a Spanish-English dual-language program, a monthly lunch discussion to help parents navigate their children's education and many other efforts. ''With the little we have, we have done an incredible job,'' she said.
  But hiring remains a challenge. Even with 48 J-1 visa-holders teaching this year, Pendergast has still had to rely on 20 long-term substitutes, said Ms. Davis-Tussey, the chief of human resources.
  In addition to interviewing international candidates via Skype, district staff members have traveled to Manila several times since 2015 to interview teachers. Mr. Soberano met with the district there in June 2016, and just two months later, arrived in Arizona to teach at Sunset Ridge Elementary School in Glendale. The Philippines was the top sender of J-1 teachers to the United States in 2017, followed by Jamaica and China.
  The 15,000-mile round-trips made sense, Ms. Davis-Tussey said. Many short-staffed schools turn to Teach for America, which recruits recent college graduates and career-changers for two-year stints in the classroom. But to hire a Teach for America recruit, who may have no teaching experience or coursework in education, the district must pay $5,000 per teacher, in addition to salaries.
  For a similar amount, a single trip to the Philippines can net dozens of candidates, all of whom, as required by the J-1 program, have degrees in education or the subjects they teach, and at least two years of experience in a Filipino school.
  Mr. Soberano holds one bachelor's degree in education, with a focus on physics, and another in philosophy. He has also studied theology. He has over 20 years of classroom experience.
  Mukul Bakhshi, director of the Alliance for Ethical International Recruitment Practices, in Philadelphia, said the Philippines purposefully trains teachers, nurses and other workers ''in a way that it's easy for them to pass muster from licensing authorities here. They obviously speak English, and they are willing to work.'' Remittances from foreign workers account for about 10 percent of the Philippines' gross domestic product.
  The Pendergast district did not owe any money to the companies that connected it with recruits in Manila. Those costs were borne by the Filipino teachers.
  James Bell, president of Alliance Abroad, the visa sponsor, said a financial arrangement like Mr. Soberano's is just one of several models the company uses, and that in some cases, school districts pay visa renewal fees. Alliance Abroad sponsors several hundred J-1 visa holders each year, according to Mr. Bell, working primarily in Arizona, California, Nevada, Texas and Utah. He said the biggest demand was for special-education teachers, though districts also looked to hire in science, math and foreign languages.
  In Gila Bend, a small town 70 miles southwest of Phoenix, 11 Filipino teachers who room together in several shared apartments commute to work by van 100 miles round-trip each day, according to Peggy Perry, a secretary in the district's central office. In Casa Grande, halfway between Phoenix and Tucson, about 25 Filipino teachers with J-1 visas are teaching science, math, special education and English, said Mary Ann Amerson, head of human resources for the Casa Grande Union High School District.
  The district works with Ms. Avenida, the California-based consultant, to find the teachers and interview them via Skype. ''We don't pay any money for it,'' Ms. Amerson said. The recruits pay the fees.
  Ms. Avenida said her company, which uses the name Avenida International Consultants in the United States, recruited 250 Filipino teachers with J-1 visas in 2017. According to State Department data, that would account for more than half the total number of J-1 visa holders who arrived from the Philippines last year.
  Ms. Avenida joined union representatives in a working group, assembled by the Alliance for Ethical International Recruitment Practices, that drafted a 2015 code of conduct for international teacher recruitment. The code calls for districts to bear all recruitment and legal costs, and for foreign educators not to be charged more than a nominal application processing fee, under $150. It has not been widely adopted, and Ms. Avenida said she disagreed with the group's conclusions.
  ''Somebody has to foot the bill,'' she said -- and in a climate of tight school budgets, that somebody is the teacher.
  Lessons and Challenges
  In Mr. Soberano's case, it was not until his second year on the job that he had paid back the money he owed and was able to begin sending some home to his family. He has had to live austerely. In his first year in Arizona, he shared an apartment with five other Filipino teachers, and he now rents a room in the home of a Filipino-American family.
  Still, he said he was nothing but grateful for the opportunity. ''The district is very supportive,'' he said. Pendergast created a welcome committee to assist the Filipino teachers, and colleagues pitched in by buying groceries and driving the newcomers to work.
  In addition to financial challenges, foreign educators face instructional ones. Administrators across the country who work with J-1 visa holders say the teachers must learn the federal requirement for inclusion, which requires that disabled children be taught alongside nondisabled peers, in the least restrictive environment possible.
  And classroom management techniques differ across cultures. ''In the Philippines, the teacher there is really an authority figure,'' Mr. Soberano said. ''Once I stood in front of the class, everybody kept quiet.'' That wasn't the case in Arizona.
  ''One thing I also learned is to be friends with the students,'' Mr. Soberano added, ''to know more about each one and especially their family. How are they doing? When you understand them, I remove that kind of problem.''
  State Department regulations require J-1 teachers to engage in cultural exchange activities with their students. The J-1 program was created by the 1961 Fulbright-Hayes Act, with the purpose of fostering understanding between nations. Mr. Soberano said that once a month, he teaches a lesson on Filipino culture, and that his students have been most interested in discussing the differences between the Filipino and American education systems. In the Philippines, Mr. Soberano tells them, school is stricter and more academically challenging.
  New regulations from the State Department, which went into effect in 2016, require J-1 holders to return to their home countries for at least two years after their visas expire before reapplying. Mr. Soberano said he may do that. But his wish is to reside legally in the United States and work long-term as a teacher. ''I would love to bring my family here,'' he said.
  Ms. Weingarten, the union president, suggested that the H-1B visa for high-skilled immigrants, which offers a pathway toward permanent residence, would be a more appropriate visa for a teacher like Mr. Soberano. But Pendergast and other school districts say long wait times and high legal costs can make the H-1B prohibitive. The Trump administration has also tightened oversight of that program.
  In Denver public schools, 20 bilingual education teachers hold H-1Bs and about three hold J-1s. But in the future, the district said, it may expand its use of the J-1.
  ''We still don't have enough people to fill the openings,'' said Bart Muller, the managing director of employee and labor relations for the system. ''The political environment has been a little challenging over the last year and a half. The bottom line is there are a lot more hoops to jump through with H-1B, while J-1 is fairly simple. You can do it expeditiously.''
  Lora Bartlett, an education professor who has written a book about migrant teachers, argued that there should be a new visa category that meets the needs of public schools while allowing effective teachers to achieve legal residency. But, she added, ''there are people who have a vested interest in not finding a long-term solution. There is a whole industry that makes money every time a new teacher comes into the country. They don't make money when a teacher stays.''
  And in Arizona, where many teachers are expected to improve test scores using aging textbooks inside buildings in need of repair, districts worry that a modest increase in teacher salaries and school funding won't be enough to persuade more local candidates to enter the profession.
  ''Quite frankly, for a lot of the teachers, some of the fun and creativity has been taken out of it with mandates,'' said Ms. Amerson, the head of human resources in Casa Grande. ''It seems like we spend the whole entire second semester testing kids.''
  In Pendergast, Ms. Davis-Tussey agreed that higher pay alone would not be enough to fill the empty jobs that have forced her to look to the Philippines.
  ''That respect for the profession is just as important as the money,'' she said. ''And for a long time, teachers have felt, not only did they not have money, but what they were doing was being brushed aside and not respected.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/02/us/arizona-teachers-philippines.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Donato Soberano with his seventh-grade science class in Glendale, Ariz. He paid thousands of dollars to come from the Philippines. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DEANNA ALEJANDRA DENT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Teachers and supporters marched last week in Phoenix as part of a statewide walkout over education funding. Critics say foreign teachers are being taken advantage of to help keep wages low. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CAITLIN O'HARA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A17)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TEACHING & TEACHERS (91%); EDUCATION & TRAINING (90%); EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (90%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); EDUCATION FUNDING (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); STRIKES (89%); TEACHER RECRUITMENT & HIRING (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES (78%); HUMAN RESOURCES & PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%); RECESSION (78%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); TEACHER COMPENSATION (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (75%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (68%); WELFARE BENEFITS (61%); FOOD STAMPS (50%)

Industry: PUBLIC SCHOOLS (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PRIMARY SCHOOLS (78%); BUDGETS (77%); PERSONAL DEBT (68%)

Geographic: PHOENIX, AZ, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (94%); PHILIPPINES (93%)

Load-Date: May 3, 2018


End of Document
How Indian Americans Came to Love the Spelling Bee
The New York Times 
July 3, 2021 Saturday 05:23 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: STYLE
Length: 1790 words
Byline: Anna P. Kambhampaty
Highlight: Since 2008, a South Asian American child has been named a champion at every Scripps National Spelling Bee.
Body


Since 2008, a South Asian American child has been named a champion at every Scripps National Spelling Bee.
Eighth graders aren’t generally known as dictionary aficionados. But Dhroov Bharatia, 12, has a passion for language.
“Nothing can express an idea as effectively as a judicious use of words,” he said by phone from his home in Plano, Texas. This love of vocabulary has made him one of 11 finalists in this year’sScripps National Spelling Bee, adding him to a long line of South Asian American middle and elementary schoolers who have excelled at the competition.
It’s a well-documented relationship. Since 2008, a South Asian American kid has been named a champion at every Scripps bee. This year, two-thirds of the semifinalists were of South Asian descent, and at least nine of the 11 finalists are of South Asian descent.
Over the past two decades, spelling bees tailored to South Asian children have proliferated. So have spelling bee coaching companies founded by South Asian Americans. Flyers for local bees are handed out at Indian supermarkets, and the activity is spread through word of mouth at temple events.
A 2020 documentary, “Spelling the Dream,” followed four Indian American children preparing for 2017’s bee season and showcased just how much it means to South Asian American families.
“It is definitely a source of pride from an educational standpoint,” said Shalini Shankar, an anthropologist and the author of “Beeline: What Spelling Bees Reveal about Generation Z’s New Path to Success.”
But it is also something more: The bee has become an occasion for unity within the South Asian American immigrant community, and it all goes back to a historic victory more than three decades ago.
In 1985, Balu Natarajan became the first child of immigrants to win Scripps, prompting an outpouring of support from people of South Asian descent. “Many people who I’d never even met felt a connection to it,” said Mr. Natarajan, 49. “I had no idea how much one could be embraced by a community.”
He became a well-known name in Indian American households around the country, which he described as humbling. “People in our community really do pay attention when one of our own is able to have success in something,” he said.
“Today, we have children and families in our community that are center stage when they go to the Scripps Spelling Bee. It’s really a place of comfort. But back in the ’80s, we were just exploring it,” Mr. Natarajan said. “We really had no idea that we were doing this for a community. We were just this tiny fraction of the participants.”
Mr. Natarajan has the photos to prove it: When he first competed in the Scripps spelling bee in 1983, he remembers only six contestants of Indian descent out of 137 students. A few of them gathered to take a photograph, documenting a small moment of togetherness — a stark contrast to the playing field of today.
The Bee Is Back
Every year, about 11 million children in the United States participate in school-level spelling bees. The first Scripps National Bee was held in 1925; because of the pandemic, it was canceled last year for the first time since World War II.
The words have gotten progressively more difficult over the decades — mostly because the kids have gotten a lot better. “Therapy” was a winning word in 1940, but in 2019, two of the winning words were “bougainvillea” and “erysipelas.”
In 2019, Scripps named eight winners for the cup — “octochamps,” they coined themselves. Previously, only two kids had ever tied for the win. Seven of the 2019 champions were of Indian descent.
“It’s not spellers against spellers. It’s spellers against the dictionary,” Ashrita Gandhari, a current finalist, said about the sense of camaraderie and companionship among the contestants.
That doesn’t mean she’s not in it to win it. Ashrita, 14, is spending about 10 hours a day practicing, and has three coaches to help her prepare. But part of her love for the bee has to do with the incredible support she receives from her community.
“I live in Ashburn, Virginia, and let me tell you, a lot of people here are of South Asian descent,” she said. “So many people — all my friends, my neighborhood, my community — they’ve all been super supportive. We’ve had parties, they even filmed a congratulations video for me, baked me cakes.”
Indian Americans are one of the younger, newer groups of immigrants in the United States. Over 60 percent of Indian immigrants living in the United States today arrived after 2000. “That’s not the case for most other Asian populations, Chinese, Filipino, Korean,” said Sangay Mishra, an associate professor at Drew University and the author of “Desis Divided: The Political Lives of South Asian Americans.”
Indian immigrants did come to the United States in earlier waves, particularly in the wake of the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act and the family-based immigration that followed. But the implementation of the H-1B visa program in 1990, which allowed for the entry of specialized foreign workers, brought in Indian immigrants in much larger numbers.
In 2016 and 2017, Indians accounted for almost 75 percent of all H-1B visa holders in the United States. This “changed the character of the community, in terms of skewing it more professional and more highly educated,” Dr. Mishra said.
Parents were looking for hobbies for their children that prioritized “all kinds of educational attainment,” said Dr. Shankar. Spelling as an extracurricular activity soon began to spread by word of mouth. “They tell their broader ethnic community about it, and they bring each other to these South Asian spelling games, which are really accessible and held in areas where there’s a large concentration of South Asian Americans,” she said.
The hobby is also passed down — within families — to younger siblings and cousins. (“If the older sibling did it, the younger one often follows,” said Dr. Shankar.) That was the case for the 2016 Scripps champion, Nihar Janga, 16, whose passion for spelling was born out of a sibling rivalry going back to age 5. Watching his mother quiz his older sister, Navya, as she was preparing for the bee, Nihar started chiming in, reciting spellings even before Navya could finish.
“I looked up to the fact that my sister was participating in something like this, but I also wanted to be better at it. Eventually, it grew into my own love for spelling and everything it’s taught me,” Nihar said.
An Engine for Success
Navya and Nihar’s family, who live in Austin, Texas, first came across spelling bees through Navya’s bharatanatyam (an Indian classical dance) teacher, who was involved with the nonprofit North South Foundation.
The foundation has over 90 chapters, hosts regional and national educational contests in a variety of subject areas, and raises money through these events for disadvantaged students in India. A spelling bee is among the contests run by the organization, and it’s common for top contenders to continue on to Scripps.
Mr. Natarajan is now the foundation’s president, and it has become a powerhouse incubator. Five of 2019’s Scripps octochamps were involved in the North South Foundation.
Another prominent spelling bee on the practice circuit is the South Asian Spelling Bee, which is run by the marketing agency Touchdown Media and has been sponsored by companies such as MetLife and State Farm.
“At its height, it was really pumping in a lot of capital into holding these bees,” Dr. Shankar said. “They’d have a title sponsor and numerous smaller sponsors.” This gave spelling bees a lot more traction and momentum, she added: “It has an entire engine behind it.”
“The community created an infrastructure for the kids to really thrive and excel in this area,” she said.
More Than a Memory Game
For many students, spelling isn’t just a study, but also an all-encompassing way to learn about the world.
“Spelling is not just taking these 500,000 words in the English language and memorizing them and then you win the spelling bee — that’s not how it works,” Nihar said. “I want people to think of spelling just like any other competition, like wanting to learn the story behind that field and learning how that field can apply to the world.”
“You can’t just eat protein powder and then go be good at football,” he added.
Dhroov said that one of his favorite things about spelling is how it intersects with his other passions, including music. “I worked on the ‘Carnival of Venice’ song on my alto saxophone, and that’s a piece where the dynamics are very important,” he said. “Knowing all these words — for example, ‘crescendo,’ ‘diminuendo,’ ‘ritardando,’ which means to slow down, ‘fortissimo,’ which means play extremely loud” allowed him to “bring emotion to the piece, make it come alive,” he said.
The amount of concentration necessary also inevitably leads to significant time commitments, and plenty of pressure on the kids.
“The level of our competitors has definitely increased. Some of our students prepare for the spelling bee as any other collegiate athlete would with the amount of preparation, the dedication, and the amount of time that they study,” said J. Michael Durnil, the bee’s executive director.
Tarini Nandakumar was, at 10, one of the youngest semifinalists competing this year. Before she struck out in the semifinals, on June 27, she said she wanted to finish what her older brother, Pranav, had started years before. “My brother got 19th place in nationals, so I wanted to continue and try and win,” Tarini said. Of how it felt to have made it that far, “it’s exciting, but also scary,” she said.
The pressure was high. And when Tarini, who is from Round Rock, Texas, didn’t make it to the finals, she felt a lot of disappointment. Many tears were shed at first, she said. Her parents tried to comfort her, and within just a few days, she said she came around, and was asking for help to start studying again.
“I’m very motivated to get better next time,” she said. “Or at least get in the top five.”
PHOTOS: Ashrita Gandhari, 14, practices about 10 hours a day and has three coaches. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATE PALMER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST1); Dhroov Bharatia, 12, of Plano, Texas, is a finalist in the Scripps National Spelling Bee. He says he Appreciates how spelling intersects with his other sessions, including music. He plays the alto saxophone. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAKE DOCKINS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST6-ST7); Balu Natarajan, second from right, at the 1983 Scripps spelling bee in a picture he provided of most of the Indian American contestants that year. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA BALU NATARAJAN); Ashrita Gandhari’s medal from the Scripps semifinals in June. Ashrita is competitive, but she enjoys the camaraderie among the spellers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATE PALMER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST7)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: ASIAN AMERICANS (92%); DICTIONARIES & THESAURI (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (73%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (70%); Spelling (%); Scripps National Spelling Bee (%); Indian-Americans (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Families and Family Life (%); Natarajan, Balu (%)

Industry: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (70%); GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS (54%)

Person: Natarajan, Balu

Geographic: PLANO, TX, USA (57%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: July 9, 2021


End of Document
Immigration Bill Wins the Backing Of Senate Panel
The New York Times
May 22, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1115 words
Byline: By ASHLEY PARKER and JULIA PRESTON; Somini Sengupta contributed reporting from San Francisco, and Michael D. Shear from Washington.
Body


WASHINGTON -- The Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday approved a broad overhaul of the nation's immigration laws on a bipartisan vote, sending the most significant immigration policy changes in decades to the full Senate, where the debate is expected to begin next month.
The 13-to-5 vote came as the committee reached a deal on one of the final snags threatening the legislation -- and agreed to hold off on a particularly politically charged amendment, which would have added protections for same-sex couples.
After intense behind-the-scenes negotiations, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, struck an agreement with the group of eight senators who drafted the original bill to address his concerns about visas for skilled foreign workers who could fill jobs in the high-tech industry.
By late afternoon on Tuesday, Mr. Hatch had said that he would support the bill out of committee, if not necessarily on the Senate floor, after the committee agreed, via a voice vote, to pass his amendment.
''I'm going to vote this bill out of committee because I've committed to do that,'' Mr. Hatch said.
Authors of the legislation hoped for a strong vote out of committee to help the bill as it heads to the Senate floor. Mr. Hatch's support could help persuade other conservative Republicans to back the bill. He was joined in his ''yes'' vote by Senators Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, both Republican members of the bipartisan group.
The most emotional part of the committee process, which stretched over five days and 301 amendments, came late Tuesday, when Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who leads the committee, said that he would not offer an amendment allowing United States citizens to apply for permanent resident status, known as a green card, on behalf of their same-sex partners.
Mr. Leahy, according to immigration and gay rights advocates, was under pressure from the White House not to offer this amendment. Though both President Obama and Democrats in the bipartisan group support protections for same-sex couples in the bill, Republicans in the group have warned that such provisions would lead them to abandon the legislation.
Before Mr. Leahy announced his decision, Democratic senators, all of whom personally supported the provision, engaged in a lengthy and agonizing debate.
Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York and an author of the measure, said that not including the provision amounted to ''rank discrimination.'' But he ultimately concluded, ''As much as it pains me, I cannot support this amendment if it will bring down the bill.''
Similarly, Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, said: ''This is the definition of a Hobson's choice. In my bones, I believe in equality.''
But Mr. Graham reflected the view of his Republican colleagues when he said: ''You've got me on immigration. You don't have me on marriage. If you want to keep me on immigration, let's stay on immigration.''
Ultimately, Mr. Leahy withheld his amendment ''with a heavy heart,'' though he can still bring it up on the Senate floor.
Mr. Hatch's amendment, which reflects the compromise he reached after lengthy negotiations led by Mr. Schumer, raises the minimum number of visas annually for high-skilled foreign workers -- known as H-1B visas -- to 115,000, from 110,000 in the bill, while keeping the maximum at 180,000 a year. More important, aides to Mr. Hatch said, his provision includes a mechanism based on conditions in the labor market, intended to ensure that companies based in the United States can bring in qualified foreign workers when jobs are not filled by Americans, but decreases visas when they are.
His provision would also make it easier for employers to hire foreign workers, because it lightens the burden on them to demonstrate that they first tried to hire a qualified American worker.
Mr. Hatch's amendment clarifies distinctions between companies in which the majority of engineers and computer technicians are Americans, and companies with mostly foreign workers. Under the measure, more stringent restrictions would apply to the companies with a foreign labor force, like many Indian outsourcing companies, raising incentives to hire more Americans.
Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, a Democratic member of the bipartisan group, had been one of the last holdouts against Mr. Hatch's amendment. Along with Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, Mr. Durbin worried that Mr. Hatch's provisions would harm American workers.
But on Tuesday, Mr. Durbin signaled that he would support Mr. Hatch's plan.
''I would like to have seen a different amendment, a different bill -- you would have as well,'' Mr. Durbin said. ''But this is a dramatic improvement.'' (Mr. Grassley, meanwhile, remained unconvinced, arguing, ''Let's see how much this stinks.'')
Mr. Durbin made it clear that he expected Mr. Hatch's support in return for his own vote in favor of the deal, saying: ''A number of us have really leaned a long way in your direction to get your support for immigration reform.''
Mr. Hatch had previously said that he believed his amendment ''makes this bill a much more acceptable bill,'' especially in the Republican-controlled House, where it is likely to face stiff opposition.
The agreement represents a win for the high-tech industry, and comes on the heels of intense lobbying by the industry. The Association for Competitive Technology, a trade group, sent 50 executives and application developers to Washington on Monday and Tuesday to meet with lawmakers, including members of the Judiciary Committee.
Richard L. Trumka, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the nation's largest federation of unions, issued a statement against what he said were Mr. Hatch's ''antiworker amendments.''
After passage, President Obama congratulated the committee and called the legislation ''largely consistent with the principles of common-sense reform I have proposed and meets the challenge of fixing our broken immigration system.'' He urged the Senate to improve it further on the Senate floor.
As the committee was finishing its work, a drumbeat against an immigration overhaul began to pick up. Dozens of high-profile conservative leaders and activists signed an open letter published Tuesday that denounced the bipartisan bill, saying the Senate ''would do better to start over from scratch.''
The conservatives said the bill was ''bloated and unwieldy,'' comparing it to President Obama's health care bill.
Still, when the committee voted to approve the legislation Tuesday evening, a cheer and applause rang out through the room, as immigration advocates leapt to their feet, shouting ''Yes we can!'' and ''Sí, se puede!''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/22/us/politics/leahy-voices-optimism-as-panel-continues-work-on-immigration-bill.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Senator Patrick J. Leahy making his closing statement during the Senate Judiciary Committee process
 at right, Senators Orrin G. Hatch and Charles E. Schumer, who were central to the deal. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DREW ANGERER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A17)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); IMMIGRATION LAW (91%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (91%); LEGISLATION (91%); BIPARTISANSHIP (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); LGBTQ+ PERSONS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); AGREEMENTS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); CONSERVATISM (76%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); LGBTQ+ RIGHTS (75%); EMOTIONS (66%); US PRESIDENTS (62%)

Organization: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (56%)

Person: JEFF FLAKE (79%); ORRIN HATCH (79%); AL FRANKEN (58%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); CHARLES SCHUMER (58%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%); PATRICK LEAHY (58%)

Geographic: VERMONT, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: May 22, 2013


End of Document
Meet the Foreign Tech Workers Left in Limbo by Trump
The New York Times 
April 19, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1369 words
Byline: DEANNE FITZMAURICE and KATIE BENNER
Highlight: They are app makers, they are podcasters, and they are also H-1B visa holders — possibly putting them at risk from the president’s immigration policies.
Body


At dawn in California’s Bay Area, the river of commuters begins to flow. It is filled with the people who help make our smartphones, our favorite games, the apps we download.
But many have also come to make something else, perhaps — a new life in America.
These are just a few of the 85,000 people who come to work at American companies from as far away as India and China on H-1B visas, which are granted to highly skilled workers from overseas. Many, like Kaushik Gopal, land jobs at technology firms that have struggled to find enough American citizens with advanced math and science skills to fill their cubicles.
Often, they hope to call the United States home.
“What I have loved about the U.S. is that it didn’t matter where you came from,” Mr Gopal said. “Your past, your color or religion didn’t matter. If you did good work, there was a place for you here.”
President Trump’s plans to change the rules that govern work visas and immigration have thrown the lives of many visa holders into limbo.
“I’m always on guard because there is a chance that suddenly I’ll get the news that I’m no longer welcome,” said Mr. Gopal, 32, who first came to the United States in 2012.
Like many of Silicon Valley’s workers who are here as part of the H-1B visa program, which is aimed at highly skilled workers, Mr. Gopal was born in India, attended university in the United States and got a job at a tech company. He said the Bay Area attracts the smartest engineers from all over the world because it is known as “a magnet for technical skill.”
He is now at the delivery start-up Instacart, working on an app that customers in several cities use to order their groceries. His weekly podcast “Fragmented,” which he hosts with an app maker named Donn Felker, has raised his professional profile and netted him speaking spots at conferences as far away as Sweden.
While growing up in India, Mr. Gopal was a fan of American television shows and cartoons. After he graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, he was excited to take his parents to Disneyland.
The high-tech industry is now deeply dependent on workers like Mr. Gopal: One in eight tech workers has an H-1B visa, according to estimates from Goldman Sachs.
H-1B visa holders account for about 15 percent of the American work forces at Facebook and Qualcomm, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department. Silicon Valley start-ups, which often drive tech innovation, employ many engineers on student and work visas, as do tech giants like Google and Apple.
This has allowed an ethnically diverse population to flourish around the Bay Area. The Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple in San Jose is one of the largest Sikh temples in North America. The 49-mile stretch of towns and cities from San Jose to San Francisco is filled with Asian eateries, like the popular Rajwadi Thali restaurant in Sunnyvale.
Some visa holders, like Sujay Jaladi, have been in America for so long that they cannot imagine living elsewhere. Mr. Jaladi, 35, has lived here for 15 years, first on a student visa and then on a series of H-1B visas. He applied for a green card in 2012 and is waiting for the application to be approved. His wife, Priya, also holds an H-1B visa and works at a tech company.
“My family lives in India and I love that country,” said Mr. Jaladi, “but I have spent my adult life in the United States and it definitely feels like more of a home to me.”
Mr. Jaladi commutes an hour each day to work as the head of information security at Gusto, a company that provides human resources services to small businesses. He enjoys meals at home and weekend shopping trips to Costco. He and his wife love to cook.
But visas are always on his mind, along with the possibility that he may have to return to India.
“Our ability to stay in the U.S., with good standing, depends on the visa process,” he said. “Working hard is just one factor. If the financial markets are hit and your job lays people off, H-1B visa holders have a limited time to find another job and get into good standing before we have to leave the country. If the market is down and jobs numbers are low, there will be more H-1Bs in the market looking for jobs.”
Mr. Jaladi isn’t the only one who has found himself in immigration limbo at Gusto. Shub Jain, a 26-year-old software engineer there, graduated from the University of California, San Diego, in 2014, worked at Microsoft and last fall moved to San Francisco for a job at the H.R. start-up. He has been working on an extended student visa and has lost out on the H-1B visa lottery three times. This is the last year he will be eligible to apply. “If it doesn’t work out,” he said, “I’ll leave the country.”
Mr. Jain’s life is like that of many 20-something professionals. He loves cars and driving around California, as well as exploring new restaurants with friends. But the feeling of welcome he has always experienced in the United States has shifted as politicians have changed their views on immigration.
“My conversations with friends have changed,” he said. “I used to look at the news every morning, but now I don’t because I don’t want it to impact my work. I look at night. You don’t know what you’ll read.”
Like many tech employees, Mr. Jain took a gamble on a smaller start-up. But his decision came with extra risk. At Microsoft, he could deal with visa issues by relocating to one of the company’s many global offices. He does not have that option at Gusto.
Mr. Jain talks about his anxieties with teammates like Nicholas Gervasi, 32, a Canadian who is working at Gusto on an H-1B visa. Thanks to provisions under the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Gervasi has had an easier time living and working in the United States than his colleagues from India, and he expects his green card application to be approved soon.
Mr. Jain’s sister attended the University of Illinois, worked on a trading floor in Chicago and left the country after she was unable to get an H1-B visa. She has since started her own company and talks to Mr. Jain almost every day as he prepares himself for the possibility that he will have to leave.
Because of his uncertain situation, Mr. Jain’s best friend from college recently visited for a month to play video games, go on drives and spend as much time together as they could.
Some critics of the H-1B visa program say there are more than enough Americans with technology degrees to fill all the technical jobs in the United States. Others say that Silicon Valley companies do not cast a wide enough net for American job candidates. But tech executives have long said that there are not enough Americans with the advanced math and science skills necessary to succeed at their companies.
Mr. Gervasi said that companies “should be empowered to hire the best people.” Joshua Reeves, the chief executive and founder of Gusto, agreed, noting that 8 percent of his work force is on a visa or green card. Gusto’s hiring policy has never taken a candidate’s citizenship into account, and Mr. Reeves said the company was “committed to sticking to that mind-set.”
That commitment could be tested over the next few years, given that the White House is continuously looking for ways to curb immigration as it seeks to enact America-first policies.
“It’s almost like living under this — maybe not fear — but a worry about what’s next and what will happen,” Mr. Jain said. “This feeling of being unwelcome in the country. I hadn’t really felt that before.”
Vindu Goel contributed reporting.
PHOTOS: The sun setting over San Jose, Calif., and the Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple, one of the largest Sikh temples in North America.; Kaushik Gopal, an H-1B visa holder who works at the delivery start-up Instacart, above left, working in what the company calls a “chill room.” At left, a line forms outside the restaurant Rajwadi Thali in Sunnyvale. Shub Jain, below left, has failed in three attempts to get an H-1B visa. At far left, Sujay Jaladi in his wedding photo; he applied for a green card in 2012 but it hasn’t been approved yet. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DEANNE FITZMAURICE)
Related Articles
    • How Trump’s ‘Hire American’ Order May Affect Tech Worker Visas
    • Trump Signs Order That Could Lead to Curbs on Foreign Workers
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); COMMUTING (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); SIKHS & SIKHISM (76%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (74%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); RACE & ETHNICITY (73%); RELIGION (68%); STARTUPS (62%); CARTOONS & COMICS (60%); vis-photo (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Silicon Valley (Calif) (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Computers and the Internet (%); San Francisco Bay Area (Calif) (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); MOBILE MEDIA (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PODCASTING (89%); BIG TECH (79%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (78%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (78%); SMARTPHONES (78%); GROCERY DELIVERY & PICKUP SERVICES (67%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (64%); CARTOONS & COMICS (60%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (94%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); SAN JOSE, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (93%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: April 21, 2017


End of Document
The Fate of Most Silicon Valley Drones: ‘Live Work Work Work Die’; Nonfiction
The New York Times 
May 25, 2018 Friday 05:00 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOKS; review
Length: 1257 words
Byline: Nikil Saval
Highlight: Corey Pein delves into the dark heart of the tech industry, where most are destined not to make it.
Body


LIVE WORK WORK WORK DIE A Journey Into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley By Corey Pein 309 pp. Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt & Company. $28.
It was not long ago that it seemed as if the companies of Silicon Valley were poised to renew and reshape American capitalism. In the late ’90s, companies like AltaVista and Razorfish received the most extraordinary valuations in the history of the stock market, and their foosball-table-filled offices were the subject of breathless coverage. Their employees were rich — congenital dorkiness having become phenomenally lucrative — and a “new economy” was on the horizon. The proof? In some parts of the country, you could log onto America Online through a dial-up modem, sign into Kozmo.com and order a Coca-Cola to be delivered in about an hour. Ah, liberty! In 2001, the bubble burst, but the dream of a genuinely profitable, internet-fueled economy remained.
That economy is now here, most visibly in the form of a sleek slab of phone on which you might be reading (or, really, scrolling) this, and the bloom is off the digital rose. You can still get a Coke delivered, but it will be handed to you by an independent contractor for Caviar, cycling around town with a humiliating giant orange box on his back, as he makes well under minimum wage. Or it will eventually come in the back seat of a robot UberEats car, which might well have slammed into a few pedestrians on the way — the price of progress. Now, or soon, anything you want can be paid for and delivered, virtually at any time, at nearly any speed. For this great convenience, Amazon can now pretty much gull every mayor in America into selling their schools, transportation systems, birthrights, etc., in order to draw 50,000 tech employees — among the least beloved specimens of humanity — to invade and comprehensively ruin their city, block by blessed block. Those employees will be mostly white, mostly men, and mostly known for upholding an industry whose sexism is towering, peerless and, according to charmers like James Damore, not even as sexist as it should be.
The effects of this bargain on all of us have been well documented — even if some of its political consequences, as with the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica scandal, are continually ramifying — but the lives of the people who work in the industry and have foisted it on us are less well known, and this is where Corey Pein’s “Live Work Work Work Die” attempts to fill in the picture. Pein, a staff writer for the caustic and essential little magazine The Baffler, is a former newspaper reporter, who experienced the depredations of tech “disruption” firsthand. Thinking he was following the money, in 2012 he joined a Seattle-based “avant-garde online news service” called Demotix as its editor in chief. Soon into his tenure, Demotix was bought by Corbis, an online photography database, which proceeded to reassign photographers from war zones to “chase reality TV stars around red-carpet events”; not long after, Pein learned that Corbis also planned to lay off half of Demotix’s employees.
So, in the spirit of gonzo journalism, he decides to high-tail it to the Bay Area to sell a start-up and document the horrors of his temporarily adopted home along the way. The idea he comes up with is called “Laborize,” a company that would hire itself out to one organization to unionize a rival — it would, say, contract with Uber to unionize Lyft — and therefore ruin the competitive advantage that comes from denying health care, steady wages and other benefits of unionization. It is a clever ploy that cuts to the heart of what makes Silicon Valley a very pure example of capitalism: the fact that it screws over, or tries to automate into the digital ether, a vast proportion of the American work force, in order to enrich, artificially and enormously, a small proportion of investors and owners, whose companies are — more often than not — profoundly unprofitable.
It probably doesn’t ruin the surprise to point out that Pein’s efforts are a failure: His start-up plans stall out. Nor does his exhaustive, scathing description of what Silicon Valley companies do make for a serious contribution to journalism about the tech industry. More than gonzo, an aura of laziness pervades the exercise. In an emblematic passage, Pein visits the Googleplex in Mountain View, but doesn’t manage to get inside any of the buildings, which in my experience is not so hard to do. Instead he wanders around outside, telling us that it “looks like pretty much any other dismal suburban office park” and that “the real story hid behind the blackened windows of the squat office buildings.” The real story — digitizing, data mining, etc. — turns out to be what is already widely available in reporting elsewhere, in any case uncited in Pein’s book.
Still, despite and perhaps a little because of its lackadaisical approach to its subject, “Live Work Work Work Die” manages to capture something essential about Silicon Valley that has eluded other authors. This is because Pein starts from the grimy underbelly of tech and never makes it out, which accurately reflects the experience of many tech workers. We only learn of those who make it big — Steve Jobs, Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg. We rarely hear of the people who fail, or work uselessly and endlessly hard, without much in the way of reward.
Struggling to find an apartment in San Francisco’s stratospherically overheated rental market, Pein settles for an Airbnb in which he has to share a room with four people and, because of what appears to be its uncertain legal status, has only one key. Calling it the Hacker Condo, he notes that all four residents are “immigrants or the children of immigrants, and therefore accustomed to getting jerked around,” and that the foreign-born residents are on H-1B visas, an arrangement that requires them to stay employed. But the lure of making it big keeps everyone working insane hours. Many of the people he meets “had a mysterious ‘side project’ — a start-up in the making — that was inevitably too ill formed to talk about, or far too technically complicated to remember.” Pein realizes that most of these “tech bros” were “doomed to be desk jockeys for life, forever dreaming of their star turn as Job Creators.”
This is an exhausting, one-note book, but the tinny, grating note Pein repeatedly strikes may nonetheless be one the world needs to hear more often. As Pein migrates from the Hacker Condo to, eventually, a literal tent ($35 a day on Airbnb), he passes through lurid publicity parties for companies like Nerdwallet, which raised $64 million in its first round of fund-raising and makes money from advertising and referral fees earned when it steers users toward certain loans or insurance policies. Its employees describe their executives (on the review site GlassDoor) as “treacherous, languishing souls who want to claw as much money as possible” from their investors and clients, and claim not even to know “what the product is.” He pays $29.70 to join a start-up pitch competition — a kind of live “Shark Tank” — whose theme is captured in the downer of a phrase “Hack immigration.”
His failed journey around the depressing periphery of the tech industry, its warrens suffused with the distinct scent of unadulterated bull, is a preview of the bleak, airless future it aims to deliver, by driverless car or drone, to all of us.
Nikil Saval is the author of “Cubed: The Secret History of the Workplace.” 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Tamara Shopsin FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Review

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: WRITERS (89%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (84%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (84%); BOOK REVIEWS (79%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (75%); MAYORS (75%); WAGES & SALARIES (75%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (71%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (70%); MINIMUM WAGE (70%); CITIZEN JOURNALISM (63%); Books and Literature (%); Live Work Work Work Die: A Journey Into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley (Book) (%); Pein, Corey (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Start-ups (%)

Company:  HENRY HOLT & CO PUBLISHING (58%);  AOL INC (56%);  COCA-COLA CO (56%);  FACEBOOK INC (51%)

Ticker: KO (NYSE) (56%); FB (NASDAQ) (51%)

Industry: SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (56%); SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (56%); NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (56%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (51%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES (89%); WRITERS (89%); BOOK REVIEWS (79%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (79%); MODEMS (72%)

Person: Pein, Corey

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (94%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: May 28, 2018


End of Document
How Do You Spell 'Excellence'?
The New York Times
July 4, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ST; Column 0; Style Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1687 words
Byline: By Anna P. Kambhampaty
Body


Since 2008, a South Asian American child has been named a champion at every Scripps National Spelling Bee.
Eighth graders aren't generally known as dictionary aficionados. But Dhroov Bharatia, 12, has a passion for language. 
  ''Nothing can express an idea as effectively as a judicious use of words,'' he said by phone from his home in Plano, Texas. This love of vocabulary has made him one of 11 finalists in this year's Scripps National Spelling Bee, adding him to a long line of South Asian American middle and elementary schoolers who have excelled at the competition.
  It's a well-documented relationship. Since 2008, a South Asian American kid has been named a champion at every Scripps bee. This year, two-thirds of the semifinalists were of South Asian descent, and at least nine of the 11 finalists are of South Asian descent.
  Over the past two decades, spelling bees tailored to South Asian children have proliferated. So have spelling bee coaching companies founded by South Asian Americans. Flyers for local bees are handed out at Indian supermarkets, and the activity is spread through word of mouth at temple events.
  A 2020 documentary, ''Spelling the Dream,'' followed four Indian American children preparing for 2017's bee season and showcased just how much it means to South Asian American families.
  ''It is definitely a source of pride from an educational standpoint,'' said Shalini Shankar, an anthropologist and the author of ''Beeline: What Spelling Bees Reveal about Generation Z's New Path to Success.''
  But it is also something more: The bee has become an occasion for unity within the South Asian American immigrant community, and it all goes back to a historic victory more than three decades ago.
  In 1985, Balu Natarajan became the first child of immigrants to win Scripps, prompting an outpouring of support from people of South Asian descent. ''Many people who I'd never even met felt a connection to it,'' said Mr. Natarajan, 49. ''I had no idea how much one could be embraced by a community.''
  He became a well-known name in Indian American households around the country, which he described as humbling. ''People in our community really do pay attention when one of our own is able to have success in something,'' he said.
  ''Today, we have children and families in our community that are center stage when they go to the Scripps Spelling Bee. It's really a place of comfort. But back in the '80s, we were just exploring it,'' Mr. Natarajan said. ''We really had no idea that we were doing this for a community. We were just this tiny fraction of the participants.''
  Mr. Natarajan has the photos to prove it: When he first competed in the Scripps spelling bee in 1983, he remembers only six contestants of Indian descent out of 137 students. A few of them gathered to take a photograph, documenting a small moment of togetherness -- a stark contrast to the playing field of today.
  The Bee Is Back
  Every year, about 11 million children in the United States participate in school-level spelling bees. The first Scripps National Bee was held in 1925; because of the pandemic, it was canceled last year for the first time since World War II.
  The words have gotten progressively more difficult over the decades -- mostly because the kids have gotten a lot better. ''Therapy'' was a winning word in 1940, but in 2019, two of the winning words were ''bougainvillea'' and ''erysipelas.''
  In 2019, Scripps named eight winners for the cup -- ''octochamps,'' they coined themselves. Previously, only two kids had ever tied for the win. Seven of the 2019 champions were of Indian descent.
  ''It's not spellers against spellers. It's spellers against the dictionary,'' Ashrita Gandhari, a current finalist, said about the sense of camaraderie and companionship among the contestants.
  That doesn't mean she's not in it to win it. Ashrita, 14, is spending about 10 hours a day practicing, and has three coaches to help her prepare. But part of her love for the bee has to do with the incredible support she receives from her community.
  ''I live in Ashburn, Virginia, and let me tell you, a lot of people here are of South Asian descent,'' she said. ''So many people -- all my friends, my neighborhood, my community -- they've all been super supportive. We've had parties, they even filmed a congratulations video for me, baked me cakes.''
  Indian Americans are one of the younger, newer groups of immigrants in the United States. Over 60 percent of Indian immigrants living in the United States today arrived after 2000. ''That's not the case for most other Asian populations, Chinese, Filipino, Korean,'' said Sangay Mishra, an associate professor at Drew University and the author of ''Desis Divided: The Political Lives of South Asian Americans.''
  Indian immigrants did come to the United States in earlier waves, particularly in the wake of the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act and the family-based immigration that followed. But the implementation of the H-1B visa program in 1990, which allowed for the entry of specialized foreign workers, brought in Indian immigrants in much larger numbers.
  In 2016 and 2017, Indians accounted for almost 75 percent of all H-1B visa holders in the United States. This ''changed the character of the community, in terms of skewing it more professional and more highly educated,'' Dr. Mishra said.
  Parents were looking for hobbies for their children that prioritized ''all kinds of educational attainment,'' said Dr. Shankar. Spelling as an extracurricular activity soon began to spread by word of mouth. ''They tell their broader ethnic community about it, and they bring each other to these South Asian spelling games, which are really accessible and held in areas where there's a large concentration of South Asian Americans,'' she said.
  The hobby is also passed down -- within families -- to younger siblings and cousins. (''If the older sibling did it, the younger one often follows,'' said Dr. Shankar.) That was the case for the 2016 Scripps champion, Nihar Janga, 16, whose passion for spelling was born out of a sibling rivalry going back to age 5. Watching his mother quiz his older sister, Navya, as she was preparing for the bee, Nihar started chiming in, reciting spellings even before Navya could finish.
  ''I looked up to the fact that my sister was participating in something like this, but I also wanted to be better at it. Eventually, it grew into my own love for spelling and everything it's taught me,'' Nihar said.
  An Engine for Success
  Navya and Nihar's family, who live in Austin, Texas, first came across spelling bees through Navya's bharatanatyam (an Indian classical dance) teacher, who was involved with the nonprofit North South Foundation.
  The foundation has over 90 chapters, hosts regional and national educational contests in a variety of subject areas, and raises money through these events for disadvantaged students in India. A spelling bee is among the contests run by the organization, and it's common for top contenders to continue on to Scripps.
  Mr. Natarajan is now the foundation's president, and it has become a powerhouse incubator. Five of 2019's Scripps octochamps were involved in the North South Foundation.
  Another prominent spelling bee on the practice circuit is the South Asian Spelling Bee, which is run by the marketing agency Touchdown Media and has been sponsored by companies such as MetLife and State Farm.
  ''At its height, it was really pumping in a lot of capital into holding these bees,'' Dr. Shankar said. ''They'd have a title sponsor and numerous smaller sponsors.'' This gave spelling bees a lot more traction and momentum, she added: ''It has an entire engine behind it.''
  ''The community created an infrastructure for the kids to really thrive and excel in this area,'' she said.
  More Than a Memory Game
  For many students, spelling isn't just a study, but also an all-encompassing way to learn about the world.
  ''Spelling is not just taking these 500,000 words in the English language and memorizing them and then you win the spelling bee -- that's not how it works,'' Nihar said. ''I want people to think of spelling just like any other competition, like wanting to learn the story behind that field and learning how that field can apply to the world.''
  ''You can't just eat protein powder and then go be good at football,'' he added.
  Dhroov said that one of his favorite things about spelling is how it intersects with his other passions, including music. ''I worked on the 'Carnival of Venice' song on my alto saxophone, and that's a piece where the dynamics are very important,'' he said. ''Knowing all these words -- for example, 'crescendo,' 'diminuendo,' 'ritardando,' which means to slow down, 'fortissimo,' which means play extremely loud'' allowed him to ''bring emotion to the piece, make it come alive,'' he said.
  The amount of concentration necessary also inevitably leads to significant time commitments, and plenty of pressure on the kids.
  ''The level of our competitors has definitely increased. Some of our students prepare for the spelling bee as any other collegiate athlete would with the amount of preparation, the dedication, and the amount of time that they study,'' said J. Michael Durnil, the bee's executive director.
  Tarini Nandakumar was, at 10, one of the youngest semifinalists competing this year. Before she struck out in the semifinals, on June 27, she said she wanted to finish what her older brother, Pranav, had started years before. ''My brother got 19th place in nationals, so I wanted to continue and try and win,'' Tarini said. Of how it felt to have made it that far, ''it's exciting, but also scary,'' she said.
  The pressure was high. And when Tarini, who is from Round Rock, Texas, didn't make it to the finals, she felt a lot of disappointment. Many tears were shed at first, she said. Her parents tried to comfort her, and within just a few days, she said she came around, and was asking for help to start studying again.
  ''I'm very motivated to get better next time,'' she said. ''Or at least get in the top five.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/03/style/spelling-bee-south-asian-americans.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Ashrita Gandhari, 14, practices about 10 hours a day and has three coaches. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATE PALMER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST1)
Dhroov Bharatia, 12, of Plano, Texas, is a finalist in the Scripps National Spelling Bee. He says he Appreciates how spelling intersects with his other sessions, including music. He plays the alto saxophone. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAKE DOCKINS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST6-ST7)
Balu Natarajan, second from right, at the 1983 Scripps spelling bee in a picture he provided of most of the Indian American contestants that year. (PHOTOGRAPH VIA BALU NATARAJAN)
 Ashrita Gandhari's medal from the Scripps semifinals in June. Ashrita is competitive, but she enjoys the camaraderie among the spellers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATE PALMER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (ST7)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: ASIAN AMERICANS (92%); DICTIONARIES & THESAURI (90%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (69%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (62%); GENERATION Z (50%)

Industry: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (69%); GROCERY STORES & SUPERMARKETS (54%)

Geographic: PLANO, TX, USA (57%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: July 4, 2021


End of Document
Engineers See a Path Out of Green Card Limbo
The New York Times
May 23, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1157 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Sanket Sant, a citizen of India, came to the United States at age 21, earning a master's degree in engineering, followed by a doctorate and then landing a well-paying job at a company making semiconductor equipment.
Then, he waited for the American government to decide if he could stay.
''I know this country better than my own country, and I still feel like an outsider,'' said Mr. Sant, 35, who received his Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Dallas in 2006, and has been waiting for federal officials to approve his green card application for six years. ''That's the thing that bothers me.''
That is also the predicament of tens of thousands of workers here in the heart of the tech industry who were born overseas and educated in the United States. Though not living in poverty or in the shadows, as are migrant workers who are here illegally, they are nevertheless in a bureaucratic limbo while they wait in a long line for a green card.
Now, though, Congress is poised to end their uncertainty.
The Senate Judiciary Committee on Tuesday approved a broad overhaul of the nation's immigration laws on a bipartisan vote, and sent the measure to the full Senate. The bill would make it much easier for science, math and engineering graduates of American universities to become permanent residents.
Crucially, it would also lift the limits on how many immigrants are allowed in from each country, which has meant that citizens of populous countries like India end up waiting far longer than others.
The provisions to ease the green card process enjoy bipartisan support, reflecting a stark reality: Nearly half of all engineering graduate students at American universities are from abroad.
Technology companies, like Facebook and Microsoft, want to hire many more of them, which is why they have lobbied to make it quicker for them to get permanent residency. So has the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, a group that campaigns for American workers.
Still, not everyone is a fan. Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, a Washington-based research and advocacy group, who has testified against the legislation, said easy, unlimited access to green cards for math and science graduates could encourage the emergence of ''visa mills,'' or schools established just to sell access to the United States. Also, he said: ''American young people with bachelor's degrees see these occupations distorted by large-scale admissions of foreign workers. That then changes their own decision making about what to do in the future.''
The green card provisions have been obscured by the louder, more polarizing fight between industry and labor over foreign guest worker visas, known as H-1Bs. But they stand to have a far greater impact on the men and women who drive this industry.
Mr. Sant, like many of his friends, was drawn to the United States for higher education. In 2010, the most recent year for which data is available from the National Science Foundation, a government agency, 45 percent of master's and doctoral students in engineering were from abroad, up from 35 percent in 1990 and 24 percent in 1980, according to the agency.
At some universities, the share of foreign students is even higher. At Carnegie Mellon University, which has one of the most prestigious engineering schools in the world, 62 percent of engineering graduate students came from abroad, and at the Rochester Institute of Technology, 56 percent.
This year, at the University of Southern California, the figure is 68 percent, according to university officials.
Among those who come to study in this country, about one in three end up staying on temporary work visas, mainly through the H-1B program. An analysis by the Brookings Institution concluded that in 2010, 30 percent of those who were working on H-1B visas were former students at American universities. Their wait for permanent residency can be frustratingly long, depending on their homeland.
According to data from the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, more than 150,000 of them have filed for green cards since 2010; nearly a third of them are from India, the largest single block.
Kartik Shah, 29, was among them. A native of Mumbai, he went to the University of Southern California, in Los Angeles, for a master's degree in electrical engineering. He graduated in 2007 and swiftly landed a job as a software engineer at Cisco's headquarters in San Jose, just south of here.
The company soon filed a green card application on his behalf, which it says it does for the vast majority of its H-1B workers. The government cleared his application, essentially ruling that his skills were needed. Then, it told him to wait.
So far the wait has been six years, and he has no idea when it will end. He is nervous about exploring other job options, for fear of losing his place in the green card line. (The draft bill would free up workers from their green card sponsors.)
Two evenings a week, he rides the bus an hour each way from his office in San Jose to the University of California, Berkeley, where he is working toward a master's in business administration. Perhaps, by the time he finishes, in the spring of 2014, his green card will be ready and he will be able to put his M.B.A. to use.
Still, he is reluctant to pin his hopes on the bill now on the Senate floor. If the overhaul fails, it would depress him too much.
''It's very frustrating,'' he said. ''Whenever we are hanging out with friends and this topic comes up, it's actually a very depressing topic.''
His onetime roommate, Rushil Kadakia, 32, says he is likewise not losing sleep over what happens in the Senate. He and his wife, an engineer at Oracle, are both in line for a green card. They have a 6-week-old daughter at home, an American citizen by birth.
''I'm taking everything with a grain of salt,'' he said. ''I'm keenly following it, but I'm not optimistic.''
He joked that maybe his daughter could eventually sponsor her parents. ''Twenty-one years down the line,'' he said.
Mr. Sant, a native of Ahmedabad, in western India, came here to earn a master's degree, then a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, specializing in semiconductors. He got a job at a company making semiconductor equipment, published papers in academic journals and earned several patents.
His wife gave up her career as a surgeon back home in India when she came to this country as his bride; under current law, a spouse of a temporary visa holder is barred from working. The draft law would grant them work papers.
Going back home is not an option for Mr. Sant. His specialty is semiconductor equipment research, and not much of it happens in India. And anyway, he says, India has changed so much in the 13 years he has been away, and he has become so much more of, well, an American.
''I went to India last year. The whole culture is different. I don't relate to it any more,'' he said. ''I feel home is here.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/23/technology/long-wait-for-a-green-card-could-be-ending.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Kartik Shah, above, 29, has been waiting six years for a green card. Supporters cheered Tuesday when a Senate committee approved an overhaul of the immigration laws and sent it to the Senate. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES
 DREW ANGERER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (90%); ENGINEERING (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); BIPARTISANSHIP (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (78%); ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (78%); MIGRANT WORKERS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (77%); APPROVALS (75%); LEGISLATION (75%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (75%); NEGATIVE NEWS (68%); MATHEMATICS (66%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (53%)

Company:  NATIONAL TECHNICAL SYSTEMS INC (92%);  INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS INC (64%);  FACEBOOK INC (53%);  MICROSOFT CORP (53%)

Organization: UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS (57%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (53%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (53%)

Industry: NAICS561320 TEMPORARY HELP SERVICES (92%); NAICS541380 TESTING LABORATORIES (92%); SIC8734 TESTING LABORATORIES (92%); SIC7363 HELP SUPPLY SERVICES (92%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (53%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (53%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (53%); ENGINEERING (90%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING (78%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (77%); SEMICONDUCTORS (72%)

Geographic: DALLAS, TX, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (98%)

Load-Date: May 24, 2013


End of Document
How 'Hire American' Could Affect a World of Tech Workers
The New York Times
April 19, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1370 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that directs federal agencies to review employment immigration laws to promote ''Hire American'' policies.
The order makes no immediate changes to work visa programs but tells the Departments of Labor, Justice, Homeland Security and State to study existing laws and procedures and recommend changes. 
  In the case of one program, H-1B temporary visas, the order directs the agencies to suggest changes to help ensure that the visas are awarded to the most skilled, best-paid immigrant workers. ''Right now, H-1B visas are awarded in a totally random lottery, and that's wrong,'' Mr. Trump said at the signing in Kenosha, Wis.
  The order also calls for a crackdown on fraud and abuse in the current system of work visas -- which the agencies had already signaled they would do.
  What is the H-1B program, and why is the president focused on it?
  The H-1B program grants 65,000 work visas a year to foreigners, with 20,000 more visas granted to foreigners with advanced degrees and an unlimited number of extra visas available for universities, teaching hospitals and other nonprofit organizations. The program is aimed at highly skilled workers, and most of the visas are awarded to technology companies, although other specialty industries such as fashion also use the visas. (Melania Trump, the first lady, worked as a model on an H-1B visa.)
  Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. All H-1B employers are also required to pay prevailing wages to the immigrant workers who receive the visas.
  Labor Department data shows that about 40 percent of the visas go to entry-level workers and another 40 percent go to people with limited experience and skills. The Trump administration says that more of the jobs performed by those people could and should be filled by Americans.
  How are the visas allocated?
  Visa applications must be sponsored by employers. Every April 1, the government begins accepting applications for the next fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1. This year, the government received 199,000 H-1B applications in the first five days and then stopped accepting them.
  Because there are more applicants than visas, the visas are awarded by lottery. Each visa is good for three years and can be renewed for three more years. Immigrants who are applying for a permanent residency visa, known as a green card, can typically stay longer while waiting for approval.
  In 2015, President Obama expanded the program to allow the spouses of H-1B visa holders to also work in the United States, but in a recent court filing, the Trump administration said it was reviewing that policy.
  It is not clear exactly how many foreigners are in the United States on H-1B visas, but analysts estimate 650,000 to 900,000. In recent years, about 70 percent of the visas have been issued to citizens of India.
  Who employs these H-1B visa holders?
  The biggest employers are India-based outsourcing companies like Wipro Technologies, Infosys, Tech Mahindra and Tata Consultancy Services. These firms contract with banks, health care companies and other businesses to handle various computing tasks and bring in thousands of immigrants to do the work. Outsourcing companies based in the United States, particularly IBM and Cognizant, also use large numbers of H-1B workers.
  The leading American technology companies, including Google, Microsoft and Apple, employ thousands of H-1B workers. Two companies, Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm, are heavily dependent on H-1B visas, with at least 15 percent of their American workforces holding the visas, according to federal filings. Thousands of Silicon Valley start-ups also hire some H-1B workers.
  How do these foreign workers contribute to the American economy?
  American technology companies argue that there is a shortage of qualified Americans for scientific and programming jobs, forcing them to turn overseas for workers to meet their hiring needs.
  In addition, immigrants or their children have played key roles in founding many technology companies, including giants like Apple, Google and Intel and up-and-comers like WhatsApp and Airbnb.
  The Indian outsourcers, which generally pay lower wages and operate in a different part of the technology ecosystem, say they are helping American companies cut spending on certain basic services so they can keep employing higher-paid workers in other parts of their businesses. R. Chandrashekhar, the president of the National Association of Software and Services Companies, a group that represents the Indian technology industry, says that more than three-quarters of the Fortune 500, America's largest companies by sales, use the Indian outsourcers for some operations.
  ''These services play a critical role in ensuring that corporate America remains a job-creation engine,'' Mr. Chandrashekhar said.
  Still, Indian outsourcing companies are preparing for a world of fewer visas, shifting the work to people in India and other countries.
  Are American workers hurt by immigrant work visa programs?
  Some studies suggest that universities grant technology degrees to more than enough American students to fill all the open jobs in the United States, so critics of the visas say the program is unnecessary. Silicon Valley companies often do not cast a wide net for American job candidates. Instead, they compete to hire the same graduates of the top colleges for many jobs and rely heavily on immigrants to fill out their workforces.
  Under the H-1B program, all companies have to attest that they are paying foreign workers prevailing wages and that their existing workers will not be adversely affected, said Russ Harrison, director of government relations at IEEE-USA, the American branch of IEEE, the largest professional association for computer scientists and electrical engineers. ''But all you have to do is check a box.''
  In some cases -- at Walt Disney and at the University of California, San Francisco, for instance -- employers laid off workers and replaced them with cheaper immigrants employed by outsourcing companies.
  Foreign workers can also be abused by the visa programs. The H-1B visa is tied to a specific employer, which means the visa holder cannot easily change jobs. Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, who has long pushed for changes, said some H-1B holders earned less than their stated salaries because they were forced to repay their employer for various expenses, such as travel.
  What changes are under consideration for visa programs?
  The Trump administration was vague about what it would like to change. In a background briefing with reporters, officials said they were considering changing the wage levels that would qualify for visas, raising fees for H-1B applications and steering more visas to immigrants with advanced degrees.
  The government will also publicly release more data about other visa programs, such as the L-1, which allows workers officially employed overseas by a company to work in the United States. ''We don't know how many L-1s are here, who employs them, where they are located and what they are paid,'' said Ronil Hira, an associate professor of political science at Howard University who has extensively studied immigrant visa programs.
  Many in Congress support changing the H-1B lottery system to give preference to the highest-paying jobs. ''We should allocate visas based on who wants to pay the highest salary to avoid undercutting the wages of American workers,'' said Ms. Lofgren, who has sponsored one of several bills on the topic.
  Such a change would favor established American technology companies, which tend to pay high wages, and hurt the outsourcing companies, which hire immigrants to do more basic work at lower wages. But there is a risk of collateral damage to start-ups, which pay less in cash but award stock to new hires, and to hospitals, which recruit immigrants for nursing and other nontech jobs.
  Changes to work visas could also be wrapped into a broader immigration bill. Mr. Trump recently told members of Congress that he was open to discussing that approach.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/18/technology/h1b-visa-facts-tech-worker.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Infosys, an Indian outsourcing company facing more pressure in the U.S. as a major employer of H-1B visa holders, has opened offices in countries like Poland. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ADAM LACH FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); IMMIGRATION (91%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); NEGATIVE NEWS (77%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (75%); PREVAILING WAGES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (99%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (92%); SPONSORSHIP (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (77%); ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS (72%); HOSPITALS (51%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); MELANIA TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: WISCONSIN, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: June 29, 2017


End of Document
Geek Hell
The New York Times
May 27, 2018 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 19; NONFICTION
Length: 1271 words
Byline: By NIKIL SAVAL
Nikil Saval is the author of ''Cubed: The Secret History of the Workplace.''
Body


LIVE WORK WORK WORK DIE A Journey Into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley By Corey Pein 309 pp. Metropolitan Books/ Henry Holt & Company. $28.
It was not long ago that it seemed as if the companies of Silicon Valley were poised to renew and reshape American capitalism. In the late '90s, companies like AltaVista and Razorfish received the most extraordinary valuations in the history of the stock market, and their foosball-table-filled offices were the subject of breathless coverage. Their employees were rich -- congenital dorkiness having become phenomenally lucrative -- and a ''new economy'' was on the horizon. The proof? In some parts of the country, you could log onto America Online through a dial-up modem, sign into Kozmo.com and order a Coca-Cola to be delivered in about an hour. Ah, liberty! In 2001, the bubble burst, but the dream of a genuinely profitable, internet-fueled economy remained. 
  That economy is now here, most visibly in the form of a sleek slab of phone on which you might be reading (or, really, scrolling) this, and the bloom is off the digital rose. You can still get a Coke delivered, but it will be handed to you by an independent contractor for Caviar, cycling around town with a humiliating giant orange box on his back, as he makes well under minimum wage. Or it will eventually come in the back seat of a robot UberEats car, which might well have slammed into a few pedestrians on the way -- the price of progress. Now, or soon, anything you want can be paid for and delivered, virtually at any time, at nearly any speed. For this great convenience, Amazon can now pretty much gull every mayor in America into selling their schools, transportation systems, birthrights, etc., in order to draw 50,000 tech employees -- among the least beloved specimens of humanity -- to invade and comprehensively ruin their city, block by blessed block. Those employees will be mostly white, mostly men, and mostly known for upholding an industry whose sexism is towering, peerless and, according to charmers like James Damore, not even as sexist as it should be.
  The effects of this bargain on all of us have been well documented -- even if some of its political consequences, as with the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica scandal, are continually ramifying -- but the lives of the people who work in the industry and have foisted it on us are less well known, and this is where Corey Pein's ''Live Work Work Work Die'' attempts to fill in the picture. Pein, a staff writer for the caustic and essential little magazine The Baffler, is a former newspaper reporter, who experienced the depredations of tech ''disruption'' firsthand. Thinking he was following the money, in 2012 he joined a Seattle-based ''avant-garde online news service'' called Demotix as its editor in chief. Soon into his tenure, Demotix was bought by Corbis, an online photography database, which proceeded to reassign photographers from war zones to ''chase reality TV stars around red-carpet events''; not long after, Pein learned that Corbis also planned to lay off half of Demotix's employees.
  So, in the spirit of gonzo journalism, he decides to high-tail it to the Bay Area to sell a start-up and document the horrors of his temporarily adopted home along the way. The idea he comes up with is called ''Laborize,'' a company that would hire itself out to one organization to unionize a rival -- it would, say, contract with Uber to unionize Lyft -- and therefore ruin the competitive advantage that comes from denying health care, steady wages and other benefits of unionization. It is a clever ploy that cuts to the heart of what makes Silicon Valley a very pure example of capitalism: the fact that it screws over, or tries to automate into the digital ether, a vast proportion of the American work force, in order to enrich, artificially and enormously, a small proportion of investors and owners, whose companies are -- more often than not -- profoundly unprofitable.
  It probably doesn't ruin the surprise to point out that Pein's efforts are a failure: His start-up plans stall out. Nor does his exhaustive, scathing description of what Silicon Valley companies do make for a serious contribution to journalism about the tech industry. More than gonzo, an aura of laziness pervades the exercise. In an emblematic passage, Pein visits the Googleplex in Mountain View, but doesn't manage to get inside any of the buildings, which in my experience is not so hard to do. Instead he wanders around outside, telling us that it ''looks like pretty much any other dismal suburban office park'' and that ''the real story hid behind the blackened windows of the squat office buildings.'' The real story -- digitizing, data mining, etc. -- turns out to be what is already widely available in reporting elsewhere, in any case uncited in Pein's book.
  Still, despite and perhaps a little because of its lackadaisical approach to its subject, ''Live Work Work Work Die'' manages to capture something essential about Silicon Valley that has eluded other authors. This is because Pein starts from the grimy underbelly of tech and never makes it out, which accurately reflects the experience of many tech workers. We only learn of those who make it big -- Steve Jobs, Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg. We rarely hear of the people who fail, or work uselessly and endlessly hard, without much in the way of reward.
  Struggling to find an apartment in San Francisco's stratospherically overheated rental market, Pein settles for an Airbnb in which he has to share a room with four people and, because of what appears to be its uncertain legal status, has only one key. Calling it the Hacker Condo, he notes that all four residents are ''immigrants or the children of immigrants, and therefore accustomed to getting jerked around,'' and that the foreign-born residents are on H-1B visas, an arrangement that requires them to stay employed. But the lure of making it big keeps everyone working insane hours. Many of the people he meets ''had a mysterious 'side project' -- a start-up in the making -- that was inevitably too ill formed to talk about, or far too technically complicated to remember.'' Pein realizes that most of these ''tech bros'' were ''doomed to be desk jockeys for life, forever dreaming of their star turn as Job Creators.''
  This is an exhausting, one-note book, but the tinny, grating note Pein repeatedly strikes may nonetheless be one the world needs to hear more often. As Pein migrates from the Hacker Condo to, eventually, a literal tent ($35 a day on Airbnb), he passes through lurid publicity parties for companies like Nerdwallet, which raised $64 million in its first round of fund-raising and makes money from advertising and referral fees earned when it steers users toward certain loans or insurance policies. Its employees describe their executives (on the review site GlassDoor) as ''treacherous, languishing souls who want to claw as much money as possible'' from their investors and clients, and claim not even to know ''what the product is.'' He pays $29.70 to join a start-up pitch competition -- a kind of live ''Shark Tank'' -- whose theme is captured in the downer of a phrase ''Hack immigration.''
  His failed journey around the depressing periphery of the tech industry, its warrens suffused with the distinct scent of unadulterated bull, is a preview of the bleak, airless future it aims to deliver, by driverless car or drone, to all of us.
  Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter, sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to us on the Book Review podcast.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/25/books/review/silicon-valley-live-work-work-work-die-corey-pein.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY TAMARA SHOPSIN)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Review

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (84%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (84%); NEW ECONOMY (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); WRITERS (78%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (75%); MAYORS (75%); WAGES & SALARIES (75%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (71%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (70%); MINIMUM WAGE (70%)

Company:  HENRY HOLT & CO PUBLISHING (58%);  AOL INC (56%);  COCA-COLA CO (56%);  FACEBOOK INC (51%)

Ticker: KO (NYSE) (56%); FB (NASDAQ) (51%)

Industry: SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (56%); SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (56%); NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (56%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (51%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (78%); WRITERS (78%); MODEMS (69%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (91%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: May 29, 2018


End of Document
Start-Ups Are Not Great for Marriages; Fiction
The New York Times 
August 2, 2021 Monday 01:35 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BOOKS; review
Length: 1425 words
Byline: Lauren Oyler
Highlight: New novels by Tahmima Anam and Y.Z. Chin feature women facing disadvantages in tech.
Body


THE STARTUP WIFE 
By Tahmima Anam
EDGE CASE 
By YZ Chin
Start-ups: We know they’re bad for politics, culture, workers, restaurants, sex, dating, fashion, San Francisco, Seattle, Berlin, local languages other than English, English, and people who enjoyed life more before teenagers could rent electric scooters. Two new novels suggest another downside: They’re also bad for marriage.
Like a C.E.O. trying to disrupt something — anything! — Tahmima Anam’s “The Startup Wife” imagines straying from the path laid by its title. A woman goes into business with her husband, does the grunt work, feels sidelined and is finally vindicated when something goes terribly wrong that her pragmatic advice would have prevented, if only the men had listened to her. “Sometimes being right is actually worse than being wrong,” she says. The marriage won’t work out, either.
Asha Ray is a graduate student at M.I.T. who has been developing “an algorithm designed to unlock the empathetic brain for artificial intelligence.” The daughter of Bangladeshi immigrants who became entrepreneurs the slow, old-fashioned way (owning a small chain of pharmacies called “Health Beats” in Queens), Asha is frustrated by both her fearsome academic adviser and the fact that her dream of building robots to “just be better versions of us” is very hard to realize. When she re-encounters her high school crush, Cyrus Jones, at their English teacher’s funeral, she is still enthralled, and eager to show him the better version of herself. Since dropping out of school after his mother died, Cyrus has cultivated a reputation for a defiant yet sensitive genius, making a living “conducting baptisms and cremations and writing little prayers for people to say at the bedside of a sick relative.” He fancies himself a (devastatingly hot) free spirit, helping people “find … meaning without the baggage of religion.” The pair elope immediately.
Soon they devise a new social media platform: “We Are Infinite,” or WAI, pronounced “why” and amenable to puns with “wise.” A few years ago I was eavesdropping on a conversation at a now-defunct women’s co-working space, and I learned the term for this kind of business arrangement: “partner partners!” Imagine it exclaimed with the same doomed excitement as the title of this novel. Asha adjusts her empathy algorithm so that it can customize nonreligious rituals for users, who can then form communities around “what gives their life meaning, instead of what they like or don’t like.” Their friend Jules provides comic relief and parents who, despite their WASP-y cruelty, pay for everything, until the couple find their funding.
And find it they do. The trio is accepted into a “secretive,” ultraexclusive start-up incubator called Utopia, focusing on projects that will help humanity survive the apocalypse; they’ve been looking for an app to “help people frame their existence” in the “post-world world.” Asha drops out of her Ph.D. program and WAI becomes wildly popular, its founders wildly wealthy.
What’s surprising is not the plot itself, but its wholesomeness — despite all the novel’s trappings of tech skepticism, from understated sendups of silly naming conventions, to an office that requires guests to hop across a trampoline to enter, to a moral lesson about the harmful effects of megalomaniacal scale. Except for the venture capitalists (“If you’re not an assassin, you can’t do your job”), everyone in this novel has good intentions. Asha offers little analysis of the topic about which she is supposedly an underappreciated expert, and as a result the book demonstrates an overall acceptance of the tech industry and its machinations, suggesting its problems can be solved merely by giving women a seat at the table.
Even as the idealist tenets of WAI’s manifesto — no trying to persuade people to buy things, no spying, the team is paramount — crumble, the earnestness with which Anam approaches her characters papers over the selfishness, cynicism and myopia that pervade their insular world. And the heavy foreshadowing suggests a much bigger marital breakdown than the Paltrowian conscious uncoupling we get instead. Although Asha is supposed to be the talented foil to a man who thinks he can get by on good will and charisma, she never keeps the novel itself from trying to do just that.
YZ Chin’s debut novel, “Edge Case,” takes up many of the same themes — love, marriage, tech, race, immigration, parents, death — but instead of user engagement, Chin focuses on engagement with actual problems. The narrator, Edwina, is not a founder, but a lowly “quality assurance analyst” at a company called AInstein, tasked with catching bugs in code before customers do. “The men regularly referred to me in the office as ‘the tester,’” she says. “It always made me think of the sad labeled tubes of lipstick at Sephora, mauve heads battered and ready to transmit oral herpes.”
Pragmatic and droll (a former English major, naturally), she’s under no illusions about the ability of her company to change the world; despite her initial excitement about AInstein’s product — “A robot that could intelligently tell jokes! A selfless companion that would lift spirits, albeit in the form of a crude metal head attached to a (so far) immobile body” — her interest in her job is entirely bureaucratic. She and her husband, Marlin, don’t work together, but they, too, are bound by more than just love: Both are immigrants from Malaysia on H-1B visas who have lived and worked at start-ups in the United States for several years, and their relationship is entangled with the forms they are constantly having to send to the imposing immigration office.
It’s distressing enough that the deadline is approaching for them to apply for green cards, if their respective employers agree to sponsor them. But the novel begins with an even bigger problem: Following the death of his father, Marlin has become moody, isolated and obsessed with a practice called dowsing, which he thinks will help him “contact spirit guides and advisers” who can shepherd him through life’s hard decisions. (As these two novels make clear, the death of a parent is an acceptable reason to become aggressively spiritual.) One day Edwina arrives home to find he has vacated their shared studio apartment and is not responding to her messages.
The novel follows Edwina’s search for Marlin and her accompanying minor breakdown — a longtime vegetarian, she starts eating all the meat she can find, from Chicken McNuggets to an $18 prime rib sandwich. Interwoven through this story are flashbacks to sweet moments from their relationship and disorienting episodes from Edwina’s struggle to adjust to life in America. Chin’s specificity and wonderfully drawn minor characters add depth and richness to a story that another writer might have washed out with the glaring light of moral clarity. Edwina’s obnoxious co-worker is a believably ridiculous tech bro, flirtatiously accusing her of having crushes on the other men in the office, and demanding she read his novel in progress, “a combination of all the best-selling genres: sci-fi, fantasy, mystery, romance.” Her mother, back in Malaysia, appears frequently in a box in the corner of Edwina’s laptop, her fuzzy Skype calls a platform for dispensing advice and “spinning past life stories” about Edwina, often insulting ones. Her mother provides the kind of structure Edwina doesn’t necessarily want, but needs.
What emerges is not only a subtly provocative depiction of the tech industry, and this country, as tilting ever more off-kilter; but also a realistic portrayal of a woman in crisis. Edwina’s problems are of the kind that can’t be solved through faulty logic or convenient substitution, but of course we humans, not yet the best versions of ourselves, will try the faulty logic and convenient substitution anyway. If “The Startup Wife” takes for granted that 21st-century individuals are desperate for meaning and ritual, “Edge Case” shows us why, even as it also shows how our quick fixes, whether they be gimmicky apps or “riots of New Age stuff hybridized willy-nilly with scientific and engineering terms,” will inevitably fall short.
Lauren Oyler is the author of “Fake Accounts.” THE STARTUP WIFE By Tahmima Anam 296 pp. Scribner. $26.  EDGE CASE By YZ Chin 304 pp. Ecco. $26.99. 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Melanie Lambrick FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • A Debut Novel Skewers Startup Culture, Click by Click
    • Confessions of an Internet Addict
    • These Debuts Arrived at a Tough Time. They Deserve Your Attention.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Review

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: COURTSHIP & DATING (90%); FICTION LITERATURE (90%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (90%); MARRIAGE (89%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); WORKSPACE SHARING (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%); BOOK REVIEWS (74%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (73%); RELIGION (68%); SCHOOL DROP OUTS (68%); CREMATION (64%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (52%); SOCIAL MEDIA (50%); Books and Literature (%); Anam, Tahmima (%); Edge Case (Book) (%); The Startup Wife: A Novel (Book) (%); Chin, YZ (%)

Organization: ASHA (82%)

Industry: BUSINESS INCUBATION (78%); RESTAURANTS (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (77%); BOOK REVIEWS (74%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (73%); MOTORIZED SCOOTERS (72%); SOCIAL MEDIA (50%)

Person: Anam, Tahmima; Chin, YZ

Load-Date: August 14, 2021


End of Document
Wooing in Silicon Valley
The New York Times
June 6, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1230 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- A bold new billboard looms over U.S. 101, the highway that runs through the heart of the global technology industry. ''H-1b problems?'' it reads. ''Pivot to Canada.''
That sassy invitation is directed at the thousands of foreigners having trouble getting temporary visas, known as H-1b's, to work in the United States. Canada's new so-called start-up visa offers them the prospect of permanent residency and with it, the country's relatively low business taxes and public health insurance.
Canada is not alone in reaching out to foreign entrepreneurs. In a bid to create their own versions of Silicon Valley, Britain and Australia have dangled start-up visas like this too. Chile is even offering seed money to lure foreigners to come to Santiago and get their start-ups off the ground.
But the seductions of this Silicon Valley are hard to resist for the men and women who dream of building the next Google (or at least being the next Google acquisition). This is where they want to be.
''It's like being in Florence during the Renaissance,'' is how Xavier Lasa, a Spanish computer coder, put it recently. He sounded dead serious. He had come to Mountain View, just south of San Francisco, on a short-term business visa to join a technology incubator program called 500 Startups. He was building a tool for brands to advertise on the Web.
Like many foreign tech entrepreneurs angling to stay here, he had his eyes on Washington, not Ottawa. The landmark immigration bill that the full Senate is to take up next week includes a provision that Silicon Valley investors have pressed hard for: a new visa category for entrepreneurs who have persuaded American investors to back them with at least $100,000 in financing.
Never mind that immigrants don't need special visas to be entrepreneurial; research shows that they are far more likely than native-born Americans to start businesses. Start-up visas are an easy political sell, which also explains Canada's latest gamble.
When Canada's immigration minister, Jason T. Kenney, came to visit 500 Startups recently, on a gloriously sunny Friday afternoon, he got a taste of what attracts foreigners. Dave McClure, a co-founder of the incubator, took him straight to the wall-to-wall 12th-floor window.
''Facebook is that way,'' Mr. McClure said, pointing to the 360-degree view. ''You can see Apple over there.''
''There's Sand Hill Road,'' he continued cheerfully, motioning toward the wide boulevard lined on both sides with big-name venture capital firms. ''Stanford is just up that way.''
The room was full of foreign entrepreneurs, huddled over laptops or sketching out business plans on whiteboards.
Julian Garcia, a programmer from Chile who was building a tool for marketers to target potential customers by location, explained his view of the Valley. ''Here, you build something incredible, in two years, you get acquired.''
Aditya Sahay, the founder of a men's fashion site, from India, retorted, ''Even if you build something not incredible, you still get acquired -- in four months!''
Mr. Kenney kept his game face on as Mr. McClure waxed about the attractions of the Valley. In an interview later, he said he was certain that some of the foreign entrepreneurs, uncertain about their immigration status in the United States, could be tempted by, say, Manitoba. He called them ''a captive audience,'' and said he hoped to take advantage of what could be a short window of opportunity for his country while Congress argues over how to fix its own immigration law.
The new Canadian visa is not for tech entrepreneurs per se, but the venture capital requirements favor technology start-ups over more traditional immigrant businesses, like corner shops and restaurants. And the offer is far more generous than its American counterpart.
Anyone with one year of college and 75,000 Canadian dollars from an approved Canadian angel investor, or 200,000 Canadian dollars from an approved Canadian venture capitalist, can apply for the visa. Applicants need to be able to speak basic English or French. They need not prove they will create any jobs.
Mr. Kenney said he believed that investors, rather than workers in his ministry, were more capable of vetting who would be good for his country.
''The kind of rigorous assessment made by investors will ensure that the qualified applicants have really a high level of human capital and they are going to be able to move around the economy,'' the minister said.
Asked what happens if their businesses fail, he said he was confident that skilled, entrepreneurial foreigners would dust themselves off and find jobs in Canada's technology industry. ''It's a risk we're willing to take,'' he said.
American lawmakers have opted for a more cautious approach. The proposed Senate bill would grant temporary visas valid for three years, unlike Canada, which would grant permanent residency. The Department of Homeland Security would have to report to Congress every three years on what kinds of businesses the recipients create, how many jobs they produce, and how much revenue.
It is not geared toward entrepreneurs in any specific industry, though the rhetoric around it has centered mainly on technology. Technology investors, like Mr. McClure, have been actively pushing for it.
''From a political perspective, the goal of the start-up visas is to demonstrate they're bringing in the sexiest, highest-value people,'' said Madeleine Sumption, assistant director for research at the Washington-based Migration Policy Institute, who has studied start-up visa programs worldwide.
But, she pointed out, most immigrant entrepreneurs -- Google's co-founder, Sergey Brin, included -- come in on other visas. ''You don't need an entrepreneur visa to have entrepreneurs,'' she added. ''You would have to let in a lot of people before you guarantee some Sergey Brins.''
Australia offers its version of a green card to those who secure 1 million Australian dollars in financing from approved Australian venture capitalists. Britain offers temporary visas to those who procure £50,000 from a venture backer. Chile doles out $40,000 in equity-free seed capital to foreign visitors who want to start a technology business.
Ayan Barua, from India, has already spent six months in Chile and taken advantage of its offer. Even though his girlfriend, who is Australian, has tried to persuade him to apply for her country's start-up visa, he has resisted. Instead, he and his business partner, Vamshi Mokshagundam, have returned to Silicon Valley repeatedly to develop their business, a recommendation engine for businesses shopping for software.
Their funders are here, they said, as are their initial customers. So too are other entrepreneurs whose guidance they seek. ''It's hard to find advice and mentorship anywhere else,'' Mr. Mokshagundam said. ''That's a big deal for us.''
Mr. Barua described California as the N.B.A. of the start-up world. ''The adrenaline rush you need as an entrepreneur is here,'' he said.
If the omnibus immigration bill winding its way through the Senate were to become law, he said, he would absolutely apply.
If it did not, he and his partner said they might consider the Canadian visa. They would still want to come to Silicon Valley as often as possible. But they could use Canada as their base, as they use Bangalore, India, now. ''It would be a shorter flight,'' Mr. Mokshagundam said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/06/technology/wishing-you-and-your-start-up-were-here.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: A billboard invitation from Canada to foreign entrepreneurs working in Silicon Valley. (B1)
 Jason T. Kenney, Canada's immigration minister, is trying to persuade foreign entrepreneurs to start their companies up north. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER DASILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B7)        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (85%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (76%); VENTURE CAPITAL (76%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (71%); NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE (70%); ONLINE MARKETING & ADVERTISING (50%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (58%);  FACEBOOK INC (51%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (51%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (58%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); BUSINESS INCUBATION (76%); VENTURE CAPITAL (76%); NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE (70%); HEALTH INSURANCE (55%); ONLINE ADVERTISING (50%); ONLINE MARKETING & ADVERTISING (50%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (73%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (56%); CANADA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AUSTRALIA (79%); CHILE (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: June 6, 2013


End of Document
Jon Ossoff, Bill O’Reilly, Etan Patz: Your Wednesday Briefing
The New York Times 
April 19, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 996 words
Byline: CHRIS STANFORD
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
 Georgia race heads to a runoff.
In a special congressional election seen as an early referendum on President Trump, a Democrat narrowly missed winning a heavily conservative House district outright.
Jon Ossoff came up short of the 50 percent threshold needed to win the seat, which is in the suburbs of Atlanta, and will face Karen Handel, the top Republican vote-getter, in a June runoff. He might find a head-to-head race tougher than the 18-person field this time around.
Four Times journalists stayed up late to watch the election returns. Here’s how they analyzed it live.
 Former N.F.L. player kills himself.
Aaron Hernandez, a former tight end with the New England Patriots who was convicted of first-degree murder in 2015, hanged himself in prison, the authorities said today.
Mr. Hernandez, 27, was sentenced to prison without the possibility of parole for the murder of Odin Lloyd, who had been dating the sister of Mr. Hernandez’s fiancée.
 Where are those warships?
Just over a week ago, the White House said that moving an aircraft carrier and three other ships to the Sea of Japan would deter North Korean aggression.
“We’re sending an armada,” President Trump said.
The problem? The ships were headed in the opposite direction.
 A globalist in the White House.
Ivanka Trump’s fashion business continues to look for deals abroad, despite possible ethical conflicts with her job advising her father.
C           hina and Japan recently approved trademarks for her brand, and dozens more applications are pending around the world.
 25 years to life for Patz murder.
Pedro Hernandez, who told the police in 2012 that he had killed Etan Patz as the boy headed to school in Manhattan in 1979, was sentenced on Tuesday.
 Hunt for Facebook killer is over.
Two days after a killing was recorded on video and posted online, the gunman was recognized at a fast-food restaurant in Pennsylvania on Tuesday and chased by officers. He committed suicide.
 “The Daily,” your audio news report.
On today’s show, we discuss why so many of President Trump’s advisers are urging him to break a campaign promise on climate change.
Listen on a computer, an            iOS device or an            Android device.
Business
 President Trump has signed an order that he said would favor American companies for federal contracts and lead to changes in visa programs for foreign workers.
One of our reporters explains how the order, which brings no immediate changes, is likely to affect the H-1B program that tech companies depend on.
 A decision on Bill O’Reilly’s future at Fox News could come in the next few days.
The Murdoch family, which controls the company, has stood by Mr. O’Reilly, the top-rated cable news host who faces accusations of harassment.
But their support was showing signs of erosion on Tuesday.
 Big global companies used to be enthusiastic about doing business in China.
But that zeal has cooled, and international brands that once tried not to rock the boat there are becoming more critical of Beijing.
 Our Tech Fix columnist advises against buying the new Samsung Galaxy S8 anytime soon.
 U.S. stocks were down on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
Smarter Living
 Improving your health and fitness doesn’t have to take much time — in fact, four minutes is enough.
 Trouble sleeping? Try replacing negative thoughts with positive ones.
 Recipe of the day: Skip the sad pasta salad and try one that is packed with roasted eggplant, chile and mint.
Noteworthy
 Training Africans to fight terrorism.
In today’s 360 video, American and European special forces train armies from seven African countries in an exercise known as Flintlock.
 Our climate future is now.
How do we live with the fact that the world we knew is going and, in some cases, already gone? This week’s Times Magazine is            devoted to climate change.
 Patrolling the border on four legs.
A horse can often go where vehicles can’t. That’s what one of our reporters and a photographer learned as they traveled along the Rio Grande with agents working to stop illegal immigration.
 Life lessons from a wild and crazy guy.
We sat down with the comedian Steve Martin, who took a rare look back at his stand-up career to reflect on what he’s learned.
 Best of late-night TV.
On “The Tonight Show,” Senator Elizabeth Warren discussed the potential for bipartisan cooperation. Jimmy Fallon had some suggestions.
Back Story
The New England Patriots visit the White House today to celebrate their Super Bowl victory. Several players will be missing, however, including the quarterback Tom Brady, who backed out this morning citing a family commitment.
Brady also skipped his team’s last visit to the White House, when it won the Super Bowl in 2015.
Brady’s current teammate LeGarrette Blount said of his own decision to miss today’s trip, “I don’t feel welcome in that house.”
The players won’t be the first to decline a visit to the White House.
Larry Bird didn’t show when the Boston Celtics visited the Reagan White House in 1984. “           If the president wants to see me, he knows where to find me,” Mr. Bird said.
The tradition of sports teams visiting the White House dates back to at least 1865, when President Andrew Johnson welcomed two amateur baseball teams.
The first championship team believed to have visited didn’t have to travel far: It was the Washington Senators, after winning the 1924 World Series.
Even Canadian teams have visited.
The Toronto Blue Jays received an invitation from President George Bush as the winners of the 1992 World Series.
“America is proud of you,” he told the team’s manager.
Evan Gershkovich contributed reporting.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: MURDER (99%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (91%); BYELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (90%); US FEDERAL ELECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (89%); LITIGATION (88%); NEGATIVE NEWS (88%); ETHICS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (74%); JOURNALISM (74%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); SUICIDE (73%); POLICE FORCES (72%); REFERENDUMS (72%); VOTERS & VOTING (72%); FOREIGN LABOR (69%); WRITERS (69%); AMERICAN FOOTBALL (68%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (68%); APPROVALS (67%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (66%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (62%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (50%)

Industry: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); FASHION INDUSTRY (73%); MOBILE DEVICES (73%); MILITARY VESSELS (71%); NAVAL VESSELS (71%); WRITERS (69%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (66%); FAST FOOD RESTAURANTS (63%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (62%); RESTAURANTS (60%); FASHION & APPAREL (50%)

Person: JON OSSOFF (90%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); IVANKA TRUMP (79%); KAREN HANDEL (58%)

Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); NORTHEAST USA (79%); PACIFIC OCEAN (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); NORTH KOREA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
With Jobs to Fill, Businesses Play the Visa Lottery
The New York Times 
June 27, 2018 Wednesday 16:45 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; economy
Length: 1306 words
Byline: Patricia Cohen
Highlight: A tight labor market set off a scramble among businesses in a visa lottery for temporary workers, adding a new element to the politics of immigration.
Body


Ronda Fox finally got the news last week, three months into planting season: The federal government approved her application to employ more than a dozen temporary foreign workers for her family-owned landscaping business in Aurora, Colo.
She had hoped to have her crew in place by April 1, but had initially lost out in this year’s visa lottery. “Better late than never,” Ms. Fox said.
In Centennial, a quick car ride away, Phil Steinhauer faced the same hiring challenge for his landscaping business. But his application for 150 temporary foreign workers was selected through the federal lottery in the first round, and his hires were in place when the season started.
Mr. Steinhauer, though, is far from satisfied with the way he had to fill the jobs. “You can’t build a business on a lottery,” he said.
What the two business owners have in common is their reliance on the H-2B visa program, which allows unskilled workers from Mexico, the Philippines, Jamaica and dozens of other countries to take temporary nonfarm jobs in the United States.
Debates over using foreign workers for seasonal labor — lower-wage jobs that Americans have spurned — have been as constant as the calendar. But a tight labor market and the fraught politics of immigration have added new urgency to the issue in an election year when Republicans and Democrats are wrestling for control in Congress.
Unions and immigration opponents argue that the program suppresses wages and deprives Americans of jobs. Advocacy groups contend that foreign workers are often exploited. Employers insist that the refusal to face up to the worker shortage just encourages businesses to hire undocumented immigrants surreptitiously at below-market wages.
But this year, the conflicts have intensified. Record low unemployment rates have left landscapers, restaurants, hotels, amusement parks and others scrambling for low-skilled seasonal labor. Changes in the rules governing the program caught many employers by surprise, threatening the crab industry in Maryland and tourist havens in Maine.
The visa program also feeds the increasingly bitter debate over immigration.
To Mr. Steinhauer, “it’s a labor issue that gets thrown into the immigration debate because people are coming from foreign countries, and the country is so divided on that.”
Congress has capped the annual number of H-2B visas at 66,000 — evenly split between the winter and summer seasons — although administrations have at times increased the allotment.
Workers from previous years used to be excluded from the quota, but Congress halted that practice in 2017 in response to complaints that foreigners undermined American workers. This year, the traditional first-come, first-served system was replaced by a lottery after the government was swamped with applications. Some longtime users like Ms. Fox, who said she filed her application at 12:01 a.m. on Jan. 1, were shut out.
Last month, after frantic requests, the Department of Homeland Security agreed to issue an additional 15,000 visas. Ms. Fox got lucky and snagged a dozen of those slots, though her crew, all veterans of previous seasons, is unlikely to arrive from Mexico until next month.
Applicants have to prove they can’t fill jobs. “You really cannot find a reliable work force at $15 an hour,” the occupation’s prevailing wage in Colorado, Ms. Fox said. The area has a 2.5 percent jobless rate, so when it comes to hiring, she said, “there’s just no worker bees here.”
A certified public accountant, Ms. Fox shakes her head when she hears economists insist that theory dictates that wages should rise until they are high enough to attract workers.
Her company, All Seasons Landscaping, is in Colorado’s Sixth Congressional District, which wraps around Denver like a question mark. It has an unusually high proportion of college graduates and an unusually low unemployment rate; the average annual salary for workers who are not self-employed is nearly $63,000.
Landscape work is harsh. Digging in the dirt and heaving equipment in blistering heat produces aching backs and raw hands. Low-skilled workers can earn a similar wage making a sandwich or working in an air-conditioned warehouse.
“We put a $5,000 ad in The Denver Post, and we didn’t have one applicant,” Ms. Fox said. Paying a wage high enough to attract local workers would put her out of business, she said, because her customers would balk at the resulting price increases.
Like Ms. Fox and other landscapers, Mr. Steinhauer signed planting contracts with customers last year based on the assumption that his crews would earn roughly $15 an hour. “These are unskilled positions,” he said. “Would you pay $50 to plant a bush in your garden?”
“With the economy as good as it is, I don’t know many families who are telling their kids to become landscape laborers,” Mr. Steinhauer said. “And who wants to work a job where you get laid off in November and then come back?”
Creating jobs, particularly for neglected blue-collar working men, and reducing immigration have been at the center of President Trump’s agenda and a lodestar for his supporters. Lower jobless rates support the Republicans’ case that the economy is improving. And the increasingly hard line on immigration provides a framework for the administration’s policies on legal as well as illegal migrants.
At the same time, many small entrepreneurs and merchants say they have found a kindred spirit in a businessman turned president who understands and quickly responds to their needs. After all, H-2B workers are hired regularly at Mar-a-Lago, his country club in Palm Beach, Fla., and other Trump properties.
These political crosscurrents are coursing through the Sixth District, which has one of the most closely watched midterm House races. A revision of the district’s boundaries combined with waves of immigrants and refugees from Ethiopia, Mexico and Nepal in recent decades has turned it into one of the state’s most diverse. It is one of 25 districts that sent a Republican representative to Washington in 2016 at the same time it gave Hillary Clinton a plurality — in this case, by a nine-point margin.
Defeating the five-term Republican incumbent, Mike Coffman, is a critical part of the Democrats’ push to win back the House in November.
Mr. Coffman distanced himself from Mr. Trump during the 2016 campaign, though he has supported him in more than 95 percent of his House votes. On immigration, Mr. Coffman has taken a more moderate line,            supporting, for example, a permanent solution for the so-called Dreamers, undocumented adults who were brought to the United States as children. And he recently called on the president to            part ways with his adviser Stephen Miller over the family separation issue.
Ms. Fox, who describes herself as a fierce independent and a “conservative by nature,” said that the Dreamers should be protected from deportation and that she was disturbed that children were being separated from their parents at the border.
“I don’t agree with any of it,” said Ms. Fox, who wants a long-term immigration policy. She hasn’t settled on her midterm vote yet, but said she liked Mr. Coffman.
As for the H-2B program, Mr. Steinhauer and Ms. Fox said they did not blame Mr. Trump for its flaws, noting that there were similar problems under Presidents Barack Obama and George W. Bush.
“I put the blame on Congress,” Ms. Fox said. “The whole issue is so toxic. Everyone in politics is afraid to do anything.”
Follow Patricia Cohen on Twitter: @patcohenNYT. 
PHOTO: Mr. Steinhauer, right, working with Miguel Vargas to set out plants at a client’s home. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Benjamin Rasmussen for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • That Summer Food-Stand Job Is No Longer Just for Teenagers
    • What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
    • Where Companies Welcome Refugees, the More, the Better
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (92%); COMPANY STRUCTURES & OWNERSHIP (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LABOR MARKET (90%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); SEASONAL WORKERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); FAMILY COMPANIES (79%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); LABOR SHORTAGES (73%); NON FARM PAYROLLS (73%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); NEGATIVE NEWS (69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (61%); Foreign Workers (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States Economy (%); Visas (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Colorado (%); Landscaping (%); Small Business (%)

Industry: LANDSCAPING SERVICES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (71%); HOTELS & MOTELS (62%); RESTAURANTS (62%); TRAVEL, HOSPITALITY & TOURISM (62%)

Person: Trump, Donald J

Geographic: COLORADO, USA (92%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); PHILIPPINES (79%)

Load-Date: June 29, 2018


End of Document
Decline in Immigration Threatens Growth of Regions on the Rise
The New York Times 
August 10, 2021 Tuesday 13:23 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1944 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Terra Fondriest
Highlight: Immigrants helped make places like Northwest Arkansas economic dynamos. But their dwindling numbers, a big factor in slower population growth, could have long-term repercussions.
Body


BENTONVILLE, Ark. — Northwest Arkansas, where the Ozark Mountains rise, used to be a sleepy corner of the state, its only claim to fame that Sam Walton opened a five-and-dime in Bentonville and the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers — outposts that became the seeds of a global retail empire. The founders of Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt got their start in the same region, and a network of software companies moved in later to meet big business’s insatiable appetite for new technology.
But there were not enough locals to build the burgeoning economy. Answering the call to work in poultry production, trucking, construction and computer programming were legions of immigrants from El Salvador, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, India and elsewhere.
With tens of thousands of immigrants helping to catalyze its development, Northwest Arkansas has emerged as one of the country’s fastest-growing metropolitan areas. Brimming with optimism, it is wooing newcomers with cheaper housing, a world-class art museum, upscale restaurants and forested bike trails.
But as much of the U.S. economy comes back from the coronavirus pandemic, the decades-long influx of immigrants that fueled such enormous expansion in places like Arkansas has begun to stall, posing challenges to the region and the country at large.
The United States over the past 10 years experienced the slowest population growth rate in eight decades, according to the 2020 census, because of plunging fertility rates and shrinking immigration.
The surge of unauthorized migrants from Mexico and Central America is testing the Biden administration, but images are deceptive: A vast majority of the single adults crossing the border to find work are quickly deported. And the flow of legal immigrants, whom Northwest Arkansas companies also heavily rely on, has fallen precipitously since the Trump administration clamped down on all kinds of immigration with the belief that it was displacing American workers.
Now, business leaders are hoping that President Biden will make good on his pledge to overhaul the immigration system and establish a legal pipeline for foreign workers to take jobs in Northwest Arkansas and other places that depend on them.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has called on Congress and the White House to double the number of visas for high-skilled temporary workers under the H-1B program and also for seasonal workers in sectors like agriculture and meat production, another economic mainstay in this part of the country.
Lifting the ceiling on H-1B visas has been contentious, with some labor groups arguing that foreign workers imported from places like India and China displace Americans and drive down wages.
So far, Mr. Biden has concentrated on the surge of unauthorized immigrants at the southwestern border, and has not advanced measures to bring large numbers of new workers into the country.
“In addition to securing the border, we should be focusing on how to secure avenues for more legal immigration,” said Neil Bradley, chief policy officer for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. “For a whole host of communities all across the United States, immigration will determine whether the local economy will continue to grow for those moving there and the residents who have called that place home for decades.”
The decline in immigration is an important factor in the long-term decline in population growth that demographers are forecasting in the United States.
“When you are not going to have enough births — and deaths will continue with an aging population — the only variable that can make an appreciable difference is immigration,” said Joseph Chamie, a demographer who formerly headed the United Nations division on population.
Areas such as Northwest Arkansas can “forget about” continued growth, Mr. Chamie said, without the steady arrival of new immigrants.
The Census Bureau had projected that the number of immigrants in the United States would increase by 1.4 million from July 2017 to July 2019. Instead, it climbed by a net 400,000.
In Northwest Arkansas, 1,750 foreign newcomers arrived in 2016, accounting for more than 14 percent of all new residents, according to the census. In 2019, only 750 new immigrants settled in the area.
The drop comes as employers in the region — like many across the country — are also facing an intense labor shortage from the pandemic. Home builders, hospitals and technology companies are all struggling to find workers. Poultry processors have been offering higher hourly rates as well as attendance, referral and sign-on bonuses.
Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt, a transportation and logistics giant, are posting for workers to take unfilled tech jobs.
Jared Smith, the chief executive of Kitestring, a boutique technology company that serves retailers, has been trying for months to fill 30 jobs.
The firm pays six-figure salaries for software engineers. “The battle for talent has become even fiercer,” he said.
About 35 percent of his 175 employees are on H-1B visas. “If I were to depend exclusively on U.S. citizens, it’s hard to imagine I would grow,” he said.
Immigrants have transformed the area not just culturally, but politically as well.
As of the 1990 census, Northwest Arkansas was 95 percent white. But by 2019, that figure had dropped to 72 percent, thanks to immigration. In Bentonville, 15.5 percent of the population was foreign born by then, and in Springdale, the state’s poultry center, 37.6 percent of the population was Hispanic.
Springdale voters in November sent the first Latino to the City Council, Kevin Flores, the son of a poultry worker; Bentonville elected the first Indian American, Gayatri Agnew, to the City Council. Even in the state’s Republican-majority legislature, there has been recognition of the role of immigrant labor. This year the General Assembly passed a bill to enable undocumented immigrants who were brought to the country as children, often known as “Dreamers,” to obtain any professional or occupational license, one of the most liberal such laws in the country.
“We have a fast-growing economy, and we are concerned about a labor shortage,” said Nelson Peacock, who heads the Northwest Arkansas Council, founded by major employers in the region to promote economic development. “We need workers of all skill levels, and immigrants are an important part of the equation.”
Baaju Chepuri remembers vividly the Bentonville he encountered in 2008, when he accepted a job to work as a software engineer for Walmart.
On the drive into town from the regional airport, he felt like a city boy lost in the woods. The Indian community was minuscule. To stock up on Indian groceries, eat at Indian restaurants and watch Bollywood movies, they journeyed to Kansas City, Mo., or Tulsa, Okla.
“This place was 20 percent of what it is today,” Mr. Chepuri said. “There was literally nothing to do.”
Bentonville’s Indian population grew by 361 percent between 2010 and 2019. By then, there were Indian cafes and supermarkets dotting strip malls. A gleaming Hindu temple opened for worship in 2012, and the city is erecting two cricket pitches for the 25-team local league.
Less than 20 miles south of Bentonville along Interstate 49, immigrants also transformed Springdale, the center of the state’s multibillion-dollar poultry industry, as tens of thousands of Latin Americans, both legal residents and undocumented, arrived.
Hispanic-owned groceries, bakeries and car repair shops popped up on Thompson Street. At Murphy Park, Hispanic families grilled carne asada and celebrated birthdays with piñatas.
Families from the Marshall Islands also arrived. Arkansas certified the nation’s first Marshallese court interpreter in Springdale, and a Marshallese consulate opened its doors.
The immigrants have not found a universal welcome.
Unease prevails among some longtime residents, like Debbie Eden, a business owner in Springdale. “Many immigrants are hard workers,” she said, “but they come in and undercut you working for less money.”
For the immigrants who have arrived, the region’s boom has led to ample employment.
Ershad Ismail Gani, who came five years ago from India and now works at Kitestring developing software that runs cash registers at Sam’s Club and Walmart, said that several of his friends have been hired away by other employers scrambling for workers, and that he had also been approached.
Wages have been high enough that he and his wife have welcomed a daughter into their family and bought a four-bedroom house with a home theater. “It’s really amazing how many jobs are available,” Mr. Gani said. “Everywhere I turn there are opportunities.”
In Springdale, Yanira Umana, a wing cutter at a Simmons Foods turkey plant who is an immigrant from El Salvador, showed off the tidy three-bedroom brick house — with a flower garden in full bloom — that she recently acquired.
“I achieved all this working with chicken and turkey,” said Ms. Umana, a single mother of two.
But she is raising her American daughters, 9 and 12, to have loftier ambitions. “Day after day, I tell them this is not the life I want for you,” she said.
Older immigrants, like American baby boomers, are not being replaced by their children. And while immigrants illegally crossing the southwestern border may be willing to take unforgiving jobs, they are not a hiring option for big-name companies like those in Northwest Arkansas.
Meanwhile, legal workers are graying.
When Marta Merlos of El Salvador moved there in 1995 to work on Tyson’s lines, her son, then in the first grade, was one of only 10 Latino children at Robert E. Lee Elementary.
Ms. Merlos, 61, who is now a U.S. citizen, still endures 12-hour shifts. The middle finger on her right hand is damaged, and she feels body aches at the end of each day.
But it has paid off, she said.
Her oldest son, Kevin Flores, joined the Marines, then went to college and became a lawyer. In November, with a campaign touting him as a product of the new, diverse Springdale, he became the first Latino elected to the City Council.
“The makeup of Northwest Arkansas has changed dramatically thanks to immigrants, and we are much better off because of them,” said Mr. Flores, 33, who arrived in the United States when he was 3 years old. “To keep flourishing, the region will need immigrants to continue moving here.”
Alain Delaquérière contributed research.
Alain Delaquérière contributed research. 
PHOTOS: Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton’s global retail empire.; Yanira Umana watering the flowers that she and her daughters planted at their home in Springdale. She works at a turkey plant.; Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton’s global retail empire. Gayatri Agnew with her family in Bentonville. In November, voters made her the first Indian American on the City Council.; Ershad Ismail Gani, with his wife and daughter, came to Bentonville from India five years ago. He is a software developer.; Kevin Flores on a trampoline with his nephews. A former Marine, he became the first Latino council member in Springdale.; At top, performers practicing the Bharatanatyam form of Indian classical dance at the Kalaloka Institute of Fine Arts; Blanca Ramirez making pupusas for sale in downtown Springdale; and a food truck at the farmers’ market in Bentonville’s square. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TERRA FONDRIEST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16-A17)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (92%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); POPULATION DECLINE (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (89%); POPULATION GROWTH (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (79%); MIGRATION ISSUES (79%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (79%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); DISPLACED WORKERS (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (74%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%); CENSUS (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (73%); FERTILITY RATES (73%); FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES (73%); SEASONAL WORKERS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); URBANIZATION (73%); TECHNOLOGY (71%); CORONAVIRUSES (66%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (66%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (61%); EPIDEMICS (52%); PANDEMICS (52%); VIRUSES (52%); Arkansas (%); Population (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Foreign Workers (%); Economic Conditions and Trends (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Census (%); Bentonville (Ark) (%); Springdale (Ark) (%); audio-neutral-informative (%)

Company:  TYSON FOODS INC (57%)

Ticker: TSN (NYSE) (57%)

Industry: NAICS311615 POULTRY PROCESSING (57%); NAICS311611 ANIMAL (EXCEPT POULTRY) SLAUGHTERING (57%); SIC2048 PREPARED FEEDS & FEED INGREDIENTS FOR ANIMALS & FOWLS, EXCEPT DOGS & CATS (57%); SIC2015 POULTRY SLAUGHTERING & PROCESSING (57%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); FOOD INDUSTRY (78%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (76%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (76%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (76%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (72%); RESTAURANTS (72%); POULTRY (71%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (71%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); DONALD TRUMP (53%)

Geographic: ARKANSAS, USA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%); CHINA (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%)

Load-Date: June 23, 2023


End of Document
The Chatter
The New York Times
June 9, 2013 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 196 words
Body


''The thing that scares me is the values going up so quickly.''
Joe Cusumano, a real estate agent in Riverside County, Calif., talking about housing prices. Large investment firms have spent billions of dollars over the last year buying homes in some of the nation's most depressed markets. The influx has been so great, and the resulting price gains so big, that ordinary buyers are feeling squeezed out.
''We are facing a huge crisis worldwide not having an antibiotics pipeline.''
Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research at the Food and Drug Administration. Government officials, drug companies and medical experts, faced with outbreaks of antibiotic-resistant ''superbugs,'' are pushing to speed the approval of new antibiotics, a move that is raising safety concerns among some critics.
''H-1b problems? Pivot to Canada.''
Message on a billboard on U.S. 101 in California. To thousands of foreigners having trouble getting temporary visas, known as H-1b's, to work in the United States, Canada's new ''start-up visa'' offers the prospect of permanent residency.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/09/business/the-chatter-for-sunday-june-9.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: DRUG & MEDICAL DEVICES APPROVAL (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); HOME PRICES (90%); HOUSING MARKET (90%); PRICES (90%); PROPERTY PRICES (90%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (90%); SAFETY (75%); SUPERBUGS (75%); US FDA REVIEW (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (73%); IMMIGRATION (72%); BACTERIA (70%); SAFETY, ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (70%); APPROVALS (69%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (55%)

Organization: CENTER FOR DRUG EVALUATION & RESEARCH (57%); FOOD & DRUG ADMINISTRATION (57%)

Industry: REAL ESTATE (91%); ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE (90%); ANTIBIOTICS (90%); DRUG & MEDICAL DEVICES APPROVAL (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); HOME PRICES (90%); HOUSING MARKET (90%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (90%); PROPERTY PRICES (90%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (90%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (78%); PHARMACEUTICALS PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT (75%); SUPERBUGS (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%); CANADA (90%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: June 9, 2013


End of Document
Trump Signs Visa Order, and Tech Giants Exhale
The New York Times
April 19, 2017 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1189 words
Byline: By GLENN THRUSH, NICK WINGFIELD and VINDU GOEL; Glen Thrush reported from Kenosha, Nick Wingfield from Seattle and Vindu Goel from San Francisco. Miriam Jordan contributed reporting from Los Angeles.
Body


KENOSHA, Wis. -- President Trump, hammering his ''America First'' campaign theme, signed an order on Tuesday that he said would favor American companies for federal contracts and reform the visa program for foreign technical workers.
After recent policy reversals that have angered his populist base, Mr. Trump described the visa program as an initiative gone awry that has driven down wages for Americans. The order was a means to end the ''theft of American prosperity,'' which he said had been brought on by low-wage immigrant labor. 
  Yet the order calls for a series of relatively modest steps, like a multiagency report on changes needed for the H-1B program, under which the government admits 85,000 foreign workers annually, many of them in the high-tech, industrial, medical and science fields. Collectively, the efforts outlined in the order could take years to carry out.
  The H1-B program has become a focus in the debate over the impact of foreign workers. Mr. Trump has criticized employers for abusing the program and using it to avoid hiring higher-paid American counterparts. He vowed to revamp its lottery-based selection process.
  The order, signed at the sprawling Snap-on tool factory here, represents a small win for bigger tech companies, which have been in pitched battles for those visas. Companies like Google and Microsoft, which rely heavily on high-skilled foreign workers, had worried that President Trump would make drastic curbs to worker programs that could cripple them.
  ''I think people are cautiously optimistic that this will be O.K., and maybe even better,'' said Tom Alberg, a venture capitalist at Madrona Venture Group, a Seattle firm that invests in high-tech start-ups.
  But the order would likely hurt the biggest users of the visa program, technology outsourcing firms that bring foreign workers to the United States to perform technical jobs, typically from India.
  On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump stoked outrage from his supporters with accounts of companies like Walt Disney forcing laid-off technical workers to train their overseas replacements.
  On Tuesday, Mr. Trump spoke in terms of an apple-pie populism that helped him pull off upset victories in November in Midwestern states like Wisconsin.
  H-1B visas ''should include only the most skilled and highest-paid applicants and should never, ever be used to replace American workers,'' Mr. Trump told a gathering of about 500 workers and local luminaries, including the White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus, who hails from Kenosha.
  On this point, many executives at American technology companies agree with Mr. Trump. They argue that they mostly apply for H-1Bs for workers when they can't find qualified American workers, usually those with advanced degrees like a masters or Ph.D.
  In recent years, there has been so much demand for H-1B visas that the whole fiscal year's allocation has run out in a few days in April, when applications are accepted. The visas are then awarded by lottery to qualified applicants. Some 600,000 to 900,000 immigrants are currently in the United States on H-1B visas, researchers estimate.
  Outsourcing firms -- the top 13 of which accounted for a third of all granted visas in 2014, the last year for which information is publicly available -- typically flood the system with visa applications. The top recipients were Tata Consultancy Services, Infosys and Wipro, all from India.
  India's leading tech trade group, the National Association of Software and Services Companies, said Indian companies were being treated unfairly. ''We believe that the current campaign to discredit our sector is driven by persistent myths, such as the ideas that H-1B visa holders are 'cheap labor' and 'train their replacements,' neither of which is accurate,'' the group said in a statement.
  Companies like Microsoft, Intel and Amazon are also big recipients. At least 15 percent of the American workforces of Facebook and the chip maker Qualcomm hold H-1Bs, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department.
  The announcement came at a jittery time for the White House, as Mr. Trump faces the 100th day of his presidency without much to show for it in the way of legislative accomplishment, after the defeat of his health care overhaul. And his two high-profile executive orders cracking down on immigration from predominantly Muslim nations have been stymied by the courts.
  ''This does nothing,'' said Senator Charles Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader. ''Like all the other executive orders, it's just words -- he's calling for new studies. It's not going to fix the problem. It's not going to create a single job.''
  Representative Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat whose district includes Silicon Valley, said the issue of foreign workers was real, but dismissed the president's order as poorly targeted and unlikely to achieve its desired result.
  ''Half of the start-ups in Silicon Valley were created by highly skilled people from other countries,'' she said. ''I don't think the president and his staff fully appreciates that fact.''
  In a briefing with reporters on Monday, White House officials said the ''Buy American and Hire American'' order would also overhaul federal procurement practices to increase the selection of products from American companies, especially in the domestic steel industry, which has faced stiff competition from China.
  One reform advocated by the Trump administration, which has drawn bipartisan support from Congress, would change the lottery system for awarding H-1B visas, giving extra preference to the highest-paying jobs -- a proposal favored by many in the American technology industry.
  Representatives from Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Google either declined to comment or didn't respond to requests for comment.
  Blake Irving, the chief executive of domain name and web hosting firm GoDaddy, said he supported the idea of changing the system for issuing H-1Bs to give priority to higher-skilled workers. He said GoDaddy typically receives only about 20 percent of the H-1B visas it applies for.
  ''If anything, it moves the policy towards something that's preferential to the expert work force,'' said Mr. Irving. ''Anything that gets us closer to that is goodness.''
  But some smaller technology companies said they were concerned about the changes proposed by the Trump administration.
  Punit Soni, the chief executive of Learning Motors, a six-person company in Silicon Valley that is trying to apply artificial intelligence to health care, said the visa changes proposed by the Trump administration would hurt start-ups.
  Small companies cannot afford to pay high salaries and are already struggling to attract talent in a tight market, he said. A visa system that favors the highest-paid workers will steer immigrants only to already successful big companies like Google, his former employer.
  ''We're a small start-up. Everyone is getting way below-market average salary,'' he said.
  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/18/us/politics/executive-order-hire-buy-american-h1b-visa-trump.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Facebook is heavily dependent on H-1B visas. Under federal law, employers that use a large number of H-1B workers are supposed to document that they tried to hire Americans for the jobs. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POPULISM (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); VENTURE CAPITAL (85%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); LAYOFFS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); TRUMPISM (78%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (77%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (77%); OUTSOURCING (77%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (77%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (77%); STARTUPS (63%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (82%);  SNAP-ON INC (55%);  WALT DISNEY CO (52%)

Organization: NEW YORK GIANTS (84%)

Ticker: SNA (NYSE) (55%); DIS (NYSE) (52%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (82%); NAICS333991 POWER-DRIVEN HANDTOOL MANUFACTURING (55%); NAICS332216 SAW BLADE & HANDTOOL MANUFACTURING (55%); SIC3546 POWER-DRIVEN HANDTOOLS (55%); SIC3423 HAND & EDGE TOOLS, EXCEPT MACHINE TOOLS & HANDSAWS (55%); NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (52%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (52%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (52%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (52%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); VENTURE CAPITAL (85%); BIG TECH (78%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (77%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); REINCE PRIEBUS (73%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WISCONSIN, USA (92%); MIDWEST USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: April 19, 2017


End of Document
DealBook Briefing: Dell Plans to Go Public, Again
The New York Times 
July 2, 2018 Monday 07:25 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1281 words
Highlight: Michael Dell took his company private when he didn’t have enough control to fix it. He won’t make that mistake again.
Body


Good Monday. Want this in your inbox every morning? Sign up here.
Michael Dell plans to take his company public — without repeating mistakes
Dell plans to return to the public markets, five years after its founder and the investment firm Silver Lake took the company private to reshape it for an age of smartphones and cloud computing.
Going private was important, they argued, because public market investors wouldn’t have enough patience for the transformation they had in mind — and would pressure the company to make short-term fixes instead of long-term ones. But the company is prepared to go public again, in part to help finance further investments in its businesses.
Mr. Dell told DealBook’s Michael de la Merced that he had accomplished much of what he had set out to do, but that more work to adapt the company would be required. But this time, he plans to take his company public while keeping a level of control that allows him to continue shaping the company for the future.
How Dell will go public again: Mr. Dell and Silver Lake will offer holders of a Dell tracking stock cash or shares in Dell itself, in a deal valued at $21.7 billion. The deal will be financed through an $11 billion special dividend issued by VMware, a publicly traded Dell subsidiary.
There’s probably more trade war to come
President Trump is said to have ordered up a bill that would have the United States ignore two important World Trade Organization rules. Axios reports that the bill would let Mr. Trump negotiate different tariffs for different countries, and to set them above pre-agreed limits.
Congress would almost certainly stop any such bill. But this news — as well as recent comments promoting auto tariffs as a weapon — shows that Mr. Trump expects more battles. With Europe said to be            preparing its own levies on $300 billion worth of U.S. products as retaliation to the administration’s moves, nobody appears to be backing down.
Meanwhile, concerns are mounting about the fallout from a trade war. G.M. says that auto tariffs could force it to cut jobs at home. Hyundai says that the levies could            harm national security efforts with North Korea. And investors are            increasingly finding ways to hedge in case trade worries hit the markets.
Elsewhere in trade: China is said to bestealing data and staff from high-tech Taiwan companies. How H-1B visas            lost their charm. And how bureaucracy could be            China’s secret trade weapon.
Dan Loeb is turning up the heat on Nestlé
Since the global food giant appointed a new C.E.O. last year, it has embarked on a turnaround plan, putting for-sale signs on underperforming divisions like its U.S. candy business and buying fast-growing brands like Blue Bottle Coffee.
But now the activist investor Mr. Loeb is losing his patience, and pressing the company to take more drastic action — including selling its stake in the cosmetics maker L’Oreal and buying more fast-growing brands to lift its stock from the doldrums.
The big question: If Nestlé doesn’t do what Mr. Loeb wants, will he start a proxy fight at the Swiss company?
In other shareholder activist news: David Einhorn’s Greenlight Capital is down 18 percent so far this year. Nelson Peltz’s Trian is            down almost 2 percent.
Tesla almost met its production goal
Around 5 a.m. Pacific on Sunday, a Tesla Model 3 underwent final quality checks at the company’s Fremont, Calif., factory. The car, Reuters notes, was the 5,000th to be made in just over seven days — meaning the company only just missed its weekly production goal.
Getting to this stage has not been easy, Neal Boudette of the NYT explains. Tesla is building cars on a production line housed in a tent; it has replaced robots that aren’t fast enough with humans; and Elon Musk has been sleeping in the factory, working all hours to streamline production.
In an email to employees, Mr. Musk said that producing 5,000 cars per week meant that Tesla “just became a real car company.” But now comes another challenge: It must reliably maintain production — if not increase it — for years.
More Tesla news: Panasonic says it will consider investing more in Tesla’s Gigafactory.
Facebook admits to special data-sharing arrangements
The tech giant’s first set of written answers to questions from Congress was dull. But its second sheds new light on a series of data-sharing arrangements the company made with other organizations — that went on for longer than previously claimed.
More from Georgia Wells of the WSJ:
The end of an era for Rupert Murdoch
Whether Walt Disney or Comcast emerges as the winner in the fight for most of 21st Century Fox’s businesses, one thing is clear: Mr. Murdoch will bid goodbye to the majority of a media empire that he has assembled over decades.
But he is doing so at a high point: Two media rivals are bidding top dollar for his assets, and he is exiting at a time when tech giants are muscling in on the media business that he made his life’s work. Here’s what a longtime Murdoch associate, Chase Carey, told Sarah Ellison of the WaPo:
In other media news: Mr. Murdoch is keeping Fox News, which is now intimately intertwined with the Trump administration. And the            NYT editorial board asks why Disney’s bid for Fox cleared a government review much more easily than AT&T’s takeover of Time Warner.
Revolving door
Philippe Capron, the C.F.O. of the French waste giant Veolia, has taken himself out of the running to become the next C.E.O. of Air France-KLM. (FT)
Ron Black was fired as the C.E.O. of the semiconductor licensing company Rambus after an incident that the board said fell short of corporate standards. (Bloomberg)
Ken Costa, the veteran investment banker, is joining the investment firm Alvarium Investments as co-chairman. (FT)
The speed read
Deals
 China Merchants Group, a state-owned conglomerate, has teamed up with the London-based merchant bank Centricus to create a $15 billion tech investment fund. (FT)
 ThyssenKrupp and Tata Steel agreed to combine, creating one of Europe’s biggest steel companies. (Bloomberg)
 Alphabet has invested in the scooter-sharing company Lime. (FT)
 Randa Accessories is said to have challenged the founder of Perry Ellis International over control of the men’s wear brand. (WSJ)
Politics and policy
 Andrés Manuel Lopéz Obrador has won Mexico’s presidency, putting an anti-globalization leftist in charge of Latin America’s second-biggest economy. (NYT)
 Three Democratic lawmakers are calling on the Securities and Exchange Commission to investigate whether Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross violated insider-trading laws. (@kylegriffin1)
 The Supreme Court’s decision against public unions threatens to undercut a source of funding for liberal causes. (NYT)
 Technology companies are getting ready to fight California’s new data privacy law. (The Hill)
Tech
 Big tech firms are reportedly annoyed by U.S. intelligence agencies’ lack of help in fighting Russian election influence. (Axios)
 How hard is it to persuade people to use cryptocurrency, rather than treat it as an investment? (NYT)
 Why does Amazon seem to be doing everything? Because its growth forecasts require it to. (WSJ)
 Venture capitalists have a secret Silicon Valley salary database to help them make deals. (Wired)
Best of the rest
 Banks are paying out billions to shareholders. Here’s what those numbers look like in context. (DealBook)
 Poor Americans are being offered loans by wealthy private equity firms. (WaPo)
 The day Toys “R” Us closed for good. Spoiler: It was quiet. (NYT)
 Is New York City in decline because it got too rich? (Harper’s)
We’d love your feedback. Please email thoughts and suggestions to bizday@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Michael Dell (PHOTOGRAPH BY Damon Winter/The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: PRIVATELY HELD COMPANIES (99%); GOING PRIVATE (90%); INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS (90%); TAXES & TAXATION (87%); TARIFFS & DUTIES (86%); TRADE DISPUTES (86%); INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS & BODIES (78%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (77%); DIVIDENDS (77%); DATA THEFT (73%); LAYOFFS (73%); APPOINTMENTS (72%); EXECUTIVE MOVES (70%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (70%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (68%); FOREIGN LABOR (68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (68%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (64%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (60%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%); Computers and the Internet (%); Dell Inc (%); Dell, Michael S (%)

Company:  VMWARE INC (54%);  NESTLE SA (50%)

Ticker: VMW (NYSE) (54%); NESN (SWX) (50%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (54%); NAICS312112 BOTTLED WATER MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS311920 COFFEE & TEA MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS311514 DRY, CONDENSED & EVAPORATED DAIRY PRODUCT MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS311351 CHOCOLATE & CONFECTIONERY MANUFACTURING FROM CACAO BEANS (50%); INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS (90%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (77%); FOOD INDUSTRY (77%); DATA THEFT (73%); FOOD & BEVERAGE (73%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (68%); CONFECTIONERY INDUSTRY (61%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (60%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (57%)

Person: MICHAEL DELL (94%); Dell, Michael S

Geographic: NORTH KOREA (79%); TAIWAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: July 3, 2018


End of Document
Immigration Declines and Some Regions Sputter
The New York Times
August 11, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1750 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan and Terra Fondriest
Body


BENTONVILLE, Ark. -- Northwest Arkansas, where the Ozark Mountains rise, used to be a sleepy corner of the state, its only claim to fame that Sam Walton opened a five-and-dime in Bentonville and the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers -- outposts that became the seeds of a global retail empire. The founders of Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt got their start in the same region, and a network of software companies moved in later to meet big business's insatiable appetite for new technology.
But there were not enough locals to build the burgeoning economy. Answering the call to work in poultry production, trucking, construction and computer programming were legions of immigrants from El Salvador, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, India and elsewhere. 
  With tens of thousands of immigrants helping to catalyze its development, Northwest Arkansas has emerged as one of the country's fastest-growing metropolitan areas. Brimming with optimism, it is wooing newcomers with cheaper housing, a world-class art museum, upscale restaurants and forested bike trails.
  But as much of the U.S. economy comes back from the coronavirus pandemic, the decades-long influx of immigrants that fueled such enormous expansion in places like Arkansas has begun to stall, posing challenges to the region and the country at large.
  The United States over the past 10 years experienced the slowest population growth rate in eight decades, according to the 2020 census, because of plunging fertility rates and shrinking immigration.
  The surge of unauthorized migrants from Mexico and Central America is testing the Biden administration, but images are deceptive: A vast majority of the single adults crossing the border to find work are quickly deported. And the flow of legal immigrants, whom Northwest Arkansas companies also heavily rely on, has fallen precipitously since the Trump administration clamped down on all kinds of immigration with the belief that it was displacing American workers.
  Now, business leaders are hoping that President Biden will make good on his pledge to overhaul the immigration system and establish a legal pipeline for foreign workers to take jobs in Northwest Arkansas and other places that depend on them.
  The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has called on Congress and the White House to double the number of visas for high-skilled temporary workers under the H-1B program and also for seasonal workers in sectors like agriculture and meat production, another economic mainstay in this part of the country.
  Lifting the ceiling on H-1B visas has been contentious, with some labor groups arguing that foreign workers imported from places like India and China displace Americans and drive down wages.
  So far, Mr. Biden has concentrated on the surge of unauthorized immigrants at the southwestern border, and has not advanced measures to bring large numbers of new workers into the country.
  ''In addition to securing the border, we should be focusing on how to secure avenues for more legal immigration,'' said Neil Bradley, chief policy officer for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. ''For a whole host of communities all across the United States, immigration will determine whether the local economy will continue to grow for those moving there and the residents who have called that place home for decades.''
  The decline in immigration is an important factor in the long-term decline in population growth that demographers are forecasting in the United States.
  ''When you are not going to have enough births -- and deaths will continue with an aging population -- the only variable that can make an appreciable difference is immigration,'' said Joseph Chamie, a demographer who formerly headed the United Nations division on population.
  Areas such as Northwest Arkansas can ''forget about'' continued growth, Mr. Chamie said, without the steady arrival of new immigrants.
  The Census Bureau had projected that the number of immigrants in the United States would increase by 1.4 million from July 2017 to July 2019. Instead, it climbed by a net 400,000.
  In Northwest Arkansas, 1,750 foreign newcomers arrived in 2016, accounting for more than 14 percent of all new residents, according to the census. In 2019, only 750 new immigrants settled in the area.
  The drop comes as employers in the region -- like many across the country -- are also facing an intense labor shortage from the pandemic. Home builders, hospitals and technology companies are all struggling to find workers. Poultry processors have been offering higher hourly rates as well as attendance, referral and sign-on bonuses.
  Tyson Foods and J.B. Hunt, a transportation and logistics giant, are posting for workers to take unfilled tech jobs.
  Jared Smith, the chief executive of Kitestring, a boutique technology company that serves retailers, has been trying for months to fill 30 jobs.
  The firm pays six-figure salaries for software engineers. ''The battle for talent has become even fiercer,'' he said.
  About 35 percent of his 175 employees are on H-1B visas. ''If I were to depend exclusively on U.S. citizens, it's hard to imagine I would grow,'' he said.
  Immigrants have transformed the area not just culturally, but politically as well.
  As of the 1990 census, Northwest Arkansas was 95 percent white. But by 2019, that figure had dropped to 72 percent, thanks to immigration. In Bentonville, 15.5 percent of the population was foreign born by then, and in Springdale, the state's poultry center, 37.6 percent of the population was Hispanic.
  Springdale voters in November sent the first Latino to the City Council, Kevin Flores, the son of a poultry worker; Bentonville elected the first Indian American, Gayatri Agnew, to the City Council. Even in the state's Republican-majority legislature, there has been recognition of the role of immigrant labor. This year the General Assembly passed a bill to enable undocumented immigrants who were brought to the country as children, often known as ''Dreamers,'' to obtain any professional or occupational license, one of the most liberal such laws in the country.
  ''We have a fast-growing economy, and we are concerned about a labor shortage,'' said Nelson Peacock, who heads the Northwest Arkansas Council, founded by major employers in the region to promote economic development. ''We need workers of all skill levels, and immigrants are an important part of the equation.''
  Baaju Chepuri remembers vividly the Bentonville he encountered in 2008, when he accepted a job to work as a software engineer for Walmart.
  On the drive into town from the regional airport, he felt like a city boy lost in the woods. The Indian community was minuscule. To stock up on Indian groceries, eat at Indian restaurants and watch Bollywood movies, they journeyed to Kansas City, Mo., or Tulsa, Okla.
  ''This place was 20 percent of what it is today,'' Mr. Chepuri said. ''There was literally nothing to do.''
  Bentonville's Indian population grew by 361 percent between 2010 and 2019. By then, there were Indian cafes and supermarkets dotting strip malls. A gleaming Hindu temple opened for worship in 2012, and the city is erecting two cricket pitches for the 25-team local league.
  Less than 20 miles south of Bentonville along Interstate 49, immigrants also transformed Springdale, the center of the state's multibillion-dollar poultry industry, as tens of thousands of Latin Americans, both legal residents and undocumented, arrived.
  Hispanic-owned groceries, bakeries and car repair shops popped up on Thompson Street. At Murphy Park, Hispanic families grilled carne asada and celebrated birthdays with piñatas.
  Families from the Marshall Islands also arrived. Arkansas certified the nation's first Marshallese court interpreter in Springdale, and a Marshallese consulate opened its doors.
  The immigrants have not found a universal welcome.
  Unease prevails among some longtime residents, like Debbie Eden, a business owner in Springdale. ''Many immigrants are hard workers,'' she said, ''but they come in and undercut you working for less money.''
  For the immigrants who have arrived, the region's boom has led to ample employment.
  Ershad Ismail Gani, who came five years ago from India and now works at Kitestring developing software that runs cash registers at Sam's Club and Walmart, said that several of his friends have been hired away by other employers scrambling for workers, and that he had also been approached.
  Wages have been high enough that he and his wife have welcomed a daughter into their family and bought a four-bedroom house with a home theater. ''It's really amazing how many jobs are available,'' Mr. Gani said. ''Everywhere I turn there are opportunities.''
  In Springdale, Yanira Umana, a wing cutter at a Simmons Foods turkey plant who is an immigrant from El Salvador, showed off the tidy three-bedroom brick house -- with a flower garden in full bloom -- that she recently acquired.
  ''I achieved all this working with chicken and turkey,'' said Ms. Umana, a single mother of two.
  But she is raising her American daughters, 9 and 12, to have loftier ambitions. ''Day after day, I tell them this is not the life I want for you,'' she said.
  Older immigrants, like American baby boomers, are not being replaced by their children. And while immigrants illegally crossing the southwestern border may be willing to take unforgiving jobs, they are not a hiring option for big-name companies like those in Northwest Arkansas.
  Meanwhile, legal workers are graying.
  When Marta Merlos of El Salvador moved there in 1995 to work on Tyson's lines, her son, then in the first grade, was one of only 10 Latino children at Robert E. Lee Elementary.
  Ms. Merlos, 61, who is now a U.S. citizen, still endures 12-hour shifts. The middle finger on her right hand is damaged, and she feels body aches at the end of each day.
  But it has paid off, she said.
  Her oldest son, Kevin Flores, joined the Marines, then went to college and became a lawyer. In November, with a campaign touting him as a product of the new, diverse Springdale, he became the first Latino elected to the City Council.
  ''The makeup of Northwest Arkansas has changed dramatically thanks to immigrants, and we are much better off because of them,'' said Mr. Flores, 33, who arrived in the United States when he was 3 years old. ''To keep flourishing, the region will need immigrants to continue moving here.''
  Alain Delaquérière contributed research.Alain Delaquérière contributed research.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/10/us/immigration-arkansas-population.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton's global retail empire.
Yanira Umana watering the flowers that she and her daughters planted at their home in Springdale. She works at a turkey plant.
Sam Walton took over a five-and-dime in Bentonville, in northwest Arkansas, after moving his family to the town in 1950. He later opened the first Walmart store in nearby Rogers. The stores became the seeds for Walton's global retail empire. Gayatri Agnew with her family in Bentonville. In November, voters made her the first Indian American on the City Council.
Ershad Ismail Gani, with his wife and daughter, came to Bentonville from India five years ago. He is a software developer.
Kevin Flores on a trampoline with his nephews. A former Marine, he became the first Latino council member in Springdale.
At top, performers practicing the Bharatanatyam form of Indian classical dance at the Kalaloka Institute of Fine Arts
Blanca Ramirez making pupusas for sale in downtown Springdale
 and a food truck at the farmers' market in Bentonville's square. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TERRA FONDRIEST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16-A17)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (91%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); POPULATION GROWTH (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (75%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%); FORTUNE 500 COMPANIES (73%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (73%); URBANIZATION (73%); TECHNOLOGY (71%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (70%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (70%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (70%); SEASONAL WORKERS (69%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (69%); BORDER CONTROL (68%); CORONAVIRUSES (66%); DISPLACED WORKERS (66%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (66%); CENSUS (65%); FERTILITY RATES (65%); EPIDEMICS (52%); PANDEMICS (52%); VIRUSES (52%)

Company:  TYSON FOODS INC (57%)

Ticker: TSN (NYSE) (57%)

Industry: NAICS311615 POULTRY PROCESSING (57%); NAICS311611 ANIMAL (EXCEPT POULTRY) SLAUGHTERING (57%); SIC2048 PREPARED FEEDS & FEED INGREDIENTS FOR ANIMALS & FOWLS, EXCEPT DOGS & CATS (57%); SIC2015 POULTRY SLAUGHTERING & PROCESSING (57%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (78%); FOOD INDUSTRY (77%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (76%); SOFTWARE MAKERS (76%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (76%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (72%); RESTAURANTS (72%); POULTRY (71%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (71%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); DONALD TRUMP (52%)

Geographic: ARKANSAS, USA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%); CHINA (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%)

Load-Date: August 11, 2021


End of Document
The Idled of Silicon Valley
The New York Times
June 28, 2013 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1144 words
Byline: By SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- As the Senate voted on a landmark immigration bill that would let Silicon Valley companies import more foreign engineers, some Americans remain locked in a deeply emotional argument over whether outsiders are taking jobs away from people like Joey Doernberg.
Mr. Doernberg worked in chip design, before that industry shrank, and then for a solar energy company, before that industry shrank, and has been unemployed since the middle of last year. By his own account, his skills are not ideal for the current job market. Nor does it help, he says, that at 53, he looks older than he is; youth is at a premium in his industry. So, too, is optimism.
''It's a question of convincing someone that with these skills, I can do this job, even though I haven't done it before,'' he said. ''I'm very optimistic. I know I will find a job.''
The questions of skills, jobs and nationality are a combustible mix these days.
Silicon Valley companies, warning of an acute labor shortage, say it is too costly to retrain older workers like Mr. Doernberg, and that the country is not producing enough younger Americans with the precise skills the industry needs. Their arguments have persuaded a majority of senators to give them what they want: a provision in the immigration bill to let in many more foreign professionals.
But Americans like Mr. Doernberg and the powerful labor lobby say that what the tech industry really wants is to depress wages and bring in more pliant, less costly temporary workers from overseas. If there is such a talent shortage, they ask, why are wages for most engineers not rising faster? Labor groups have pushed for a requirement to offer jobs to equally qualified Americans before hiring foreigners, a provision that the industry has fiercely resisted.
The pitched arguments of both sides, which are likely to resurface in the House when it takes up its version of an immigration overhaul, cloud a complicated reality. There is little empirical evidence to suggest that foreign engineers displace American engineers as a whole. If anything, one recent study suggests, the growth of immigrant workers in American companies helps younger American technical workers -- more of them are hired and at higher-paying jobs -- but has no noticeable consequences, good or bad, on older workers.
''In the short run, we don't find really any adverse or superpositive effect on the employment of Americans,'' said William R. Kerr, a Harvard business professor who conducted the study on the work force of 300 American companies. ''People take an extremely one-sided view of this stuff and dismiss any evidence to the contrary.''
A recent analysis by the Brookings Institution reached a similar conclusion. It found that in the top 10 cities that bring in the largest number of high-skilled guest workers on H-1B visas, college-educated Americans -- those who could compete for jobs with high-skilled guest workers -- are not more likely to be unemployed.
At the same time, though, the industry's claims of a labor shortage may be somewhat overblown. Most H-1B workers hold entry-level positions. Economists say that bringing in more of these workers would serve to keep wages down. It also saves employers the trouble of having to retrain workers.
There is a difference between what companies say they need and want, said Peter Cappelli, a management professor at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. ''Saying we need people with these skills is like me saying I need a four-wheel drive,'' he said. ''They could retrain people.''
It is true that for certain categories of engineers, wages are not going up as sharply as one would expect if good engineering talent were indeed hard to find. But it is also true that engineers with certain specialties, like software development, are hard to find.
Intel, for instance, which has more than 50,000 employees in the United States, said it has 1,000 openings. Motorola Solutions said it was scrambling for software engineers. And unemployment among technology professionals is generally about half the national average, buttressing the industry's claims.
Economists say there may be other reasons for opening the door to high-skilled immigrants. In cities where there are large concentrations of such immigrants in science and engineering, overall wages tend to go up, especially among college-educated American residents, and eventually, so do housing prices, according to a study by Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis.
The Congressional Budget Office weighed in this week too, concluding that the growth in high-skilled immigration would lead to ''slightly higher'' productivity and in turn higher wages overall.
Already, the fight over high-skilled immigration has led to arguments and counterarguments on the Senate floor, with one side warning that jobs will go to workers from overseas and the other rallying for Americans first.
But Ardine Williams, the vice president for human resources at Intel, said that hiring Americans is not always practical. Asked about hiring unemployed engineers in this country, she said, ''I encounter those folks as well. They are skilled and have expertise outside of an area where we need engineers. In some cases they haven't kept their skills current.''
The debate over the effect of foreign engineers on American ones has obscured the critical issue of why more Americans are not going into the thriving technology sector. Students in the United States consistently rank low on global math and science tests, suggesting that relatively few are prepared to go into rigorous science and engineering programs.
In engineering programs at American universities, a little more than 40 percent of all graduate students were from abroad, according to data from the National Science Foundation. Even among Americans who do graduate with computer science or engineering degrees, a third pursue careers outside the tech sector.
Mr. Doernberg is keeping his fingers crossed. A resident of Woodside, Calif., an upscale town south of San Francisco, he spends his days scouring online job boards and attending networking sessions at diners and church halls across Silicon Valley. One of them is a Thursday morning group that meets in a church in Saratoga, a short drive from his home.
It was set up years ago by Hamid Saadat, an electrical engineer who came to this country from Iran as a graduate student in 1978, worked at a series of semiconductor companies in the area, became a United States citizen and went through the same rite of passage as Mr. Doernberg.
In 2001, just as the technology industry slumped, he lost his job. He was 47 and he soon learned one lesson. In Silicon Valley, it may not matter where you were born, but when.
''As much as we like to believe there's no discrimination, being younger usually helps,'' Mr. Saadat said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/28/technology/a-bill-allowing-more-foreign-workers-stirs-a-tech-debate.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: At a networking meeting in Saratoga, Calif., Joey Doernberg, an unemployed engineer, said his skills were not ideal now. (B1)
Hamid Saadat, an electrical engineer from Iran, with other job seekers
 he worked in Silicon Valley until he lost his job in 2001. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NOAH BERGER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B6)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE VOTING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); OLDER WORKERS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LOBBYING (78%); EMOTIONS (77%); LABOR FORCE (77%); LABOR MARKET (77%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (77%); LABOR SHORTAGES (77%); EMPLOYEE RETRAINING (72%); EMPLOYEE TRAINING & ASSISTANCE (72%); SOLAR POWER INDUSTRY (72%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (72%); RANKINGS (60%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%)

Industry: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); ELECTRONICS DESIGN (73%); SOLAR POWER INDUSTRY (72%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (71%); SOLAR ENERGY (56%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (90%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: June 28, 2013


End of Document
Daily Report: Cautious Optimism for Trump’s H-1B Plans; Bits
The New York Times 
April 19, 2017 Wednesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 240 words
Byline: NICK WINGFIELD
Highlight: The tech industry has aggressively fought the president on several issues. But with regard to Tuesday’s executive order, there is some hope the industry could benefit.
Body


President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that could lead to significant changes in the H-1B immigrant worker program that is heavily used by the technology industry.
While tech has often clashed with Mr. Trump, at least on this issue, many executives are cautiously optimistic. Why? They are not the biggest users of H-1B visas — that distinction goes to outsourcing companies — and some hope that changes to the program will help them bring highly educated workers to the United States.
The tempered comments from technology executives stood in contrast to their opposition to earlier orders by Mr. Trump banning travelers from a handful of predominantly Muslim countries. Immigrants have risen to the pinnacle of the industry, leading icons like Google and Microsoft, and many rank-and-file workers from abroad have become entrepreneurs behind the most successful start-ups.
Neeraj Agrawal, a venture capitalist with Battery Ventures in Boston, is supportive of the proposal to reform the visa lottery system, but he believes Mr. Trump should make it clear that people with skills and ambition are still wanted in the United States.
“While they’re tweaking the system, I think it’s really important for the headline to read, ‘Immigrants Are Still Welcome Here,’” Mr. Agrawal said. “What I’m really worried about is, the undercurrent of tone and message people are hearing is that they’re no longer welcome. We have to get that right.”
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); OUTSOURCING (73%); VENTURE CAPITAL (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (54%); Executive Orders and Memorandums (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); VENTURE CAPITAL (68%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: April 21, 2017


End of Document
California Today: With ‘Blindspotting,’ Oakland’s Film Scene Takes Center Stage; California Today
The New York Times 
July 27, 2018 Friday 19:08 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1116 words
Byline: Brooks Barnes and Inyoung Kang
Highlight: Friday: Three movies set in Oakland signal a shift for Hollywood, Redding residents flee the Carr Fire, and our reporter writes of his native Los Angeles.
Body


Good morning.
(Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Long before he won a Tony Award for “Hamilton,” Daveed Diggs was living in Oakland — his hometown — and watching in alarm as white tech-industry workers moved in, driving up rents and displacing black residents. Around the same time in 2009, a white officer fatally shot an unarmed black man in the back three blocks from Mr. Diggs’s apartment.
“We were all dealing with lots of complicated issues and feelings all at once,” Mr. Diggs recalled in a recent interview.
He and a friend, Rafael Casal, ended up channeling their emotions — rage, frustration, confusion, anxiety — into a screenplay. The resulting film, “Blindspotting,” arrives on Friday after a nine-year gestation. Lionsgate plans to release the movie in about 475 theaters nationwide after it generated solid ticket sales in a 14-theater trial run last weekend and received an A grade from audiences in CinemaScore exit polls.
For the first time in Oakland’s long history as a cultural hotbed, major film artists are surfacing in rapid succession, a development that reflects a shift in Hollywood regarding what kind of stories and storytellers receive support. “Blindspotting,” which stars Mr. Casal and Mr. Diggs and grapples with racial profiling and gentrification, follows “Sorry to Bother You,” a racial satire written and directed by            Boots Riley, an Oakland artist-activist. (It has collected $10 million at the box office since July 6, a good result for an indie film.) Leading the pack has been Ryan Coogler, whose “Black Panther” was partly set in Oakland and took in $1.3 billion worldwide earlier this year.
“The thread that connects them is a sense of place,” said Eric Arnold, a journalist who has written extensively about Bay Area artists, including on the blog Oakulture. To have three films in the cultural firmament at once, he added, is “a game changer” for Oakland’s film scene. (There is already Oscar and other awards chatter in Hollywood around all three movies.)
Whether or not “Blindspotting” hooks a wide audience remains to be seen. But the film has already succeeded in one aspect: Mr. Diggs and Mr. Casal are now firmly on studio radar screens. “Oh, man, yeah, you wouldn’t believe it,” Mr. Diggs said. “There are already so many things in the works.”
California Online
(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers. Considering supporting one of these publications, or this one, by becoming a subscriber.)
 One person was killed, more than 28,000 acres had burned and parts of Redding were evacuated as the Carr Fire surged into the city. This is a developing story; check here for updates. [The New York Times]
 The Cranston Fire continued to burn in the San Jacinto Mountains. Thousands lost electricity and cellphone service. [           The Press-Enterprise]
 A Temecula man who was suspected of starting the Cranston blaze was arrested and charged with five counts of arson. [The New York Times]
 Federal authorities said they had reunited 1,442 more migrant children with their families at the southwest border. But hundreds still remain in custody. [The New York Times]
 Facebook shares fell 19 percent, wiping out roughly $120 billion in shareholder wealth. It was among the largest one-day destructions a company has ever suffered, shattering faith in the invulnerability of tech companies. [The New York Times]
 Mark Zuckerberg also lost more than $15 billion himself as a result of the Facebook plunge. [Reuters]
 Senior administration officials are squabbling over President Trump’s plan to roll back a major rule on tailpipe emissions, which would challenge states’ rights to set their own, more restrictive pollution standards. [The New York Times]
 Do you live in a political bubble? Explore our extremely detailed interactive map of the 2016 presidential election to see how your precinct voted. [The New York Times]
 Denials of H-1B visas have increased since Mr. Trump’s “Buy American and Hire American” executive order last year, according to a new report. [The Mercury News]
 Workers must be paid for the brief tasks they complete off the clock, such as opening and closing workplaces, the State Supreme Court ruled. [The Los Angeles Times]
 A lawyer for Brock Turner argued that the former Stanford swimmer shouldn’t have been convicted of intending to commit rape because he merely sought “outercourse.” [The New York Times]
 In memoriam: Elbert Howard, a founder of the Black Panther Party who acted as its spokesman during some of the most tumultuous events of the 1960s and ’70s, died at his home in Santa Rosa. He was 80. [The New York Times]
 California home sales have slumped, suggesting that buyer fatigue has set in after six years of price increases. [The Sacramento Bee]
 The mundane vehicle license plate is getting a makeover: A company in Foster City has developed technology to swap stamped metal plates for digital screens. [The New York Times]
 And here’s how Goop, Gwyneth Paltrow’s controversial wellness brand, became a $250 million company. [The New York Times]
And Finally ...
“The Los Angeles that travelers visit is not the one that I know, and many people who know the city feel the same way,” writes Walter Thompson-Hernández in a recent            essay about his experience growing up in Southeast L.A.
It’s easy to misunderstand the city, he concedes, but “the Los Angeles that I know is deeply connected to working-class Latino communities and families who work multiple jobs to provide for families on both sides of the United States-Mexico border. Or African-American families who found joy while struggling to make ends meet amid the constant and growing threat of displacement throughout South Los Angeles.”
Some of Mr. Thompson-Hernández’s work aims to look at these many nuanced communities. In March he wrote about the Compton Cowboys, a group of childhood friends who want to combat negative stereotypes about African-Americans and challenge the notion that they can’t be cowboys.
“The sweeping pace of change sometimes even leaves us questioning whether or not we still know this city,” Mr. Thompson-Hernández writes. But Los Angeles “is defined by the people who lead their lives with a real sense of purpose.”
California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.
PHOTO: Rafael Casal and Daveed Diggs, who wrote and starred in the film “Blindspotting,” in front of Taqueria Sinaloa, a taco truck they both frequent in Oakland. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Peter Prato for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CELEBRITIES (90%); DEATH NOTICES & OBITUARIES (90%); FILM (90%); RACE & ETHNICITY (90%); THEATER & DRAMA (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (89%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (89%); THEATER (89%); WILDFIRES (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); DRAMA LITERATURE (78%); FILM DIRECTORS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); JOURNALISM (78%); MOVIE REVENUES (78%); MOVIE REVIEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); TICKET SALES (78%); TONY AWARDS (78%); WRITERS (78%); EMOTIONS (75%); RACIAL PROFILING (71%); SHOOTINGS (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (69%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (61%); California Today (%)

Industry: CELEBRITIES (90%); FILM (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (89%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (89%); FILM DIRECTORS (78%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (78%); MOVIE RELEASE DATES (78%); MOVIE REVENUES (78%); MOVIE REVIEWS (78%); TICKET SALES (78%); TONY AWARDS (78%); WRITERS (78%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (61%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

Person: DAVEED DIGGS (79%)

Geographic: OAKLAND, CA, USA (90%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%)

Load-Date: July 28, 2018


End of Document
Technically Speaking
The New York Times
August 15, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 13; FICTION
Length: 1401 words
Byline: By Lauren Oyler
Body


THE STARTUP WIFE By Tahmima Anam
EDGE CASE By YZ Chin 
  Start-ups: We know they're bad for politics, culture, workers, restaurants, sex, dating, fashion, San Francisco, Seattle, Berlin, local languages other than English, English, and people who enjoyed life more before teenagers could rent electric scooters. Two new novels suggest another downside: They're also bad for marriage.
  Like a C.E.O. trying to disrupt something -- anything! -- Tahmima Anam's ''The Startup Wife'' imagines straying from the path laid by its title. A woman goes into business with her husband, does the grunt work, feels sidelined and is finally vindicated when something goes terribly wrong that her pragmatic advice would have prevented, if only the men had listened to her. ''Sometimes being right is actually worse than being wrong,'' she says. The marriage won't work out, either.
  Asha Ray is a graduate student at M.I.T. who has been developing ''an algorithm designed to unlock the empathetic brain for artificial intelligence.'' The daughter of Bangladeshi immigrants who became entrepreneurs the slow, old-fashioned way (owning a small chain of pharmacies called ''Health Beats'' in Queens), Asha is frustrated by both her fearsome academic adviser and the fact that her dream of building robots to ''just be better versions of us'' is very hard to realize. When she re-encounters her high school crush, Cyrus Jones, at their English teacher's funeral, she is still enthralled, and eager to show him the better version of herself. Since dropping out of school after his mother died, Cyrus has cultivated a reputation for a defiant yet sensitive genius, making a living ''conducting baptisms and cremations and writing little prayers for people to say at the bedside of a sick relative.'' He fancies himself a (devastatingly hot) free spirit, helping people ''find ... meaning without the baggage of religion.'' The pair elope immediately.
  Soon they devise a new social media platform: ''We Are Infinite,'' or WAI, pronounced ''why'' and amenable to puns with ''wise.'' A few years ago I was eavesdropping on a conversation at a now-defunct women's co-working space, and I learned the term for this kind of business arrangement: ''partner partners!'' Imagine it exclaimed with the same doomed excitement as the title of this novel. Asha adjusts her empathy algorithm so that it can customize nonreligious rituals for users, who can then form communities around ''what gives their life meaning, instead of what they like or don't like.'' Their friend Jules provides comic relief and parents who, despite their WASP-y cruelty, pay for everything, until the couple find their funding.
  And find it they do. The trio is accepted into a ''secretive,'' ultraexclusive start-up incubator called Utopia, focusing on projects that will help humanity survive the apocalypse; they've been looking for an app to ''help people frame their existence'' in the ''post-world world.'' Asha drops out of her Ph.D. program and WAI becomes wildly popular, its founders wildly wealthy.
  What's surprising is not the plot itself, but its wholesomeness -- despite all the novel's trappings of tech skepticism, from understated sendups of silly naming conventions, to an office that requires guests to hop across a trampoline to enter, to a moral lesson about the harmful effects of megalomaniacal scale. Except for the venture capitalists (''If you're not an assassin, you can't do your job''), everyone in this novel has good intentions. Asha offers little analysis of the topic about which she is supposedly an underappreciated expert, and as a result the book demonstrates an overall acceptance of the tech industry and its machinations, suggesting its problems can be solved merely by giving women a seat at the table.
  Even as the idealist tenets of WAI's manifesto -- no trying to persuade people to buy things, no spying, the team is paramount -- crumble, the earnestness with which Anam approaches her characters papers over the selfishness, cynicism and myopia that pervade their insular world. And the heavy foreshadowing suggests a much bigger marital breakdown than the Paltrowian conscious uncoupling we get instead. Although Asha is supposed to be the talented foil to a man who thinks he can get by on good will and charisma, she never keeps the novel itself from trying to do just that.
  YZ Chin's debut novel, ''Edge Case,'' takes up many of the same themes -- love, marriage, tech, race, immigration, parents, death -- but instead of user engagement, Chin focuses on engagement with actual problems. The narrator, Edwina, is not a founder, but a lowly ''quality assurance analyst'' at a company called AInstein, tasked with catching bugs in code before customers do. ''The men regularly referred to me in the office as 'the tester,''' she says. ''It always made me think of the sad labeled tubes of lipstick at Sephora, mauve heads battered and ready to transmit oral herpes.''
  Pragmatic and droll (a former English major, naturally), she's under no illusions about the ability of her company to change the world; despite her initial excitement about AInstein's product -- ''A robot that could intelligently tell jokes! A selfless companion that would lift spirits, albeit in the form of a crude metal head attached to a (so far) immobile body'' -- her interest in her job is entirely bureaucratic. She and her husband, Marlin, don't work together, but they, too, are bound by more than just love: Both are immigrants from Malaysia on H-1B visas who have lived and worked at start-ups in the United States for several years, and their relationship is entangled with the forms they are constantly having to send to the imposing immigration office.
  It's distressing enough that the deadline is approaching for them to apply for green cards, if their respective employers agree to sponsor them. But the novel begins with an even bigger problem: Following the death of his father, Marlin has become moody, isolated and obsessed with a practice called dowsing, which he thinks will help him ''contact spirit guides and advisers'' who can shepherd him through life's hard decisions. (As these two novels make clear, the death of a parent is an acceptable reason to become aggressively spiritual.) One day Edwina arrives home to find he has vacated their shared studio apartment and is not responding to her messages.
  The novel follows Edwina's search for Marlin and her accompanying minor breakdown -- a longtime vegetarian, she starts eating all the meat she can find, from Chicken McNuggets to an $18 prime rib sandwich. Interwoven through this story are flashbacks to sweet moments from their relationship and disorienting episodes from Edwina's struggle to adjust to life in America. Chin's specificity and wonderfully drawn minor characters add depth and richness to a story that another writer might have washed out with the glaring light of moral clarity. Edwina's obnoxious co-worker is a believably ridiculous tech bro, flirtatiously accusing her of having crushes on the other men in the office, and demanding she read his novel in progress, ''a combination of all the best-selling genres: sci-fi, fantasy, mystery, romance.'' Her mother, back in Malaysia, appears frequently in a box in the corner of Edwina's laptop, her fuzzy Skype calls a platform for dispensing advice and ''spinning past life stories'' about Edwina, often insulting ones. Her mother provides the kind of structure Edwina doesn't necessarily want, but needs.
  What emerges is not only a subtly provocative depiction of the tech industry, and this country, as tilting ever more off-kilter; but also a realistic portrayal of a woman in crisis. Edwina's problems are of the kind that can't be solved through faulty logic or convenient substitution, but of course we humans, not yet the best versions of ourselves, will try the faulty logic and convenient substitution anyway. If ''The Startup Wife'' takes for granted that 21st-century individuals are desperate for meaning and ritual, ''Edge Case'' shows us why, even as it also shows how our quick fixes, whether they be gimmicky apps or ''riots of New Age stuff hybridized willy-nilly with scientific and engineering terms,'' will inevitably fall short.Lauren Oyler is the author of ''Fake Accounts.''THE STARTUP WIFEBy Tahmima Anam296 pp. Scribner. $26.EDGE CASEBy YZ Chin304 pp. Ecco. $26.99.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/02/books/review/startup-wife-tahmima-anam-edge-case-yz-chin.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Melanie Lambrick FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Review

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: COURTSHIP & DATING (90%); MARRIAGE (89%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (77%); BOOK REVIEWS (74%); WORKSPACE SHARING (73%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (72%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (72%); FICTION LITERATURE (71%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (71%); SCHOOL DROP OUTS (67%); RELIGION (66%); CREMATION (63%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (52%); SOCIAL MEDIA (50%)

Organization: ASHA (83%)

Industry: RESTAURANTS (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS (77%); BOOK REVIEWS (74%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (72%); MOTORIZED SCOOTERS (72%); SOCIAL MEDIA (50%)

Load-Date: August 15, 2021


End of Document
Study Questions Guest Visa Issue
The New York Times
July 29, 2013 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4; BITS
Length: 1061 words
Byline: By QUENTIN HARDY and SOMINI SENGUPTA
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Although certain kinds of engineers are in short supply in the United States, plenty of potential candidates exist for thousands of positions for which companies want to import guest workers, according to an analysis of three million résumés of job seekers in the United States.
The numbers, prepared by a company called Bright, which collects résumés and uses big data tools to connect job seekers with openings, enter a contentious debate over whether tech companies should be allowed to expand their rolls of guest workers. In lobbying Congress for more of these temporary visas, called H-1B visas, the technology industry argues there are not enough qualified Americans. Its critics, including labor groups, say bringing in guest workers is a way to depress wages in the industry.
Many economists take issue with the industry's argument, too. One side points out that wages have not gone up across the board for engineers, suggesting that there is no stark labor shortage. Another counters that unemployment rates in the sector are minuscule and that in any event, H-1B workers represent a tiny fraction of the American work force.
''I didn't expect this result,'' said Steve Goodman, Bright's chief executive.
Bright is based in San Francisco, and it makes money in part by placing qualified candidates with recruiters and, according to Mr. Goodman, employs workers using H-1B visas. ''We're Silicon Valley people, we just assumed the shortage was true,'' Mr. Goodman said. ''It turns out there is a little Silicon Valley groupthink going on about this, though it's not comfortable to say that.''
For a few job categories, like computer systems analysts, there are relatively few ''good fits'' among American applicants, Bright found. Computer systems analyst jobs, considered relatively low-skilled in the tech world, had four openings for every American candidate. For others, like high-skilled computer programmers, there were more than enough potential candidates in the United States, the company found.
Bright's study is unlikely to end the debate, partly because it rests on the company's proprietary algorithm to determine who is a ''good fit'' for a particular job opening. Its algorithm uses a range of criteria, including work experience and education, but also work descriptions that indicated a high likelihood of other skills. Its analysis also doesn't specify how many job openings there are at a particular point in time, or whether they are sufficient to accommodate both American engineers and foreign guest workers.
Lawrence Katz, an economist at Harvard, said that while the tech industry's claims of a labor shortage may be overblown, the argument over expanding temporary work visas should not be made on the basis of whether there are shortages at one point in time. He said the data from Bright were useful in showing that there was most likely not ''a huge mismatch'' in the demand and supply of computer professionals, except perhaps in certain job categories like computer systems analysts.
''But they don't help us determine whether the U.S. economy would benefit from an expansion of the H1-B visa program or what the impact would be on U.S. workers in these occupations,'' he said. ''The case for and against expanding the H1-B visa program should be done on an overall assessment of the impact on the U.S. economy (workers, consumers, investors, students/future workers) and not only on whether there are short-run 'shortages' in any specific occupation.''
For the study, Bright looked at the job categories for which firms applied for H-1B visas, and then, looked at résumés of job seekers in the United States whose résumés matched those same categories.
Giovanni Peri, an economist at University of California, Davis, said that the Bright study was insufficient to determine whether there was a need for foreign engineers. ''It is the difference between job vacancies (demand) and unemployed with right qualifications (supply) that provides a measure of the excess (or not) of demand,'' he said. ''Knowing only the number of unemployed with right qualifications does not do it.''
''There are many more job openings'' where companies do not file for H-1Bs, but search for candidates on the domestic job market, he added.
The Senate immigration bill, passed last month, nearly doubles the number of H-1B visas that companies can seek every year. Industry lobbied heavily for it, bulldozing efforts to add language that would force companies to try to hire an equally qualified American first. The House is mired in arguments over what kind of immigration legislation it can pass. Technology industry groups are lobbying members of the House for a substantial increase in H-1Bs, among other things.
Outsourcing companies, mostly from India, have lately sought the largest chunks of H-1B visas. Companies like Tata Consultancy Services and Wipro bring thousands of temporary workers, mostly from India, and place them for short-term projects in a variety of American industries, from banks to technology firms like Microsoft and Oracle. H-1B visas are also used by graduates of American universities who are hired by companies in the United States.
Bright's analysis suggests a hierarchy in the industry that mirrors what has long been said about jobs like low-skilled agricultural or restaurant work: Americans could do these jobs, but are unlikely to accept the pay or conditions. As a result, the jobs are taken by immigrants.
The age of workers, which the study did not look at, may also play a role. Experienced American workers tend to be older in an industry that prizes youth. A study conducted by a Seattle-based company called Payscale found that among 32 technology companies surveyed, only six had a work force with a median age over 35. At Monster, the job search portal, the median age was 30; at Google, 29; and at Facebook, 28. The median age of American workers over all is 42.3 years old, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
As if to underline the study's findings, Mr. Goodman spoke from a conference room that looked out on decorated ping-pong tables, a liquor bar and tiki-themed snacks. Later that day, Bright was having a party, partly to attract new talent, he said, including foreign programmers here on H-1B visas.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/23/big-data-analysis-adds-to-guest-worker-debate/

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Lawrence F. Katz, an economist at Harvard, said the argument over temporary work visas should include a broader focus. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVAN MCGLINN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)            
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FOREIGN LABOR (93%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); ECONOMICS (89%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); LABOR MARKET (89%); LABOR SHORTAGES (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); LABOR FORCE (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); RESUMES & CURRICULA VITAE (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); EMPLOYMENT CLASSIFICATIONS (77%); WAGES & SALARIES (77%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (73%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (72%); LOBBYING (70%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (67%); EXECUTIVES (51%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (73%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (74%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: July 29, 2013


End of Document
Tech Workers Left in Limbo
The New York Times
April 20, 2017 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 1259 words
Byline: By DEANNE FITZMAURICE and KATIE BENNER; Vindu Goel contributed reporting.
Body


At dawn in California's Bay Area, the river of commuters begins to flow. It is filled with the people who help make our smartphones, our favorite games, the apps we download.
But many have also come to make something else, perhaps -- a new life in America. 
  These are just a few of the 85,000 people who come to work at American companies from as far away as India and China on H-1B visas, which are granted to highly skilled workers from overseas. Many, like Kaushik Gopal, land jobs at technology firms that have struggled to find enough American citizens with advanced math and science skills to fill their cubicles.
  Often, they hope to call the United States home.
  ''What I have loved about the U.S. is that it didn't matter where you came from,'' Mr Gopal said. ''Your past, your color or religion didn't matter. If you did good work, there was a place for you here.''
  President Trump's plans to change the rules that govern work visas and immigration have thrown the lives of many visa holders into limbo.
  ''I'm always on guard because there is a chance that suddenly I'll get the news that I'm no longer welcome,'' said Mr. Gopal, 32, who first came to the United States in 2012.
  Like many of Silicon Valley's workers who are here as part of the H-1B visa program, which is aimed at highly skilled workers, Mr. Gopal was born in India, attended university in the United States and got a job at a tech company. He said the Bay Area attracts the smartest engineers from all over the world because it is known as ''a magnet for technical skill.''
  He is now at the delivery start-up Instacart, working on an app that customers in several cities use to order their groceries. His weekly podcast ''Fragmented,'' which he hosts with an app maker named Donn Felker, has raised his professional profile and netted him speaking spots at conferences as far away as Sweden.
  While growing up in India, Mr. Gopal was a fan of American television shows and cartoons. After he graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, he was excited to take his parents to Disneyland.
  The high-tech industry is now deeply dependent on workers like Mr. Gopal: One in eight tech workers has an H-1B visa, according to estimates from Goldman Sachs.
  H-1B visa holders account for about 15 percent of the American work forces at Facebook and Qualcomm, according to the most recent documents the companies have filed with the Labor Department. Silicon Valley start-ups, which often drive tech innovation, employ many engineers on student and work visas, as do tech giants like Google and Apple.
  This has allowed an ethnically diverse population to flourish around the Bay Area. The Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple in San Jose is one of the largest Sikh temples in North America. The 49-mile stretch of towns and cities from San Jose to San Francisco is filled with Asian eateries, like the popular Rajwadi Thali restaurant in Sunnyvale.
  Some visa holders, like Sujay Jaladi, have been in America for so long that they cannot imagine living elsewhere. Mr. Jaladi, 35, has lived here for 15 years, first on a student visa and then on a series of H-1B visas. He applied for a green card in 2012 and is waiting for the application to be approved. His wife, Priya, also holds an H-1B visa and works at a tech company.
  ''My family lives in India and I love that country,'' said Mr. Jaladi, ''but I have spent my adult life in the United States and it definitely feels like more of a home to me.''
  Mr. Jaladi commutes an hour each day to work as the head of information security at Gusto, a company that provides human resources services to small businesses. He enjoys meals at home and weekend shopping trips to Costco. He and his wife love to cook.
  But visas are always on his mind, along with the possibility that he may have to return to India.
  ''Our ability to stay in the U.S., with good standing, depends on the visa process,'' he said. ''Working hard is just one factor. If the financial markets are hit and your job lays people off, H-1B visa holders have a limited time to find another job and get into good standing before we have to leave the country. If the market is down and jobs numbers are low, there will be more H-1Bs in the market looking for jobs.''
  Mr. Jaladi isn't the only one who has found himself in immigration limbo at Gusto. Shub Jain, a 26-year-old software engineer there, graduated from the University of California, San Diego, in 2014, worked at Microsoft and last fall moved to San Francisco for a job at the H.R. start-up. He has been working on an extended student visa and has lost out on the H-1B visa lottery three times. This is the last year he will be eligible to apply. ''If it doesn't work out,'' he said, ''I'll leave the country.''
  Mr. Jain's life is like that of many 20-something professionals. He loves cars and driving around California, as well as exploring new restaurants with friends. But the feeling of welcome he has always experienced in the United States has shifted as politicians have changed their views on immigration.
  ''My conversations with friends have changed,'' he said. ''I used to look at the news every morning, but now I don't because I don't want it to impact my work. I look at night. You don't know what you'll read.''
  Like many tech employees, Mr. Jain took a gamble on a smaller start-up. But his decision came with extra risk. At Microsoft, he could deal with visa issues by relocating to one of the company's many global offices. He does not have that option at Gusto.
  Mr. Jain talks about his anxieties with teammates like Nicholas Gervasi, 32, a Canadian who is working at Gusto on an H-1B visa. Thanks to provisions under the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Gervasi has had an easier time living and working in the United States than his colleagues from India, and he expects his green card application to be approved soon.
  Mr. Jain's sister attended the University of Illinois, worked on a trading floor in Chicago and left the country after she was unable to get an H1-B visa. She has since started her own company and talks to Mr. Jain almost every day as he prepares himself for the possibility that he will have to leave.
  Because of his uncertain situation, Mr. Jain's best friend from college recently visited for a month to play video games, go on drives and spend as much time together as they could.
  Some critics of the H-1B visa program say there are more than enough Americans with technology degrees to fill all the technical jobs in the United States. Others say that Silicon Valley companies do not cast a wide enough net for American job candidates. But tech executives have long said that there are not enough Americans with the advanced math and science skills necessary to succeed at their companies.
  Mr. Gervasi said that companies ''should be empowered to hire the best people.'' Joshua Reeves, the chief executive and founder of Gusto, agreed, noting that 8 percent of his work force is on a visa or green card. Gusto's hiring policy has never taken a candidate's citizenship into account, and Mr. Reeves said the company was ''committed to sticking to that mind-set.''
  That commitment could be tested over the next few years, given that the White House is continuously looking for ways to curb immigration as it seeks to enact America-first policies.
  ''It's almost like living under this -- maybe not fear -- but a worry about what's next and what will happen,'' Mr. Jain said. ''This feeling of being unwelcome in the country. I hadn't really felt that before.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/19/technology/h1-b-tech-worker-life.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: The sun setting over San Jose, Calif., and the Sikh Gurdwara Sahib temple, one of the largest Sikh temples in North America.
Kaushik Gopal, an H-1B visa holder who works at the delivery start-up Instacart, above left, working in what the company calls a ''chill room.'' At left, a line forms outside the restaurant Rajwadi Thali in Sunnyvale. Shub Jain, below left, has failed in three attempts to get an H-1B visa. At far left, Sujay Jaladi in his wedding photo
 he applied for a green card in 2012 but it hasn't been approved yet. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DEANNE FITZMAURICE)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); COMMUTING (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (74%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); IMMIGRATION (70%); STARTUPS (61%); CARTOONS & COMICS (60%)

Company:  GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC (51%);  FACEBOOK INC (50%);  QUALCOMM INC (50%)

Ticker: GS (NYSE) (51%); FB (NASDAQ) (50%); QCOM (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS523930 INVESTMENT ADVICE (51%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (51%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (51%); SIC6798 REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS (51%); SIC6289 SERVICES ALLIED WITH THE EXCHANGE OF SECURITIES OR COMMODITIES, NEC (51%); SIC6282 INVESTMENT ADVICE (51%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (51%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (50%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS334220 RADIO & TELEVISION BROADCASTING & WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (50%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); MOBILE MEDIA (78%); ON DEMAND SERVICES (78%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (73%); PODCASTING (72%); GROCERY DELIVERY & PICKUP SERVICES (66%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (63%); CARTOONS & COMICS (60%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (93%); CHINA (79%)

Load-Date: April 20, 2017


End of Document
Top C.E.O.s Denounce Trump Immigration Policy as Threat to U.S. Economy
The New York Times 
August 23, 2018 Thursday 00:46 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1031 words
Byline: Steve Lohr
Highlight: Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Ginni Rometty of IBM and dozens of other C.E.O.s said new guidelines and practices were hindering skilled foreign workers and harmful to economic growth.
Body


Dozens of American business leaders are challenging the Trump administration over changes to immigration policy that they say threaten the livelihoods of thousands of their skilled foreign workers, and the nation’s economic growth and competitiveness as well.
The executives, members of the Business Roundtable, expressed their “serious concern” over the administration’s immigration moves in a jointly signed letter delivered late Wednesday to Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security.
Some of the most prominent chief executives in the United States signed the letter, including Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Ginni Rometty of IBM, Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase, Laurence Fink of BlackRock, Marc Benioff of Salesforce and Indra Nooyi, the departing head of PepsiCo.
The letter comes during a week when the broader debate over the country’s immigration policies has been reignited by the arrest of a Mexican laborer in the killing of an Iowa woman. It also underscores the continuing tension between America’s globally minded corporate establishment and the Trump administration’s “America First” agenda.
Business leaders have praised President Trump’s tax cuts and rolling back of many regulations. But they have deplored some of his statements and some of his administration’s actions, including on immigration.
In one of the most notable examples of the strain, several White House business advisory councils dissolved last year after Mr. Trump blamed “many sides” for white supremacist violence in Charlottesville, Va.
In June, a group of top executives condemned the administrationfor the forced separation of migrant children from their parents at the Mexican border. The Business Roundtable described the separations as “cruel and contrary to American values.”
With their letter on Wednesday, the group’s members took issue with a series of immigration enforcement guidelines that they said were “arbitrary and inconsistent” and created new and unnecessary hurdles for skilled foreigners working in the United States.
The changes, the letter stated, were “causing considerable anxiety for many thousands of our employees while threatening to disrupt company operations.”
The business group’s complaint focused on new guidelines and practices by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security that vets visa applications and administers immigration policy.
The letter’s main focus was the treatment of applications for, and renewals of, H-1B visas for skilled foreign workers. The visas are used by companies to hire computer engineers and other professionals.
As a result of the changes, there has been a sharp increase in the number of denials and requests for more information. A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan policy research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had increased 41 percent in the government’s fourth fiscal quarter of 2017, compared with the third quarter.
Government examiners’ requests for additional information on H-1B visa applications tripled in the same period. The government’s fiscal fourth quarter began in July 2017, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his “Buy American and Hire American” executive order.
The policy foundation’s analysis, published last month, was meant to examine the “Trump effect” on immigration for skilled foreign workers, said Stuart Anderson, executive director of the foundation and a former immigration official.
The Trump administration, experts said, was using the government’s regulatory apparatus, which it has so often scorned, to serve its policy goal of clamping down on the flow of foreign workers into America.
“Step up investigations, slow things down, and you can accomplish your policy goals without legislation,” said Hal Salzman, a professor of public policy at Rutgers University.
In response to the business leaders’ letter, the immigration service said a statement on Thursday that the administration had been “relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move towards a merit-based system.” It added that it handles all applications and petitions “fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.”
The H-1B program was created to provide a pathway for talented foreigners whose special skills were expected to strengthen the American economy. Today, the nation’s technology hubs are filled with H-1B alumni who have become entrepreneurs, executives, venture capitalists and, quite often, United States citizens.
In recent years, however, the visa program has been criticized because corporations, especially Indian technology outsourcing companies, have exploited legal loopholes in the H-1B regime to replace American workers and shift jobs out of the United States. The immigration service has said its increased scrutiny and enforcement actions were intended to strengthen “protections to combat H-1B abuses.”
But to the business leaders, the policies are vague and capricious, creating uncertainty for their workers and in company operations. For example, the group’s letter stated, “companies now do not know whether a work visa petition that was approved last month will be approved when the company submits the identical application to extend the employee’s status.”
A particular concern, the business leaders said, was that the immigration service was expected to revoke work eligibility for spouses of H-1B visa holders. The spouses, they said, are often highly skilled workers who have built careers in America.
“Revoking their U.S. work authorization,” the letter said, “will likely cause high-skilled immigrants to take their skills to competitors outside the United States.”
PHOTO: Timothy D. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, was among dozens of business leaders who signed a letter complaining that the Trump administration’s immigration policies were hurting the economy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Jason Lee/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • As C.E.O.s Condemn Splitting Up Migrant Families, Goldman Chief Defends Trump
    • Inside the C.E.O. Rebellion Against Trump’s Advisory Councils
    • Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (92%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); BUSINESS NEWS (79%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (79%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (77%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (74%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (73%); ARRESTS (72%); PETITIONS (71%); TAXES & TAXATION (69%); TAX LAW (67%); ENGINEERING (60%); WHITE NATIONALISTS (51%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Visas (%); United States Politics and Government (%); United States Economy (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Business Roundtable (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Homeland Security Department (%); International Business Machines Corporation (%); JPMorgan Chase & Company (%); Salesforce.com Inc (%); United States (%); Benioff, Marc (%); Cook, Timothy D (%); Dimon, James (%); Nielsen, Kirstjen (%); Nooyi, Indra K (%); Rometty, Virginia M (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Apple Inc (%)

Company:  JPMORGAN CHASE & CO (70%);  PEPSICO INC (56%)

Organization: BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (83%)

Ticker: JPM (NYSE) (70%); JPM (LSE) (70%); PEP (NYSE) (56%)

Industry: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (70%); NAICS523999 MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES (70%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (70%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (70%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (70%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (70%); SIC6022 STATE COMMERCIAL BANKS (70%); NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311919 OTHER SNACK FOOD MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311513 CHEESE MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311511 FLUID MILK MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311411 FROZEN FRUIT, JUICE & VEGETABLE MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC2096 POTATO CHIPS, CORN CHIPS, & SIMILAR SNACKS (56%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (56%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (60%)

Person: INDRA K NOOYI (93%); MARC BENIOFF (92%); DONALD TRUMP (90%); TIM COOK (90%); VIRGINIA ROMETTY (90%); JAMES DIMON (88%); KIRSTJEN NIELSEN (88%); LAURENCE D FINK (58%); Benioff, Marc; Cook, Timothy D; Dimon, James; Nielsen, Kirstjen; Nooyi, Indra K; Rometty, Virginia M; Trump, Donald J

Geographic: VIRGINIA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (98%); MEXICO (92%)

Load-Date: August 25, 2018


End of Document
Who Has the Cure for America’s Declining Birthrate? Canada.; Guest Essay
The New York Times 
August 18, 2021 Wednesday 23:51 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 1526 words
Byline: Shikha Dalmia
Highlight: Let states bring in workers from around the world, based on their labor needs.
Body


Over the past century, two moments that transformed America and positioned it as the global economic leader were the post-World War II economic boom and the I.T. revolution of the 1990s. In both cases, America tore down many forms of discrimination and other barriers to harness the talents of marginalized groups in the country and to welcome new ones, injecting demographic vitality into the economy.
To continue America’s upward trajectory in the 21st century, the country must reverse its current demographic decline. As the Census Bureau reported last week, in the past decade, the U.S. population grew at the second-slowest rate since the government started counting in 1790 — and the slowest since the 1930s.
The most expeditious way out might be if the federal government gave up its monopoly on immigration and allowed states to bring in workers from anywhere in the world, based on their own labor needs, without being held to federal quotas. The growing concern is that the United States is facing a population bust. The U.S. fertility rate, which had bucked Europe’s low-fertility trend during the past century, is now around 1.73 children per woman — roughly on par with that of Denmark and Britain.
Declining population growth because of lower fertility rates by definition means that the ratio of young to old declines — which is not a formula for a dynamic economy or a competitive country. The risk-taking and experimentation of young workers make them the engine of capitalism. They are also more mobile: They can move to places where they will be most productive.
That is what America had in abundance after World War II. The Nobel prize-winning economist Vernon Smith notes that the prewar American labor force was quite immobile. But the returning 16 million World War II veterans, having traveled to foreign lands, weren’t daunted by moving within their own country for jobs.
The domestic shortage of men during the war also broke down barriers that had kept teenagers, women and Black Americans out of the labor force.
Young men like Mr. Smith (who worked at a Boeing factory in Wichita, Kan., from age 16 to 18) entered the work force and gained valuable skills and experience in the postwar economy. At the same time, weakening social norms against working women, even married ones, increased female labor participation by 50 percent between 1940 and 1945. The shortage of men also opened opportunities for Black workers, helping to trigger the second Great Migration from the South.
Some of these barriers shot up again after the war to accommodate the returning veterans. Still, there were gains: After the World War II generation, the baby boom generation, together with its progeny, kept the American work force humming until the 1980s.
The seeds of the 1990s I.T. revolution were planted in the 1960s. That era of civil rights activism dismantled at least many formal barriers preventing robust Black participation in the economy. And it eliminated the 1924 Johnson-Reed Act, which had blocked foreign talent. This law had not only cut immigration rates overall but imposed national-origin quotas expressly designed to maintain America’s Western European ethnic makeup by discouraging immigration from Eastern Europe and Asia. Its end in 1965 resulted in 58.5 million new immigrants over the next 50 years, about 25 percent Asian. Many were high-tech professionals from China and India.
Their innovations and entrepreneurship helped power the I.T. revolution that transformed the world. According to a study by the nonpartisan National Foundation for American Policy, more than half of the 91 start-ups that became $1 billion companies had one or more immigrant founders. Likewise, the Partnership for a New American Economy found that immigrants or their children had founded more than 40 percent of the 2010 Fortune 500 companies.
So what’s the cure for America’s dwindling demographic vitality?
A new baby boom generation would be enormously difficult to produce in a world with easy birth control. On average, women say they want 2.5 children. But returning America to just a 2.1 replacement level through cash incentives would be “prohibitively costly,” as Lyman Stone of the American Enterprise Institute concluded after examining how these policies fared in European and other countries.
Instead, America might borrow a page from Canada. Its immigration policy is expressly meant to offset its aging population and low birthrates. Canada’s immigration intake is 0.9 percent of its population — or three times America’s per capita rate.
It has admitted immigrants in an ingenious way. In 1998, Canada initiated its Provincial Nominee Program, which gives most provinces a quota, based on their population, of immigrants to sponsor as they see fit (in addition to the immigrants the federal government in Ottawa admits). A province sets criteria based on its needs for workers, and it can sponsor immigrants from anywhere in the world for permanent residency, provided they pass a basic background and health check. (The federal government has the final say.)
The average processing time for this program is about 18 months. In the United States, by contrast, many low-skilled immigrants on work visas have no pathway to green cards, and highly skilled immigrants on H-1B visas wait years — and in the case of Indian and Chinese nationals, up to half a century.
Although, in principle immigrants, sponsored by a Canadian province are free to relocate to another province anytime, in practice the five-year retention rate for many provinces is upwards of 80 percent, according to a 2017 assessment by the Canadian government. That’s because the granular matching between skills and the local labor market ensures employment, which removes the main reason that immigrants leave. The program started small, but from 2021 to 2023, about 30 percent of Canada’s total immigrant admissions are expected to be through it.
America should begin its own version of this program but take it one step further and let states set their own limits on foreign workers. This would get federal bureaucrats out of the business of centrally planning the labor market for the whole country. States that understand their own labor markets would do a much better job of finding suitable workers for their businesses.
The states wouldn’t have to hew to the federal high-skilled and low-skilled distinction for visas. Right now, both high-tech and low-tech states are suffering from a tight labor market. States that don’t want or need immigrant workers could opt out of the program. Foreign workers would be free to travel anywhere in the country, but they would be limited to jobs in participating states until they are naturalized. This would be an improvement over the existing system for them, since work visas currently tether them to a single employer, unless they find a new employer to undertake the onerous process of sponsoring them. It would also reassure states that they would have a measure of control over the level of in-migration from other states, at least for some time.
States wouldn’t be required to participate, but they would face an inherent incentive to do so because businesses are far more likely to prefer locations where there are suitably skilled, motivated workers. Such a program would render the current broken and dysfunctional federal immigration system beside the point. (Constitutionally, immigration is a federal function, but nothing prevents Washington from voluntarily giving states more latitude to make their own decisions about foreign workers. Other aspects of immigration policy can remain in federal hands.)
Fiscally costly schemes won’t be necessary to attract immigrants. These workers are highly motivated to build their lives in America and will happily pay fees for state sponsorship. They often come to America during their peak productive years after another society has usually borne the cost of raising them, which bestows a one-time fiscal windfall on America. Also, given that immigrant fertility rates may not typically drop to native levels for a generation or two, foreign workers would stabilize the population for longer than would a short-term family-policy approach.
Another benefit of federalizing immigration would be that the restored demographic health and improved economic performance of participating states would make it easier for U.S. citizens to see immigrants as assets and saviors rather than liabilities and threats. America would then have a material — not just an idealistic — interest in redoubling its commitment to its core value of pluralism and tolerance.
Shikha Dalmia (@shikhadalmia) is a visiting fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University studying the rise of populist authoritarianism and a columnist at The Week.
The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY O.O.P.S. FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: BIRTHS & BIRTH RATES (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (90%); FERTILITY RATES (90%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (90%); POPULATION GROWTH (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (89%); LABOR FORCE (89%); WORLD WAR II (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); BABY BOOMERS (78%); CENSUS (78%); FERTILITY & INFERTILITY (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (78%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (78%); NOBEL PRIZES (78%); POPULATION DECLINE (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); VETERANS (78%); WOMEN (78%); WOMEN WORKERS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (77%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (77%); TRENDS (77%); IMMIGRATION (74%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (74%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); ACTIVISM (73%); ECONOMICS (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (72%); ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (70%); AWARDS & PRIZES (68%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Population (%); Labor and Jobs (%); United States Economy (%); Birth Rates (%); Census Bureau (%); Canada (%); United States (%)

Company:  BOEING CO (52%)

Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU (83%)

Ticker: BOE (LSE) (52%); BA (NYSE) (52%)

Industry: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (52%); NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (52%); NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (52%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (52%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (59%)

Geographic: WICHITA, KS, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%)

Load-Date: November 3, 2021


End of Document
Texas: Deal Reached Over Claims That Company Misused Visas
The New York Times
October 29, 2013 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14; NATIONAL BRIEFING | SOUTHWEST
Length: 112 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Federal prosecutors in Texas have reached a civil settlement with Infosys, an Indian outsourcing company, over charges that it misused temporary visas to bring Indian technology workers to the United States, justice officials said. In an investigation started in February 2011, prosecutors have examined whether Infosys systematically used short-term visitor visas to bring software programmers and technology engineers from India to work in American companies, instead of more costly H-1B visas, deceiving immigration authorities and undercutting wages for American workers. Infosys has said it set aside $35 million for the settlement, which will be announced on Wednesday.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/29/us/texas-deal-reached-over-claims-that-company-misused-visas.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Brief

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); FOREIGN LABOR (88%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (88%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (88%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (72%); IMMIGRATION (72%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (91%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (91%); INFY (NYSE) (91%); INFY (NSE) (91%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (91%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (88%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (72%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (70%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (70%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (91%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2013


End of Document
Bill O’Reilly, Venezuela, Aaron Hernandez: Your Thursday Briefing
The New York Times 
April 20, 2017 Thursday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BRIEFING
Length: 897 words
Byline: CHRIS STANFORD
Highlight: Here’s what you need to know to start your day.
Body


 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)
Good morning.
Here’s what you need to know:
 Lights out for O’Reilly.
Bill O’Reilly, the top-rated host in cable news, will not be returning to Fox News after an investigation of sexual harassment allegations against him, the network announced on Wednesday.
Rupert Murdoch, whose family controls Fox News, had long stood by its star. In signing off on the decision, Mr. Murdoch proved that he is a pragmatist at heart.
Advertisers pulled out and protests flared after a Times investigation revealed payouts of $13 million to resolve claims of inappropriate behavior.
Tucker Carlson will           fill the void left by O’Reilly’s ouster, which will test audience loyalties,            our media columnist writes.
 Trip to Russia caught the F.B.I.’s eye.
Investigators had known since 2013 that a Russian spy was trying to recruit the American businessman Carter Page.
So when Mr. Page became an adviser to the Trump campaign last year and gave a Russia-friendly speech in Moscow, it drew the bureau’s attention.
That trip became the catalyst for the current investigation into connections between Russia and Mr. Trump’s campaign, officials say.
 Big donations to inauguration.
The crowds at President Trump’s swearing-in may have been relatively small, but the checks paying for the festivities were not.
Newly released documents provide a glimpse of the frenzy of influence-seeking and peacemaking at the inauguration,            which raised $107 million, twice as much as any other.
 Chaos in Venezuela.
At least three people were killed in the country amid protests on Wednesday to demand elections and a return to democratic rule.
Times journalists were on the streets of Caracas covering the demonstrations.
 An increasingly expensive habit.
Mayor Bill de Blasio wants to raise the minimum price of a pack of cigarettes to $13, which would make New York City the most expensive place in the nation to buy them.
 “The Daily,” your audio news report.
On today’s show, the reporter who wrote the story that helped lead to the departure of Bill O’Reilly discusses her work.
Listen on a computer, an            iOS device or an            Android device.
Business
 They are app makers or podcasters, and they are H-1B visa holders — possible targets of President Trump’s immigration policies. Meet the tech workers whose lives are in limbo.
 Facebook has been adding features inspired by its rival Snapchat. Our tech columnist explains why the social media giant keeps winning: It’s the network.
 “Unicorn food”: It’s colorful, it’s sparkly, and it’s everywhere.
 U.S. stocks were mixed on Wednesday. Here’s a snapshot of            global markets.
Smarter Living
 Put the weights down. Here are some brain-fitness exercises, from puzzle games to flying drones.
 This is what 2,000 calories looks like.
 Recipe of the day: A homemade sofrito is central to this Cuban black bean           dish.
Noteworthy
 Brightening the bridge to Staten Island.
In today’s 360 video, visit the new Goethals Bridge, which connects Staten Island to New Jersey and is opening soon.
 Death of a former football star.
Aaron Hernandez, once the youngest player in the N.F.L. and a star for its best team, could never escape his roots. Convicted of murder, he            killed himself in prison.
 More good news for Serena Williams.
The best women’s tennis player of the era confirmed on Wednesday that she is expecting her first child. She was close to two months pregnant when she won the Australian Open in January.
 A day in the lunch box.
Food vendors are a fixture of New York City streets and appetites, yet they struggle daily with weather, logistics and rules. Here’s the story of one.
 A near miss, by cosmic standards.
A large asteroid flew past Earth on Wednesday with only 1.1 million miles to spare, the closest that one has come in years.
 Best of late-night TV.
Everyone was eager to say goodbye to Bill O’Reilly.
Back Story
The most famous photograph of a very camera-shy monster was published in The Daily Mail 83 years ago this week.
The sinuous silhouette of the Loch Ness monster (affectionately known as Nessie) appeared in The Daily Mail, a British newspaper, in April 1934. The picture, apparently taken in the Scottish Highlands by a respected London gynecologist and known as “the surgeon’s photograph,” claimed to show the monster’s long neck and head above water.
The image ignited a media frenzy that year, with The Times itself mentioning the beast no fewer than 55 times.
Though many pictures of Nessie have been taken over the decades (most later found to show wakes from boats, optical illusions, birds or otters), the surgeon’s photograph remains the clearest. But it was proved to be a hoax in 1994, nothing more than a small model on top of a toy submarine.
Despite the hoax (and a number of others like it), many still believe that the monster exists, hidden in dark waters with depths of almost 750 feet.
Last year, Nessie hunters did find something at the bottom of the loch — a 30-foot movie prop version of the monster. For now, it’s the closest thing to finding Nessie itself.
Des Shoe contributed reporting.
_____
Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.
What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: briefing

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); TRENDS & EVENTS (89%); WRITERS (89%); JOURNALISM (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); FOREIGN LABOR (73%); ELECTIONS (72%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (72%); CITY GOVERNMENT (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (70%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (65%); SOCIAL MEDIA (65%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (63%); COOKING & ENTERTAINING (61%); PUBLIC POLICY (61%); EXERCISE & FITNESS (60%); IMMIGRATION (60%)

Industry: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%); WRITERS (89%); MEDIA & TELECOMMUNICATIONS (78%); MOBILE DEVICES (78%); MOBILE MEDIA (74%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (70%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (65%); SOCIAL MEDIA (65%); PODCASTING (50%)

Person: TUCKER CARLSON (79%); BILL DE BLASIO (78%); KEITH RUPERT MURDOCH (72%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); CARACAS, VENEZUELA (73%); MOSCOW, RUSSIA (71%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (92%); RUSSIA (91%)

Load-Date: July 8, 2017


End of Document
Business Leaders View Immigration Policy as Threat to Economy
The New York Times
August 24, 2018 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4
Length: 965 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Body


Dozens of American business leaders are challenging the Trump administration over changes to immigration policy that they say threaten the livelihoods of thousands of their skilled foreign workers, and the nation's economic growth and competitiveness as well.
The executives, members of the Business Roundtable, expressed their ''serious concern'' over the administration's immigration moves in a jointly signed letter delivered late Wednesday to Kirstjen Nielsen, the secretary of homeland security. 
  Some of the most prominent chief executives in the United States signed the letter, including Timothy D. Cook of Apple, Ginni Rometty of IBM, Jamie Dimon of JPMorgan Chase, Laurence Fink of BlackRock, Marc Benioff of Salesforce and Indra Nooyi, the departing head of PepsiCo.
  The letter comes during a week when the broader debate over the country's immigration policies has been reignited by the arrest of a Mexican laborer in the killing of an Iowa woman. It also underscores the continuing tension between America's globally minded corporate establishment and the Trump administration's ''America First'' agenda.
  Business leaders have praised President Trump's tax cuts and rolling back of many regulations. But they have deplored some of his statements and some of his administration's actions, including on immigration.
  In one of the most notable examples of the strain, several White House business advisory councils dissolved last year after Mr. Trump blamed ''many sides'' for white supremacist violence in Charlottesville, Va.
  In June, a group of top executives condemned the administration for the forced separation of migrant children from their parents at the Mexican border. The Business Roundtable described the separations as ''cruel and contrary to American values.''
  With their letter on Wednesday, the group's members took issue with a series of immigration enforcement guidelines that they said were ''arbitrary and inconsistent'' and created new and unnecessary hurdles for skilled foreigners working in the United States.
  The changes, the letter stated, were ''causing considerable anxiety for many thousands of our employees while threatening to disrupt company operations.''
  The business group's complaint focused on new guidelines and practices by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, an arm of the Department of Homeland Security that vets visa applications and administers immigration policy.
  The letter's main focus was the treatment of applications for, and renewals of, H-1B visas for skilled foreign workers. The visas are used by companies to hire computer engineers and other professionals.
  As a result of the changes, there has been a sharp increase in the number of denials and requests for more information. A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan policy research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had increased 41 percent in the government's fourth fiscal quarter of 2017, compared with the third quarter.
  Government examiners' requests for additional information on H-1B visa applications tripled in the same period. The government's fiscal fourth quarter began in July 2017, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order.
  The policy foundation's analysis, published last month, was meant to examine the ''Trump effect'' on immigration for skilled foreign workers, said Stuart Anderson, executive director of the foundation and a former immigration official.
  The Trump administration, experts said, was using the government's regulatory apparatus, which it has so often scorned, to serve its policy goal of clamping down on the flow of foreign workers into America.
  ''Step up investigations, slow things down, and you can accomplish your policy goals without legislation,'' said Hal Salzman, a professor of public policy at Rutgers University.
  In response to the business leaders' letter, the immigration service said a statement on Thursday that the administration had been ''relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move towards a merit-based system.'' It added that it handles all applications and petitions ''fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.''
  The H-1B program was created to provide a pathway for talented foreigners whose special skills were expected to strengthen the American economy. Today, the nation's technology hubs are filled with H-1B alumni who have become entrepreneurs, executives, venture capitalists and, quite often, United States citizens.
  In recent years, however, the visa program has been criticized because corporations, especially Indian technology outsourcing companies, have exploited legal loopholes in the H-1B regime to replace American workers and shift jobs out of the United States. The immigration service has said its increased scrutiny and enforcement actions were intended to strengthen ''protections to combat H-1B abuses.''
  But to the business leaders, the policies are vague and capricious, creating uncertainty for their workers and in company operations. For example, the group's letter stated, ''companies now do not know whether a work visa petition that was approved last month will be approved when the company submits the identical application to extend the employee's status.''
  A particular concern, the business leaders said, was that the immigration service was expected to revoke work eligibility for spouses of H-1B visa holders. The spouses, they said, are often highly skilled workers who have built careers in America.
  ''Revoking their U.S. work authorization,'' the letter said, ''will likely cause high-skilled immigrants to take their skills to competitors outside the United States.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/23/business/trump-immigration-business-leaders-economy.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The offices of BuildZoom in San Francisco. Denials of visas for skilled workers have risen sharply under the Trump administration. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON HENRY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (92%); BUSINESS NEWS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (78%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (77%); BUSINESS OPERATIONS (73%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (73%); ARRESTS (71%); PETITIONS (71%); TAXES & TAXATION (68%); TAX LAW (66%); ENGINEERING (60%); WHITE NATIONALISTS (50%)

Company:  JPMORGAN CHASE & CO (71%);  PEPSICO INC (56%)

Organization: BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE (58%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (57%)

Ticker: JPM (NYSE) (71%); JPM (LSE) (71%); PEP (NYSE) (56%)

Industry: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (71%); NAICS523999 MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES (71%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (71%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (71%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (71%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (71%); SIC6022 STATE COMMERCIAL BANKS (71%); NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311919 OTHER SNACK FOOD MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311513 CHEESE MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311511 FLUID MILK MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS311411 FROZEN FRUIT, JUICE & VEGETABLE MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC2096 POTATO CHIPS, CORN CHIPS, & SIMILAR SNACKS (56%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER (56%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); ENGINEERING (60%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); INDRA K NOOYI (79%); MARC BENIOFF (75%); KIRSTJEN NIELSEN (73%); JAMES DIMON (55%); LAURENCE D FINK (55%); TIM COOK (55%); VIRGINIA ROMETTY (54%)

Geographic: VIRGINIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); MEXICO (92%)

Load-Date: August 24, 2018


End of Document
The Enduring Importance of the 1965 Immigration Act; Jay Caspian Kang
The New York Times 
October 7, 2021 Thursday 05:04 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 2417 words
Byline: Jay Caspian Kang
Highlight: How Asians arrived in America.
Body


What follows is an excerpt from my book “The Loneliest Americans,” which will be published on Oct. 12. (I also published an excerpt this week in the Times magazine.) The book is a meditation on the 1965 Immigration Act, which I argue is the starting point of the multiethnic society we live in today.
***
On Oct. 3, 1965, President Lyndon Johnson stood in front of the Statue of Liberty and said something that would be proved wrong: “This bill that we sign today is not a revolutionary bill. It does not affect the lives of millions. It will not reshape the structure of our daily lives.” He was referring to the Hart-Celler Immigration Act, a landmark piece of legislation that lifted restrictive quotas on immigration from Asia, Africa and southern and Eastern Europe.
Its opponents at the time it was finally passed described apocalyptic scenarios in which the United States and its white population would be overrun by a horde of foreigners. Johnson, for his part, assured the public that the easing of restrictions would have only a mild effect on the demographics of the country. Most people, he believed, would stay in their home countries.
Over the next five decades, the Hart-Celler Act would bring tens of millions of immigrants from Asia, southern and Eastern Europe, and Africa. No single piece of legislation has shaped the demographic and economic history of this country in quite the same way.
Before Hart-Celler, immigration into the United States operated under the National Origins Act, a seemingly simple system that doled out up to 150,000 visas a year, distributed among different quotas for each nationality, calculated according to the 1920 census. The more people of your kind you had in the United States, the more people could immigrate from your country of origin. As a result, countries like Ireland, Germany and England would receive far more visas than those in Eastern Europe, Asia or Africa. (African Americans and African immigrants were excluded from the calculation of quotas. While white Americans were classified by nation of origin, all Black Americans were classified by race, and as a result African countries were held to the minimum number of slots.)
This quota system did not extend to the “Orient.” The official practice of excluding Asians from the United States’ immigration policies had begun in 1875 with the Page Act, which barred Chinese women from entering the country to limit the ability of Chinese workers to start families. Just seven years later, the Chinese Exclusion Act was passed, ending all immigration from China and preventing any Chinese people living in America from ever attaining citizenship.
The law was largely a response to the labor market in California. A majority of Chinese people who had immigrated to the United States were young men. During the Gold Rush and railroad eras, these men served as cheap labor and were generally kept apart from mainstream society.
But as an increasing number of manufacturers and agricultural barons began replacing their work force with the Chinese, a nativist backlash quickly ensued, depicting the Chinese as subhuman carriers of smallpox and cholera. In 1881, George Frederick Keller, an influential cartoonist, drew what would become the defining image of the exclusion fight. A cartoon titled “A Statue for Our Harbor” reimagined the Statue of Liberty as a Chinese man dressed in rags, his right foot stepping on a skull. Around his head, in radiating points of light, are the words “ruin to white labor,” “diseases,” “immorality” and “filth.”
These indignities carried on into the early 20th century. Young Japanese workers, for example, were still permitted to enter the United States after the Chinese Exclusion Act and split their time among railroad work, mining, logging and small farming ventures. They, too, would soon feel the racialized effects of competition in America’s labor market.
After the San Francisco earthquake in 1906, nativist mobs openly attacked Japanese immigrants in the streets and called for boycotts of their businesses. This rash of xenophobic violence spilled over into local politics. Japanese students, who had been free to attend San Francisco’s public schools, were expelled and forced to enroll in the already segregated Chinese schools. This move, which caused a furor back in Japan, created a diplomatic headache for President Theodore Roosevelt, who had recently been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for successfully negotiating the end of the Russo-Japanese War.
In the end, Roosevelt could not smooth over America’s relationship with Tokyo, in part because of a man named Takao Ozawa, a Japanese immigrant who had settled in San Francisco, studied at the University of California and ultimately relocated to Hawaii after the earthquake. Ozawa was the first foreign-born Asian person to apply for U.S. citizenship, in 1915. The fight went all the way to the Supreme Court, which concluded that while Ozawa was more than fit to become an American, the rights of citizenship could be extended only to white people.
This decision, which came down in 1922, set off a fight in Congress between lawmakers who saw an opening to create a fully racialized immigration system — one that kept out not only the Japanese, Chinese and Koreans but Jews as well — and a group of lawmakers, who, along with President Calvin Coolidge, believed new restrictions on immigration would destroy any hope of diplomatic relations with Japan.
Coolidge and his allies lost. The Johnson-Reed Immigration Act of 1924 defined an “immigrant” as someone who also had the right to eventual citizenship. And because people from the “Orient” were not white and, therefore, could not become citizens, the law effectively ended all Asian immigration to the United States.
Immigration law usually moves in lock step with a country’s foreign policy goals. The day after the bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941, the United States and China both declared war on Japan, which prompted a two-year diplomatic effort to classify China as a long-term ally of the United States. In response, Japan began a propaganda campaign that recast the war as a fight against Anglo-Saxon imperialism in the “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.”
In dozens of pamphlets, articles and radio programs broadcast throughout Asia, Japanese propagandists derided any Asians who believed Americans would treat them as citizens with the same rights as white immigrants. They also set forth a vision of a unified East Asian continent that could usher in an era of unparalleled harmony and economic might. Much of the critique centered on a simple, compelling question: How could the Chinese ally themselves with a country whose racist immigration laws specifically targeted their people?
The provocation worked, although not exactly in the way the Japanese might have envisioned. Between 1941 and 1943, scholars, politicians and members of the media in the United States argued for an end to the Chinese Exclusion Act. The author Pearl Buck, whose Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, “The Good Earth,” drew upon her childhood in China as the daughter of Presbyterian missionaries, became a tireless advocate of the end of racist laws against the Chinese.
At a lunch gathering at the Hotel Astor in 1942, Buck noted that Japanese propaganda was starting to show signs of success and concluded that the United States could not win the war unless it convinced its Asian allies that they would be seen as equals in the eyes of American law. Later, Buck would write that as long as the United States continued to discriminate against Chinese people, “we are fighting on the wrong side in this war. We belong with Hitler.”
In May 1943, Buck, her husband and a group of intellectuals and publishers formed the Citizens Committee to Repeal Chinese Exclusion and Place Immigration on a Quota Basis. They used their influence in the media to blast out their message. That same month, the House Committee on Immigration and Naturalization held public hearings on the possible repeal of the act. The opposition came mostly from labor organizations, veterans’ groups and “patriotic societies,” who dredged up much of the original logic for Chinese exclusion: an Asian influx would bring a wave of morally depraved men who would quickly displace native workers.
But the Citizens Committee had some powerful allies: Top military officials argued that China’s allegiance was crucial not only to winning in the Pacific theater but also to stabilizing the region after the fighting ended. And in October, as the Exclusion Act was being debated in Congress, President Franklin Roosevelt came out in favor of repeal. In an address, he said: “Nations, like individuals, make mistakes. We must be big enough to acknowledge our mistakes of the past and to correct them. By the repeal of the Chinese exclusion laws, we can correct a historic mistake and silence the distorted Japanese propaganda.” Just over two years after the Pearl Harbor attack, the law was repealed with the passage of the Magnuson Act, which allowed for some immigration from China.
Buck and her allies had put forth a vision of strength through pluralism — a nation whose diplomatic and economic ties to Asia could be deepened by liberal immigration laws that proved the United States did indeed consider the Chinese to be potential contributors to American society as opposed to inscrutable outsiders. In 1942, a poll commissioned by the Office of War Information found that over 80 percent of Americans considered China to be a strong ally of the United States.
The reality of the Magnuson Act, however, did not match the worldly rhetoric. Roosevelt, who just two years before had authorized the internment of Japanese Americans, brokered a compromise that allowed for only a small increase in the number of Chinese immigrants per year.
Future immigration bills would continue to restrict immigrants from Asia, though some concessions were made. In 1952, Patrick McCarran, a Democratic senator from Nevada, and Francis Walter, a Democratic representative from Pennsylvania, pushed through a complex, endlessly negotiated immigration law that both amplified the rhetoric of fear around Asian and Jewish immigrants and also, counterintuitively, lifted the ban on Asian naturalization, meaning Asian immigrants could now become full citizens. All “Oriental” countries were given a quota of visas, though they were minuscule: 100 to 185 per year.
But these allowances came with a caveat: Tight restrictions were placed on who, exactly, could come to the United States. Educated, oftentimes wealthy professionals with families were given preference over poor laborers. And while some new pathways for immigrants had been laid out, the bill also contained an “Asian-Pacific Triangle” provision that capped the number of total Asian immigrants at 2,000 per year.
The classification of “Asian-Pacific” was purely racial: A second-generation Chinese immigrant from, say, Argentina would not be able to apply for a visa as an Argentine. Because of his racial origin, he would always be Chinese, whereas the British-born child of Italian immigrants could come to the United States under the British quota. The McCarran-Walter Act also curtailed Jewish immigration. In both instances, the justification came out of the budding Cold War and the belief that Asians and Jews would propagate communism within U.S. borders.
The bill was intensely debated between nativists and more liberal immigration advocates in Congress. Senator McCarran argued, “The cold, hard truth is that in the United States today there are hard-core, indigestible blocs who have not become integrated into the American way of life, but who, on the contrary, are its deadly enemy.”
President Harry Truman ultimately vetoed it, only to be overridden.
In the past, pro-immigration politicians had been reluctant to commit to a full-throated defense of their principles for the very simple reason that nativism had always been popular. But in the debates over McCarran-Walter, a handful of lawmakers led by Representative Emanuel Celler of New York began to advance the idea that the restrictions on Asian immigration were racist and immoral. In a speech, Senator William Benton of Connecticut argued that the “great investment of our boys’ blood” in the Korean War had been undercut by this sort of shallow and ultimately meaningless immigration reform. “We can totally destroy that investment, and can ruthlessly and stupidly destroy faith and respect in our great principles, by enacting laws that, in effect, say to the peoples of the world: ‘We love you, but we love you from afar. We want you, but for God’s sake, stay where you are.’”
Those rebuttals, along with pressure to make the country’s immigration laws reflect the logic of the civil rights movement, would lay the groundwork for the eventual passage of the Hart-Celler 1965 Immigration Act. In 1960, white immigrants from Europe and Canada made up roughly 84 percent of the immigrant population in the United States. East and South Asians, by contrast, were around 4 percent. Between 1980 and 1990, a majority of the millions of immigrants to the United States came from Latin America or Asia.
Many of these workers brought over their relatives through the family reunification statute in the Hart-Celler Act. A Pew Research Center report found that in 2011, 62 percent of immigrants from the six largest “source countries” (China, India, the Philippines, Korea, Vietnam and Japan) received their green cards through family sponsorships. You may have come to the United States from Korea to study engineering, received your H-1B visa and fallen right into the track of assimilation into the middle class, but your brother and sister might come over with a very different set of abilities, ambitions and visions for their life in this country.
As it turns out, the nativists were right about the coming hordes. The immigrants from Asia arrived in a series of waves throughout the 1970s, ’80s and ’90s. They included my parents, my grandparents, my mother’s five siblings, two of my cousins and me. And although their new country did have pockets of people who looked like them, they shared almost nothing in common with their fellow “Asian Americans” except some well-worn threads of culture, whether food or holiday rituals, and the assumptions of white people.
Have feedback? Send a note to kang-newsletter@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Alberto Miranda FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (92%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (89%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (88%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); RACE & ETHNICITY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (74%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); internal-sub-only (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Asian-Americans (%); Chinese-Americans (%); Visas (%); Korean-Americans (%); Foreign Workers (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Johnson, Lyndon Baines (%)

Person: Johnson, Lyndon Baines

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); AFRICA (94%); CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ASIA (93%); EUROPE (93%); EASTERN EUROPE (87%); GERMANY (79%); ENGLAND (71%)

Load-Date: October 13, 2021


End of Document
Deal Reached In Inquiry Into Visa Fraud At Tech Giant
The New York Times
October 30, 2013 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12
Length: 1386 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Infosys, the giant Indian technology outsourcing company, has agreed to pay $34 million in a civil settlement after federal prosecutors in Texas found it had committed ''systemic visa fraud and abuse'' when bringing temporary workers from India for jobs in American businesses, according to court documents and officials familiar with the case. The payment is the largest ever in a visa case.
After an investigation of more than two years, prosecutors on Wednesday will unveil the settlement as well as its accusations that Infosys ''knowingly and unlawfully'' brought Indian workers into the United States on business visitor visas since 2008, which avoided the higher costs and delays of a longer-term employment visa the workers should have had. They will charge that Infosys systematically submitted misleading information to American immigration authorities and consular officials to obtain the faster visas, unfairly gaining a competitive edge and undercutting American workers qualified for the jobs.
Federal investigators also found extensive omissions and errors in the hiring records Infosys was required to keep for its employees, which could have allowed thousands of Indians to continue working in this country after their visas had expired, according to the documents.
The lead prosecutor in the case, Shamoil Shipchandler, an assistant United States attorney in the Eastern District of Texas, said he could not comment on the settlement before a news conference scheduled for Wednesday in Plano, where Infosys has offices that handle its visa applications.
Infosys has steadfastly denied any accusations of visa abuse and fought the case vigorously. ''Those claims are untrue and only unproven assertions,'' the company said Tuesday in a statement. The company said its use of business visitor visas ''was for legitimate business purposes and not in any way intended to circumvent the requirements'' of the employment visa, which is known as H-1B.
Infosys, which is based in Bangalore, said the resolution of the case was not yet completed. ''Infosys' policy demands adherence to all laws, rules and regulations everywhere we operate and we continue to take our compliance obligations seriously,'' the statement said.
The settlement is one of several setbacks in this country for Infosys, and could also affect other big Indian outsourcing companies that rely on the temporary H-1B employment visas to bring thousands of workers from India each year for technology contracts here. In a class-action lawsuit filed this year in Wisconsin, four American tech workers assert that Infosys broadly discriminates against Americans with its practice of employing mainly South Asians in the United States.
The outcome in Texas is long-awaited relief to an American employee of Infosys, Jack B. Palmer. He spurred the federal investigation by bringing a whistle-blower lawsuit in Alabama in February 2011, saying that he had been punished and sidelined by Infosys executives after he reported witnessing widespread visa fraud. Since then, Mr. Palmer said by email, the case has continued to dominate his life. He has remained on the company's payroll while cooperating with a federal investigation that has ground slowly forward, but he has not been assigned any work or spoken with anyone at Infosys for many months.
''Despite the personal toll it took on me, it would have been much worse in the long run if I had turned the other cheek,'' Mr. Palmer said. ''It was a question of right and wrong, following my conscience and following the law.''
Infosys strongly rejected Mr. Palmer's claims and fought his whistle-blower case, which was dismissed last year by a federal judge in Alabama.
But the time Mr. Palmer has invested is likely to be worth it. Mr. Shipchandler and Mr. Palmer's lawyer, Kenneth Mendelsohn of Montgomery, Ala., declined to state a figure, but people familiar with the case said Mr. Palmer could receive as much as $5 million from the payment Infosys will make to the federal government, under a provision of federal false claims law.
One of India's largest technology outsourcing companies, Infosys employs 160,000 people in 30 countries, including about 15,000 people in the United States.
Competition for the H-1B temporary employment visas is intense among companies, here and in India, because there is a basic annual limit of 65,000 visas. This year, the limit was reached within one week after the application period opened. In recent years, Infosys and other Indian outsourcing companies have consistently been among the top recipients of H-1B visas. As a result of recent changes by Congress, large foreign companies like Infosys must now pay as much as $5,000 for each visa.
The business visitor visa, which is known as B-1, has lower fees, is quicker to obtain and is not subject to the same numerical caps. But the B-1 visa is for foreigners coming to meetings and training sessions. It does not allow them to live or work in the United States. The workers continue to be paid at wage rates in India, which are much lower than wages in this country.
According to the court documents, from 2008 through 2011 Infosys ''as a matter of practice'' submitted false invitation letters intended ''to deceive'' immigration and consular authorities by indicating that Indian workers were coming for meetings when they were in fact being assigned to technology contracts here.
Infosys prepared ''dos and don'ts'' lists that advised Indian workers how to mislead American immigration authorities in B-1 visa application letters and interviews, according to the documents, to avoid the appearance that they were coming to work. ''Do not mention activities like implementation, design and testing, consulting, etc. which sound like work,'' was one of the instructions.
Infosys regularly misinformed immigration officials about where Indian workers on B-1 visas would travel in this country, to avoid a more onerous requirement of the H-1B visa that the company demonstrate that it was not undercutting prevailing wages paid to Americans in places where Indians would be assigned, the documents show. Infosys also rewrote some contracts with American companies to conceal the fact that it was using B-1 visa holders to perform jobs that were ''otherwise required to be performed by United States citizens or legitimate H-1B visa holders,'' according to the documents.
The prosecutors charge that Infosys regularly submitted the false information about its B-1 visas ''for the purposes of increasing profits'' by minimizing costs and gaining greater flexibility in moving Indian workers around the country.
In the most fully documented aspect of the case, federal investigators found ''widespread failure'' by Infosys to maintain accurate and up-to-date records, known as I-9 forms, for its Indian employees. Because of the faulty records, the company could have kept thousands of foreigners working here after their visas had lapsed.
A federal grand jury in Texas had been weighing criminal charges for visa abuse. Since prosecutors reached a civil settlement with the company, it is likely that they have agreed not to pursue criminal charges on the immigration issues.
During his long wait to see what the Texas prosecutors would come up with, Mr. Palmer, who lives near Montgomery, has wrestled with depression and has found himself in an unwelcome state of idleness and isolation. A technology program manager, he was drawing a paycheck from Infosys but could not work for it or anyone else. It was Mr. Palmer who first reported that Infosys was writing false invitation letters for B-1 visas for Indian employees, because he was asked to write one and he refused.
A low moment for Mr. Palmer came when the Alabama court ruled against his whistle-blower case, finding that the harassment he claimed was not sufficiently severe. But he said that with the help of Mr. Mendelsohn, ''I concentrated on what I can control in my life, which is my attitude.''
''My physical and mental health is good,'' he said.
Mr. Palmer said he turned down an early settlement offer from Infosys, because it would not have allowed him to continue cooperating with federal investigators. ''They wanted to buy my silence, and I wouldn't do it,'' he said. ''I never did it for the money. I did it because they were violating the law.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/30/us/indian-tech-giant-infosys-said-to-reach-settlement-on-us-visa-fraud-claims.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Jack B. Palmer, an American employee of Infosys, brought a whistle-blower lawsuit in 2011, saying that he had been punished and sidelined after he reported witnessing widespread visa fraud. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BOB MILLER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A16)        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (91%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); CLASS ACTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); FALSE STATEMENTS (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (78%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (78%); WHISTLEBLOWERS (78%); ABUSE & NEGLECT (77%); LAWYERS (74%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); IMMIGRATION (73%); ASIAN AMERICANS (68%); PRESS CONFERENCES (65%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (92%)

Organization: US ATTORNEY'S OFFICE FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF TEXAS (55%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (92%); INFY (NYSE) (92%); INFY (NSE) (92%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (91%); BIG TECH (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); LAWYERS (74%)

Geographic: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); PLANO, TX, USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (93%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); WISCONSIN, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (93%); SOUTHERN ASIA (58%)

Load-Date: October 30, 2013


End of Document
Daily Report: Cautious Optimism for Trump's H-1B Plans
The New York Times
April 20, 2017 Thursday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. ; BITS
Length: 242 words
Byline: By NICK WINGFIELD
Body


President Trump signed an executive order on Tuesday that could lead to significant changes in the H-1B immigrant worker program that is heavily used by the technology industry.
While tech has often clashed with Mr. Trump, at least on this issue, many executives are cautiously optimistic. Why? They are not the biggest users of H-1B visas -- that distinction goes to outsourcing companies -- and some hope that changes to the program will help them bring highly educated workers to the United States. 
  The tempered comments from technology executives stood in contrast to their opposition to earlier orders by Mr. Trump banning travelers from a handful of predominantly Muslim countries. Immigrants have risen to the pinnacle of the industry, leading icons like Google and Microsoft, and many rank-and-file workers from abroad have become entrepreneurs behind the most successful start-ups.
  Neeraj Agrawal, a venture capitalist with Battery Ventures in Boston, is supportive of the proposal to reform the visa lottery system, but he believes Mr. Trump should make it clear that people with skills and ambition are still wanted in the United States.
  ''While they're tweaking the system, I think it's really important for the headline to read, 'Immigrants Are Still Welcome Here,''' Mr. Agrawal said. ''What I'm really worried about is, the undercurrent of tone and message people are hearing is that they're no longer welcome. We have to get that right.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/19/technology/daily-report-cautious-optimism-for-trumps-h-1b-plans.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); OUTSOURCING (73%); VENTURE CAPITAL (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (54%)

Company:  GOOGLE INC (84%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (84%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); VENTURE CAPITAL (68%)

Geographic: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: April 20, 2017


End of Document
Companies Say Trump Is Hurting Business by Limiting Legal Immigration
The New York Times 
September 2, 2018 Sunday 16:01 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1763 words
Byline: Nelson D. Schwartz and Steve Lohr
Highlight: The government is making it harder to hire foreigners by denying visas, asking for more information and delaying approvals, corporate leaders say.
Body


The Trump administration is using the country’s vast and nearly opaque immigration bureaucracy to constrict the flow of foreign workers into the United States by throwing up new roadblocks to limit legal arrivals.
The government is denying more work visas, asking applicants to provide additional information and delaying approvals more frequently than just a year earlier. Hospitals, hotels, technology companies and other businesses say they are now struggling to fill jobs with the foreign workers they need.
With foreign hires missing, the employees who remain are being forced to pick up the slack. Seasonal industries like hotels and landscaping are having to turn down customers or provide fewer services. Corporate executives worry about the long-term impact of losing talented engineers and programmers to countries like Canada that are laying out the welcome mat for skilled foreigners.
At Northwell Health’s pathology lab on Long Island, a new doctor’s cubicle stands empty, her computer and microscope untouched. Other residents started on July 1, but she is stuck in India’s Punjab State, held up by unexplained delays in her visa.
“There have been delays in processing that we have not felt before,” said Dr. Andrew C. Yacht, chief academic officer at Northwell, which includes Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan and North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.
In April 2017, President Trump signed a “Buy American and Hire American” executive order, directing government officials to “rigorously enforce” immigration laws. The order did not get the kind of attention that followed the administration’s decision to separate families at the Mexican border this summer.
A few months later, the president endorsed           legislation that would cut legal immigration by half. The bill was introduced by two Republican senators, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia. But Republican leaders in Congress have not advanced it.
Some lawmakers say Mr. Trump is using administrative means to reshape immigration policy because those changes have stalled on Capitol Hill.
“If they want to have a proposal on immigration, they should send it to Congress,” said Representative Ro Khanna, a Democrat whose district includes parts of Silicon Valley. “The administration should engage in that conversation. To unilaterally and without any accountability change what Congress has authorized is not democratic.”
In practice, businesses say the increased red tape has made it harder to secure employment-based visas. That has added to the difficulty of finding qualified workers with the unemployment rate falling to 3.9 percent.
A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions for skilled foreign workers had increased 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the third quarter. Government requests for additional information for applications doubled in the fourth quarter, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his order.
Experts say a sustained reduction in immigration could dampen growth over time as more baby boomers retire, leaving big gaps in the job market.
That goes for high-skilled immigrants and low-skilled workers, said Francine D. Blau, an economist at Cornell. The latter will be vital in fields like elder care and child care, as well as construction and cleaning.
“A lot of our labor-force growth comes from immigrants and their children,” Ms. Blau said. “Without them, we’d suffer the problems associated with countries with an aging population, like Japan.”
The Business Roundtable, a group of corporate leaders, recently challenged the Trump administration over changes that it says threaten the livelihoods of thousands of skilled foreign workers, and economic growth and competitiveness.
In a statement, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the administration was “relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move toward a merit-based system.” It added that all petitions and applications were handled “fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.”
The H-1B program, which was created to bring in foreigners with skills that business leaders argued would strengthen the economy, has long been a target for some politicians. The visa program has been criticized because corporations have exploited it to replace American workers.
Still, many economists say H-1B holders are valuable. Immigrants file patents at twice the rate of native-born Americans and start            about 25 percent of high-tech companies in the United States.
“There’s absolutely no research that supports the idea that cutting legal immigration is good for the economy,” said Ethan Lewis, a Dartmouth economist.
Hospitals in particular argue that they need foreign doctors who are more willing than native-born Americans to take jobs in less glamorous and lower-paying fields, like internal and family medicine. Of Northwell’s 1,826 resident doctors, 165 came in under H1-B or J-1 student visas.
Nearly one-third of pathology residents come from other countries, according to the National Resident Matching Program. But the number of overseas applicants in all specialties has dropped for two years in a row.
“The administration’s policies are having a chilling effect on the interest of international medical graduates coming to the United States to train,” said Mona M. Signer, chief executive of the matching program.
The missing Indian pathologist’s workload at Northwell has been spread among 11 residents, lengthening the time they are on call.
“Our nation’s ability to care for patients is dependent on international medical graduates,” Dr. Yacht said.
The effect of lower-skilled immigrants is more debatable. George J. Borjas, a Harvard economist, has found that an influx of such workers reduced the incomes of people without a high school degree between 3 and 5 percent.
Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis, agrees that individual workers can be hurt by competition from lower-paid foreigners. But he said the overall effect on wages was modest. Immigration also tends to bolster the incomes of college-educated Americans.
Mr. Peri points to what happened when the government deported between 400,000 and 500,000 Mexicans between 1929 and 1934, most of whom worked in agriculture and construction. With fewer people to work the fields, farm owners and agricultural businesses cut administrative, sales and clerical jobs because there was not enough to do.
“Out of eight or 10 positions held by Mexicans, maybe one or two were taken by Americans,” Mr. Peri said. “The rest disappeared.”
Rob Hurst is not concerned with the macroeconomics of immigration. He is just struggling to keep bathrooms clean.
This summer, he has found himself on his hands and knees scrubbing toilets and tubs at Edgartown Commons, a hotel he manages on Martha’s Vineyard in Massachusetts. Five Jamaican workers who had long worked at the property failed to get H2-B seasonal-work visas.
“I’m 65 years old, but you got to do what you got to do,” he said. “We did hire contract workers, but it’s never going to be as good as people with years of experience.”
In the past, returning H2-B visa workers were not counted against the program’s annual cap of 66,000. Congress declined to renew that exemption in December 2016.
Foreign workers are also growing frustrated about the clampdown on visas and rising anti-immigrant sentiment.
Uday Verma is leaving after 12 years in Iowa, time he spent earning a graduate degree in computer science and working for a technology company.
Mr. Verma, 37, who emigrated from India, has repeatedly renewed his H-1B visa while waiting fruitlessly for permanent resident status — also known as a green card. Had he been successful, he could have easily switched employers or started his own business.
“I can’t make a plan here,” Mr. Verma said. “You’re perpetually in this state of limbo. It just doesn’t make sense anymore to stay here and keep pursuing this American dream.”
Mr. Verma, his wife and their 9-year-old son plan to be living in Toronto by the time their American visas expire in the second week of September.
He is taking advantage of the Global Talent Stream initiative the Canadian government started last year. It lets companies in innovative fields, like artificial intelligence, quickly secure visas for workers with vital skills.
With experience with A.I. programming tools, Mr. Verma got a visa in two weeks, and could become a permanent resident in six months or so.
His employer, Kira Systems, makes software that reads and analyzes legal contracts. The company has more than doubled its employment in the past year, to 115 people. Noah Waisberg, a co-founder and the chief executive, said half of Kira’s technical staff was from China, India, Russia and other countries.
Canada has long welcomed immigrants. “But that is even more so relative to the United States, given the climate in America now,” Mr. Waisberg said. “It’s certainly helped us recruit.”
Mr. Trump’s “hire American” push is helping some domestic businesses. One of those is Nexient, which provides software services and competes with firms in India and elsewhere. Fearful of becoming too dependent on offshore firms, corporate customers are increasingly interested in having domestic partners, said Mark Orttung, Nexient’s chief executive.
“You still have to win the business, but it has been an accelerator for us,” he said.
Nexient is based in Newark, Calif., but its programmers are mainly in Michigan and Indiana. The start-up employs more than 500 people, up from 400 last year.
About 10 percent of Nexient’s employees have H-1B visas, typically engineers who have mastered old software systems and other niche technologies in corporate data centers.
Those foreign workers are fielding more government requests for information and waiting longer for visa renewals, Mr. Orttung said. “It adds a great deal of uncertainty to the lives of some of our employees.”
PHOTO: Rob Hurst, manager of Edgartown Commons on Martha’s Vineyard, has had to scrub bathrooms this summer because five Jamaican workers who had long worked at the hotel couldn’t get visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Elizabeth Cecil for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Top C.E.O.s Denounce Trump Immigration Policy as Threat to U.S. Economy
    • With Jobs to Fill, Businesses Play the Visa Lottery
    • What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
    • Without New Laws or Walls, Trump Presses the Brake on Legal Immigration
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (93%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); EXECUTIVES (90%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (73%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (70%); LEGISLATION (69%); PETITIONS (65%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States Economy (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Business Roundtable (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Trump, Donald J (%); Cotton, Tom (%); Perdue, David A Jr (%)

Organization: BUSINESS ROUNDTABLE (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (79%); HOTELS & MOTELS (71%); MEDICAL & DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES (71%)

Person: RO KHANNA (92%); DONALD TRUMP (89%); TOM COTTON (89%); DAVID A PERDUE (78%); Trump, Donald J; Cotton, Tom; Perdue, David A Jr

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (77%); PUNJAB, INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (79%)

Load-Date: November 2, 2018


End of Document
Facebook will pay up to $14 million to settle claims it favored foreign workers.
The New York Times 
October 19, 2021 Tuesday 08:12 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 951 words
Byline: David McCabe
Highlight: The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to “recruit, consider or hire” qualified United States workers for more than 2,000 positions.
Body


The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to “recruit, consider or hire” qualified United States workers for more than 2,000 positions.
WASHINGTON — Facebook agreed on Tuesday to pay up to $14.25 million to settle claims brought by the federal government in the waning days of the Trump administration that the company had discriminated against United States workers.
The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to “recruit, consider or hire” qualified United States workers for thousands of positions. Instead, prosecutors said, the company gave those jobs to foreign workers who held temporary work visas.
The agreement with the Justice Department included payments of $4.75 million to the government and as much as $9.5 million to “eligible victims of Facebook’s alleged discrimination,” according to a news release. The combined settlement is the largest ever collected by the agency’s civil rights division for violations of the anti-discrimination provision in the Immigration and Nationality Act. The company also separately settled concerns raised by the Labor Department this year over whether it had violated labor regulations.
The claims were part of an effort by the Trump administration to push the country’s biggest tech companies to hire more United States workers. The administration tightened the requirements to receive a so-called H-1B visa, which are popular with technology companies hiring foreigners, including increasing the salaries companies needed to pay workers as part of the program.
The government investigated Facebook for two years, looking into whether the company intentionally favored workers with H-1B visas and other temporary immigrants over U.S. workers. Prosecutors ultimately claimed that the company had failed to make more than 2,600 jobs — with an average salary of $156,000 — as readily available to Americans and other United States workers as to foreigners.
“Facebook is not above the law and must comply with our nation’s federal civil rights laws, which prohibit discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices,” said Kristen Clarke, an assistant attorney general in the Justice Department’s civil rights division.
A Facebook spokesman, Andy Stone, said that the company believed it had met the government standards but that the settlements would allow the company to move forward.
“These resolutions will enable us to continue our focus on hiring the best builders from both the U.S. and around the world and supporting our internal community of highly skilled visa holders who are seeking permanent residence,” he said in a statement.
Under the agreement with the Justice Department, Facebook will have to better advertise for some jobs and make it easier for United States workers to apply. The separate settlement with the Labor Department requires the company to do more to recruit United States workers and to submit to audits.
The monetary value of the settlement is negligible for Facebook. It paid a fine of roughly $5 billion in 2019 to resolve accusations by the Federal Trade Commission that it had abused consumer data. In the second quarter of 2021, it generated $29 billion in revenue. The jobs in question amounted to only a fraction of Facebook’s roughly 63,000 employees.
But the agreements the company reached Tuesday with the federal government show how the social media giant is facing battles with Washington regulators on multiple fronts.
The F.T.C. has accused the company of breaking antitrust laws when it acquired WhatsApp and Instagram, two services the government believes could have become bigger threats to Facebook if they had not been purchased. In recent weeks, lawmakers have called for more rules to protect children who use Facebook products after a former employee of the company claimed it knew that its product harmed teenagers.
Lawmakers in Washington have long focused on how tech companies use visa programs — particularly the H-1B system — to hire engineers from abroad. The companies and their allies have pushed Congress to expand access to the visas, arguing they help companies bring the most talented engineers to the United States. But critics say the companies prefer those engineers to United States workers because they command lower salaries.
Former President Donald J. Trump’s administration put the program under a microscope for years. In 2017, Mr. Trump announced he would revamp the program.
Three years later the administration temporarily blocked new visas under the H-1B program. It also raised the qualifications needed for foreign workers to access the program, saying they needed a more specialized degree than was previously needed. The administration also said companies would have to pay the workers a higher minimum salary.
A federal judge ruled against the ban on the visa program in October 2020, forestalling its impact for business groups that had sued over the change, including a major technology trade association. The Biden administration allowed a Trump-era ban on multiple visa programs to expire in March.
Facebook’s founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has adopted immigration reform as a cause. He helped to found a group called FWD.us in 2013 that has pushed for changes to the immigration system. And he personally entered the debate over immigration as Mr. Trump began his crackdown on foreigners entering the United States.
“We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here,” Mr. Zuckerberg said in January 2017.
PHOTO: Facebook’s chief, Mark Zuckerberg. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B6)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (91%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); AGREEMENTS (89%); BUSINESS TORTS (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); TECHNOLOGY (79%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (78%); LABOR REGULATION & POLICY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WAGE & HOUR LAWS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (74%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (73%); WAGE GROWTH (73%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (72%); IMMIGRATION LAW (72%); FINES & PENALTIES (68%); Facebook Inc (%); Justice Department (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Suits and Litigation (Civil) (%); Foreign Workers (%); Discrimination (%); Social Media (%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (90%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (96%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION (55%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (90%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); BIG TECH (74%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: October 29, 2021


End of Document
Federal Inquiry Into Indian Firm Puts a Focus on Widespread Visa Abuses
The New York Times
October 31, 2013 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2013 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 13
Length: 897 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON; Pamela Kripke contributed reporting.
Body


A federal investigation into visa use by Infosys, the Indian technology outsourcing giant, has brought to light widespread abuses in the industry and prompted investigations into other foreign outsourcing firms, federal officials said Wednesday.
In the largest settlement ever in an immigration case, Infosys admitted no visa violations but agreed Wednesday to pay $34 million to resolve claims made by federal prosecutors in Texas.
The amount of the settlement was relatively small for Infosys, a Bangalore-based global enterprise with 160,000 employees worldwide and reported revenues of $7.9 billion, 70 percent of it from consulting in the United States. But the case added to intensifying legal scrutiny and political skepticism in the United States facing Indian companies that use temporary visas to bring in thousands of guest workers each year for technology and software jobs in American companies.
As part of the settlement, Infosys acknowledged major errors and omissions in records it kept on its employees in the United States, including Indian temporary technology workers brought in for contract work with American companies. But it did not admit to systematic fraud, and the agreement includes a point-by-point rebuttal of prosecutors' accusations that it tried to increase profits by illegally using short-term business visitors' visas to bring workers from India, instead of a more expensive and less accessible temporary employment visa, known as H-1B.
''This is not a settlement about systemic visa fraud,'' Stephen A. Jonas of WilmerHale, the lead lawyer representing Infosys, said Wednesday after the settlement was made public by prosecutors in Plano, Tex., where Infosys has offices. ''The company adamantly denies the visa abuse allegations. They are not true.''
But federal prosecutors and investigators insisted Wednesday that they had uncovered extensive misuse of visas at Infosys. They said they agreed to the settlement because Infosys had cooperated with the investigation and moved speedily to overhaul its record-keeping and improve its visa procedures.
''While Infosys is not admitting any wrongdoing, its leadership did appreciate there were substantial problems in the way they were conducting business in this country,'' said John Malcolm Bales, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Texas, in Plano. ''We think they've cleaned up their act.''
Each year there is a scramble among technology companies for H-1B employment visas, because there is a basic annual cap of 65,000 visas. In the past three years, Infosys and two other Indian companies -- Wipro and Tata Consultancy Services -- were among the top five recipients of those visas, according to Ron Hira, a professor at Rochester Institute of Technology who studies the visa system.
The largest user, Cognizant, is an American company that brought in nearly 18,000 foreign workers, almost all from India, Mr. Hira said.
American technology companies have been clamoring for an increase in H-1B visas, saying they face shortages of Americans with advanced skills. A large increase was part of broad immigration legislation that passed the Senate in June, and there is also a measure to raise the limits before the House of Representatives. But the Senate bill also included new protections for Americans that would make it more difficult for foreign outsourcing companies to bring in temporary workers.
It is not clear whether Congress will take further action on those bills this year.
In recent years Congress has sharply raised visa fees for foreign outsourcing companies while immigration authorities imposed new regulations to limit the movement of foreign technology workers in the United States.
''In the past few years there has been a real assault by the federal government on the information technology consulting industry, and it has hit the Indian companies particularly hard,'' said Avram Morell, an immigration lawyer in New York.
Infosys has vigorously disputed the government's accusations. Mr. Jonas, the company's lawyer, said the government had failed to prove that foreign workers on business visitor visas, known as B-1, were doing any work that was not authorized under their visas. He said no evidence had emerged that any foreign workers ever remained in the United States after their visas had expired.
Since 2011, Infosys put in place new record-keeping and visa procedures and later placed new limitations on the activities in the United States of B-1 visitor visa holders, improvements that were acknowledged in the settlement.
But federal investigators said Wednesday that they had uncovered numerous cases in which Infosys had brought in Indian workers on B-1 visas, to do work not allowed under that visa. Investigators from the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security examined 6,500 B-1 visas Infosys had used to bring in Indian workers over five years.
''The vast majority were illegitimate,'' said George M. Nutwell, a special agent in charge of the State Department Diplomatic Security Service in Houston. Investigators went to the American companies where the B-1 workers were placed and discovered they were doing programming and technology engineering work similar to H-1B workers. The business visitor visa is primarily for attending training sessions and meetings, not for work.
''Infosys cheated, plain and simple,'' Mr. Nutwell said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/31/us/indian-tech-giant-infosys-paying-34-million-to-settle-visa-abuse-case.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); OUTSOURCING (91%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (89%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); ABUSE & NEGLECT (78%); GLOBALIZATION (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); OFFSHORING (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); LAWYERS (77%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (77%); COMPANY PROFITS (75%); IMMIGRATION LAW (72%); FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE & REPORTS (70%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (70%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (92%);  WILMER CUTLER PICKERING HALE & DORR LLP (84%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (51%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (92%); INFY (NYSE) (92%); INFY (NSE) (92%); TCS (NSE) (51%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (84%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (84%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (51%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (51%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (51%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (51%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); LAWYERS (77%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (77%); CONSULTING SERVICES (75%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (73%)

Geographic: PLANO, TX, USA (92%); BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); TEXAS, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: October 31, 2013


End of Document
For Indians, Trump’s America Is a Land of Lost Opportunity
The New York Times 
April 23, 2017 Sunday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD; asia
Length: 1230 words
Byline: GEETA ANAND
Highlight: Generations of Indians have greatly admired the United States. But many are infuriated and unnerved by what they see as a wave of racist violence.
Body


Correction Appended
MUMBAI, India — Generations of Indians have admired the United States for almost everything. But many are infuriated and unnerved by what they see as a wave of racist violence under President Trump, souring America’s allure.
The reaction is not just anger and anxiety. Now, young Indians who have aspired to study, live and work in the United States are looking elsewhere.
“We don’t know what might happen to us while walking on the street there,” said Kanika Arora, a 20-year-old student in Mumbai who is reconsidering her plan to study in the United States. “They might just think that we’re terrorists.”
Recent attacks on people of Indian descent in the United States are explosive news in India. A country once viewed as the promised land now seems for many to be dangerously inhospitable.
Further alienating Indians, especially among their highly educated class, is the Trump administration’s reassessment of H-1B visas given mostly for information technology jobs. More than 85,000 are granted a year, the majority to Indians.
“America was the land of great opportunity,” Sanket Bafna, 21, said as he emerged one afternoon last week from an exam at K. C. College, where he is studying financial management. “It’s not the same land.”
This year, undergraduate applications from India fell at 26 percent of United States educational institutions, and 15 percent of graduate programs, according to a survey of 250 American universities by the            American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions O           fficers.
The number of applications for H-1B visas also fell to 199,000, a nearly 20 percent decline, according to data kept by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
Like many others, Indians were offended by Mr. Trump’s promises to block the Mexico border with a wall and bar people from six predominantly Muslim countries. Some took solace that India was not targeted.
But they soon saw that anti-immigrant rage in America did not discriminate.
In February, two Indian immigrants were shot, one fatally, at a bar in Kansas by a man who witnesses said had shouted ethnic slurs and told them they did not belong in the United States.
Since then, several more attacks on Indian immigrants have been closely covered by the Indian news media. While the authorities have not linked all to anti-immigrant bigotry, the belief that Indians are under attack in America seems cemented in the minds of many.
About 3.2 million people of Indian descent live in the United States, slightly more than 1 percent of the population, a Pew Research Center report found.
Most hold green cards and H-1B visas, and are far more affluent and educated than the average American.
Indian-Americans play an outsize role in Silicon Valley, where some, including Google’s chief executive, Sundar Pichai, have founded or run some of the most successful companies.
But success stories like Mr. Pichai’s no longer inspire the jealousy they once did in India.
Ms. Arora, leaving H. R. College of Commerce and Economics, where she had finished an exam, said her parents had reservations about sending her brother to the United States, where he had been planning to enroll in college this year.
Ms. Arora said she, like her brother, “did aspire to work and study in America, but I’m reconsidering.”
The biggest reason, she said, was the violence directed against Indians.
“Every day, there’s a new headline about an Indian or Asian getting killed,” she said.
Now, Ms. Arora said, she and others in India are looking more favorably on Europe for study and work, despite the upheaval over Britain’s planned exit from the European Union. “Comparatively, it’s considered safer,” she said.
In the end, Mr. Trump’s policies may benefit their home country by cutting off the brain drain, Ms. Arora and other Indians said. “All the intelligent people are coming back and can work here,” she added.
As students of Mumbai’s colleges reviewed dog-eared question papers with friends on the sidewalk after finishing their exams, they returned again and again to astonishment that someone like Mr. Trump could be elected.
“I was like, ‘Wow, how did you elect somebody like him?’” said Shantanu Sivan, 20, who studies mass media at Wilson College. “I think I lost hope in the people of America.”
Ananya Gupta, 21, who studies financial management at K. C. College, laced his disappointment with contempt.
“That just shows where they stand intellectually, electing a person of Trump’s nature as a president,” he said.
When asked if he had an opinion on America under Mr. Trump, Mr. Gupta, standing across the street from his college, among other students at a beverage stand, replied, “Who doesn’t?”
“Of course as a child, I used to dream about going to America, the land of opportunity.” But today, he said, “I wouldn’t want to go there.”
Not everyone is so negative about America under Mr. Trump. Devanshu Jain, 21, said he still planned to study and work there.
“There’s racism in India, too,” he said. “Who doesn’t want to work for Goldman Sachs in New York City, right?”
But he said some friends were “so shaken up about what’s happening” that they have transferred from American universities to Canadian institutions in recent months.
At Mumbai’s Todi Mills, an old mill area converted in recent years into restaurants, bars and office space for young entrepreneurs, Mr. Trump’s America is also viewed with trepidation.
“People are really thinking America’s going downhill,” said Shikha Mittal, 33, founder of Be.artsy, a nine-person firm specializing in using art for marketing.
“It’s hard to take him seriously because the perception is so nonserious about him, that he’s not fit for the role he’s got,” Ms. Mittal said. “It’s affected how people think about America. What made people vote for him? What sort of people have voted for him?”
Around the corner, Abhishek Singh, 23, sat with a friend at a patio table of a pub, worrying about the effect of Mr. Trump on the world.
“The U.S. has been such a good country with such good policies,” said Mr. Singh, a brewer. “And this guy comes to power, and you don’t know what he might actually do.”
Mr. Singh, who dreams about owning a pub some day, said he was scared by Mr. Trump’s recent bombings in Syria and Afghanistan.
“He might start World War III,” Mr. Singh said. “He might kill us all.”
Still, some Indians seem willing to overlook what they find offensive about Mr. Trump if he is tough on Pakistan.
India has fought three wars with Pakistan, and many Indians think it is behind terrorist attacks in the country. Mr. Trump’s tough talk on terrorism has given these Indians hope.
“On one side, he’s absolutely a mad guy,” said Abhay Bhalerao, 50, the founder and managing director of a software company that provides price comparison data.
“But on other side, he seems to understand that Pakistan is the bad guy.”
Ayesha Venkataraman contributed reporting.
Correction: April 23, 2017, Sunday
This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of Google’s chief executive. He is Sundar Pichai, not Sunder.
PHOTOS: Workers at Amrut Software in Mumbai. Unnerved and angered by President Trump and an increase in anti-immigrant sentiment in the United States, fewer Indians are applying to American universities and seeking H-1B visas for skilled workers. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: NEGATIVE NEWS (91%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); HATE CRIME (90%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); VIOLENT CRIME (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (87%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (79%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EXECUTIVES (77%); TERRORISM (73%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (67%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (50%); Foreign Students (in US) (%); Indian-Americans (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Discrimination (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Industry: COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (87%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (79%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (90%); SUNDAR PICHAI (78%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (73%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (70%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (94%); MEXICO (79%)

Load-Date: April 26, 2017


End of Document
U.S. Curbs Visas, Putting Squeeze On Hiring Plans
The New York Times
September 3, 2018 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1697 words
Byline: By NELSON D. SCHWARTZ and STEVE LOHR
Body


The Trump administration is using the country's vast and nearly opaque immigration bureaucracy to constrict the flow of foreign workers into the United States by throwing up new roadblocks to limit legal arrivals.
The government is denying more work visas, asking applicants to provide additional information and delaying approvals more frequently than just a year earlier. Hospitals, hotels, technology companies and other businesses say they are now struggling to fill jobs with the foreign workers they need. 
  With foreign hires missing, the employees who remain are being forced to pick up the slack. Seasonal industries like hotels and landscaping are having to turn down customers or provide fewer services. Corporate executives worry about the long-term impact of losing talented engineers and programmers to countries like Canada that are laying out the welcome mat for skilled foreigners.
  At Northwell Health's pathology lab on Long Island, a new doctor's cubicle stands empty, her computer and microscope untouched. Other residents started on July 1, but she is stuck in India's Punjab State, held up by unexplained delays in her visa.
  ''There have been delays in processing that we have not felt before,'' said Dr. Andrew C. Yacht, chief academic officer at Northwell, which includes Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan and North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y.
  In April 2017, President Trump signed a ''Buy American and Hire American'' executive order, directing government officials to ''rigorously enforce'' immigration laws. The order did not get the kind of attention that followed the administration's decision to separate families at the Mexican border this summer.
  A few months later, the president endorsed legislation that would cut legal immigration by half. The bill was introduced by two Republican senators, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia. But Republican leaders in Congress have not advanced it.
  Some lawmakers say Mr. Trump is using administrative means to reshape immigration policy because those changes have stalled on Capitol Hill.
  ''If they want to have a proposal on immigration, they should send it to Congress,'' said Representative Ro Khanna, a Democrat whose district includes parts of Silicon Valley. ''The administration should engage in that conversation. To unilaterally and without any accountability change what Congress has authorized is not democratic.''
  In practice, businesses say the increased red tape has made it harder to secure employment-based visas. That has added to the difficulty of finding qualified workers with the unemployment rate falling to 3.9 percent.
  A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions for skilled foreign workers had increased 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the third quarter. Government requests for additional information for applications doubled in the fourth quarter, a few months after Mr. Trump issued his order.
  Experts say a sustained reduction in immigration could dampen growth over time as more baby boomers retire, leaving big gaps in the job market.
  That goes for high-skilled immigrants and low-skilled workers, said Francine D. Blau, an economist at Cornell. The latter will be vital in fields like elder care and child care, as well as construction and cleaning.
  ''A lot of our labor-force growth comes from immigrants and their children,'' Ms. Blau said. ''Without them, we'd suffer the problems associated with countries with an aging population, like Japan.''
  The Business Roundtable, a group of corporate leaders, recently challenged the Trump administration over changes that it says threaten the livelihoods of thousands of skilled foreign workers, and economic growth and competitiveness.
  In a statement, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services said the administration was ''relentlessly pursuing necessary immigration reforms that move toward a merit-based system.'' It added that all petitions and applications were handled ''fairly, efficiently, and effectively on a case-by-case basis.''
  The H-1B program, which was created to bring in foreigners with skills that business leaders argued would strengthen the economy, has long been a target for some politicians. The visa program has been criticized because corporations have exploited it to replace American workers.
  Still, many economists say H-1B holders are valuable. Immigrants file patents at twice the rate of native-born Americans and start about 25 percent of high-tech companies in the United States.
  ''There's absolutely no research that supports the idea that cutting legal immigration is good for the economy,'' said Ethan Lewis, a Dartmouth economist.
  Hospitals in particular argue that they need foreign doctors who are more willing than native-born Americans to take jobs in less glamorous and lower-paying fields, like internal and family medicine. Of Northwell's 1,826 resident doctors, 165 came in under H1-B or J-1 student visas.
  Nearly one-third of pathology residents come from other countries, according to the National Resident Matching Program. But the number of overseas applicants in all specialties has dropped for two years in a row.
  ''The administration's policies are having a chilling effect on the interest of international medical graduates coming to the United States to train,'' said Mona M. Signer, chief executive of the matching program.
  The missing Indian pathologist's workload at Northwell has been spread among 11 residents, lengthening the time they are on call.
  ''Our nation's ability to care for patients is dependent on international medical graduates,'' Dr. Yacht said.
  The effect of lower-skilled immigrants is more debatable. George J. Borjas, a Harvard economist, has found that an influx of such workers reduced the incomes of people without a high school degree between 3 and 5 percent.
  Giovanni Peri, an economist at the University of California, Davis, agrees that individual workers can be hurt by competition from lower-paid foreigners. But he said the overall effect on wages was modest. Immigration also tends to bolster the incomes of college-educated Americans.
  Mr. Peri points to what happened when the government deported between 400,000 and 500,000 Mexicans between 1929 and 1934, most of whom worked in agriculture and construction. With fewer people to work the fields, farm owners and agricultural businesses cut administrative, sales and clerical jobs because there was not enough to do.
  ''Out of eight or 10 positions held by Mexicans, maybe one or two were taken by Americans,'' Mr. Peri said. ''The rest disappeared.''
  Rob Hurst is not concerned with the macroeconomics of immigration. He is just struggling to keep bathrooms clean.
  This summer, he has found himself on his hands and knees scrubbing toilets and tubs at Edgartown Commons, a hotel he manages on Martha's Vineyard in Massachusetts. Five Jamaican workers who had long worked at the property failed to get H2-B seasonal-work visas.
  ''I'm 65 years old, but you got to do what you got to do,'' he said. ''We did hire contract workers, but it's never going to be as good as people with years of experience.''
  In the past, returning H2-B visa workers were not counted against the program's annual cap of 66,000. Congress declined to renew that exemption in December 2016.
  Foreign workers are also growing frustrated about the clampdown on visas and rising anti-immigrant sentiment.
  Uday Verma is leaving after 12 years in Iowa, time he spent earning a graduate degree in computer science and working for a technology company.
  Mr. Verma, 37, who emigrated from India, has repeatedly renewed his H-1B visa while waiting fruitlessly for permanent resident status -- also known as a green card. Had he been successful, he could have easily switched employers or started his own business.
  ''I can't make a plan here,'' Mr. Verma said. ''You're perpetually in this state of limbo. It just doesn't make sense anymore to stay here and keep pursuing this American dream.''
  Mr. Verma, his wife and their 9-year-old son plan to be living in Toronto by the time their American visas expire in the second week of September.
  He is taking advantage of the Global Talent Stream initiative the Canadian government started last year. It lets companies in innovative fields, like artificial intelligence, quickly secure visas for workers with vital skills.
  With experience with A.I. programming tools, Mr. Verma got a visa in two weeks, and could become a permanent resident in six months or so.
  His employer, Kira Systems, makes software that reads and analyzes legal contracts. The company has more than doubled its employment in the past year, to 115 people. Noah Waisberg, a co-founder and the chief executive, said half of Kira's technical staff was from China, India, Russia and other countries.
  Canada has long welcomed immigrants. ''But that is even more so relative to the United States, given the climate in America now,'' Mr. Waisberg said. ''It's certainly helped us recruit.''
  Mr. Trump's ''hire American'' push is helping some domestic businesses. One of those is Nexient, which provides software services and competes with firms in India and elsewhere. Fearful of becoming too dependent on offshore firms, corporate customers are increasingly interested in having domestic partners, said Mark Orttung, Nexient's chief executive.
  ''You still have to win the business, but it has been an accelerator for us,'' he said.
  Nexient is based in Newark, Calif., but its programmers are mainly in Michigan and Indiana. The start-up employs more than 500 people, up from 400 last year.
  About 10 percent of Nexient's employees have H-1B visas, typically engineers who have mastered old software systems and other niche technologies in corporate data centers.
  Those foreign workers are fielding more government requests for information and waiting longer for visa renewals, Mr. Orttung said. ''It adds a great deal of uncertainty to the lives of some of our employees.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/02/business/trump-legal-immigration-h1b-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Uday Verma and his wife, Anamika Chandel, grew tired of waiting for a green card and are leaving Iowa City for a job in Toronto. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHRYN GAMBLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: RECRUITMENT & HIRING (91%); EXECUTIVES (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (77%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (73%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (70%); LEGISLATION (69%); PETITIONS (65%)

Industry: ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTERS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); HOTELS & MOTELS (71%); MEDICAL & DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES (71%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (89%); RO KHANNA (79%); TOM COTTON (74%); DAVID A PERDUE (50%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (77%); PUNJAB, INDIA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (79%); MEXICO (79%)

Load-Date: September 3, 2018


End of Document
Facebook to Pay $14 Million Over Claims of Hiring Bias
The New York Times
October 20, 2021 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 944 words
Byline: By David McCabe
Body


The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to ''recruit, consider or hire'' qualified United States workers for more than 2,000 positions.
WASHINGTON -- Facebook agreed on Tuesday to pay up to $14.25 million to settle claims brought by the federal government in the waning days of the Trump administration that the company had discriminated against United States workers. 
  The Justice Department sued the company in December, arguing that Facebook had declined to ''recruit, consider or hire'' qualified United States workers for thousands of positions. Instead, prosecutors said, the company gave those jobs to foreign workers who held temporary work visas.
  The agreement with the Justice Department included payments of $4.75 million to the government and as much as $9.5 million to ''eligible victims of Facebook's alleged discrimination,'' according to a news release. The combined settlement is the largest ever collected by the agency's civil rights division for violations of the anti-discrimination provision in the Immigration and Nationality Act. The company also separately settled concerns raised by the Labor Department this year over whether it had violated labor regulations.
  The claims were part of an effort by the Trump administration to push the country's biggest tech companies to hire more United States workers. The administration tightened the requirements to receive a so-called H-1B visa, which are popular with technology companies hiring foreigners, including increasing the salaries companies needed to pay workers as part of the program.
  The government investigated Facebook for two years, looking into whether the company intentionally favored workers with H-1B visas and other temporary immigrants over U.S. workers. Prosecutors ultimately claimed that the company had failed to make more than 2,600 jobs -- with an average salary of $156,000 -- as readily available to Americans and other United States workers as to foreigners.
  ''Facebook is not above the law and must comply with our nation's federal civil rights laws, which prohibit discriminatory recruitment and hiring practices,'' said Kristen Clarke, an assistant attorney general in the Justice Department's civil rights division.
  A Facebook spokesman, Andy Stone, said that the company believed it had met the government standards but that the settlements would allow the company to move forward.
  ''These resolutions will enable us to continue our focus on hiring the best builders from both the U.S. and around the world and supporting our internal community of highly skilled visa holders who are seeking permanent residence,'' he said in a statement.
  Under the agreement with the Justice Department, Facebook will have to better advertise for some jobs and make it easier for United States workers to apply. The separate settlement with the Labor Department requires the company to do more to recruit United States workers and to submit to audits.
  The monetary value of the settlement is negligible for Facebook. It paid a fine of roughly $5 billion in 2019 to resolve accusations by the Federal Trade Commission that it had abused consumer data. In the second quarter of 2021, it generated $29 billion in revenue. The jobs in question amounted to only a fraction of Facebook's roughly 63,000 employees.
  But the agreements the company reached Tuesday with the federal government show how the social media giant is facing battles with Washington regulators on multiple fronts.
  The F.T.C. has accused the company of breaking antitrust laws when it acquired WhatsApp and Instagram, two services the government believes could have become bigger threats to Facebook if they had not been purchased. In recent weeks, lawmakers have called for more rules to protect children who use Facebook products after a former employee of the company claimed it knew that its product harmed teenagers.
  Lawmakers in Washington have long focused on how tech companies use visa programs -- particularly the H-1B system -- to hire engineers from abroad. The companies and their allies have pushed Congress to expand access to the visas, arguing they help companies bring the most talented engineers to the United States. But critics say the companies prefer those engineers to United States workers because they command lower salaries.
  Former President Donald J. Trump's administration put the program under a microscope for years. In 2017, Mr. Trump announced he would revamp the program.
  Three years later the administration temporarily blocked new visas under the H-1B program. It also raised the qualifications needed for foreign workers to access the program, saying they needed a more specialized degree than was previously needed. The administration also said companies would have to pay the workers a higher minimum salary.
  A federal judge ruled against the ban on the visa program in October 2020, forestalling its impact for business groups that had sued over the change, including a major technology trade association. The Biden administration allowed a Trump-era ban on multiple visa programs to expire in March.
  Facebook's founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, has adopted immigration reform as a cause. He helped to found a group called FWD.us in 2013 that has pushed for changes to the immigration system. And he personally entered the debate over immigration as Mr. Trump began his crackdown on foreigners entering the United States.
  ''We are a nation of immigrants, and we all benefit when the best and brightest from around the world can live, work and contribute here,'' Mr. Zuckerberg said in January 2017.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/19/technology/facebook-foreign-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Facebook's chief, Mark Zuckerberg. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LENNIHAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (B6)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: DISCRIMINATION (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS & CIVIL LIBERTIES LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); BUSINESS TORTS (78%); LABOR REGULATION & POLICY (78%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WAGE & HOUR LAWS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); AGREEMENTS (76%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (74%); AVERAGE EARNINGS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (73%); WAGE GROWTH (73%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (72%); IMMIGRATION LAW (72%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (90%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION (55%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (90%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); PUBLIC PROSECUTORS (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); BIG TECH (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: October 20, 2021


End of Document
Plan Aimed at Drawing Immigrants With Technology Skills
The New York Times
May 7, 2014 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 719 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The Obama administration, looking to make adjustments to the nation's immigration system while broader legislation is stalled in Congress, announced plans on Tuesday to allow the spouses of some highly skilled temporary immigrants to work in the United States.
The proposed rule changes were announced with fanfare by Alejandro Mayorkas, the deputy secretary of homeland security, and Commerce Secretary Penny Pritzker, who said they would help the country attract and retain immigrants with skills in technology and science, and ''unleash more of the extraordinary contributions that immigrants have always made to America's innovation economy.''
The proposals address visa rules that have long caused difficulties for the spouses of skilled immigrants, mainly from China, India and the Philippines, who are working here on temporary visas known as H-1B. The spouses, mainly wives, often have skills and education, too, but are not authorized to work in the United States, causing their careers to languish.
High-tech employers welcomed the plans. Fred Humphries, a vice president at Microsoft, one of the biggest users of H-1B visas, said they would have ''a positive economic impact.''
The proposals will be subject to a 60-day period of public comment that could lead to changes. Homeland Security officials said they hoped to issue final regulations by the end of the year.
The announcement drew criticism from several sides in the immigration debate. Some immigration lawyers and immigrant advocates said the proposals were too narrow. Republicans on Capitol Hill said the opposite, that they were a new example of executive overreach by President Obama.
H-1B workers number in the hundreds of thousands at any given time. The new rules would grant work authorization only to spouses of H-1B visa holders who had taken the first steps to apply for permanent-resident green cards.
Immigrants can work in the United States on H-1B visas for six years. While they have those visas, employers may apply for them to receive employment-based green cards.
The proposed rule changes acknowledge the huge backlogs that have developed for those green cards. The current wait for most immigrants from India is at least 11 years. Filipinos wait as long as seven years and people from China up to six years. The immigrants can remain in the country while they wait, and with the changes, their spouses would be able to work during that waiting period as well.
Mr. Mayorkas said the changes would benefit as many as 97,000 immigrants in the first year and about 30,000 a year after that.
Representative Judy Chu, a Democrat who represents a California district with many immigrant communities, praised the proposals as a good ''first step'' that would protect immigrant families.
''Denying spouses the right to work is an ill-conceived policy that has gone on for too long,'' Ms. Chu said.
But Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, accused the Obama administration of a ''lack of compassion and understanding'' for American workers who have lost jobs because ''companies prefer to hire lower-paid workers from abroad.''
Mr. Grassley also questioned whether the president had the legal authority to change the rules. ''Where will this administration stop?'' he asked. ''What other categories of individuals will be granted work authorizations?''
A broad immigration bill that passed the Senate last year included major changes to the H-1B program, including a provision that would allow the spouses of all H-1B visa holders to work. The House has not taken up that bill, and it remains unclear if it will move on any major immigration measures this year.
Many immigration lawyers were frustrated that the administration's proposal would not grant work permits to all H-1B spouses.
''It is a rather miserly grant,'' said Angelo Paparelli, a lawyer at Seyfarth Shaw in California. ''Other countries are clamoring to get the best and the brightest. Why are we not doing more?''
Australia and Canada are among the countries in the global competition for highly trained workers in science, technology and engineering that have more generous policies for the families of those immigrants.
Demand for H-1B visas has remained strong. This year, the annual limit of 85,000 visas was reached within one week after the application period opened.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/07/us/politics/us-plan-aims-to-draw-immigrants-with-technology-skills.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US CONGRESS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (77%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (76%); ECONOMICS (76%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (55%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%)

Ticker: MSFT (NASDAQ) (55%)

Industry: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (55%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Person: ALEJANDRO MAYORKAS (79%); JUDY CHU (73%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); PENNY PRITZKER (58%)

Geographic: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (92%); INDIA (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%)

Load-Date: May 9, 2014


End of Document
For Indians, America Under Trump Is a Land of Vanished Opportunity
The New York Times
April 24, 2017 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 1157 words
Byline: By GEETA ANAND; Ayesha Venkataraman contributed reporting.
Body


MUMBAI, India -- Generations of Indians have admired the United States for almost everything. But many are infuriated and unnerved by what they see as a wave of racist violence under President Trump, souring America's allure.
The reaction is not just anger and anxiety. Now, young Indians who have aspired to study, live and work in the United States are looking elsewhere. 
  ''We don't know what might happen to us while walking on the street there,'' said Kanika Arora, a 20-year-old student in Mumbai who is reconsidering her plan to study in the United States. ''They might just think that we're terrorists.''
  Recent attacks on people of Indian descent in the United States are explosive news in India. A country once viewed as the promised land now seems for many to be dangerously inhospitable.
  Further alienating Indians, especially among their highly educated class, is the Trump administration's reassessment of H-1B visas given mostly for information technology jobs. More than 85,000 are granted a year, the majority to Indians.
  ''America was the land of great opportunity,'' Sanket Bafna, 21, said as he emerged one afternoon last week from an exam at K. C. College, where he is studying financial management. ''It's not the same land.''
  This year, undergraduate applications from India fell at 26 percent of United States educational institutions, and 15 percent of graduate programs, according to a survey of 250 American universities by the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers.
  The number of applications for H-1B visas also fell to 199,000, a nearly 20 percent decline, according to data kept by United States Citizenship and Immigration Services.
  Like many others, Indians were offended by Mr. Trump's promises to block the Mexico border with a wall and bar people from six predominantly Muslim countries. Some took solace that India was not targeted.
  But they soon saw that anti-immigrant rage in America did not discriminate.
  In February, two Indian immigrants were shot, one fatally, at a bar in Kansas by a man who witnesses said had shouted ethnic slurs and told them they did not belong in the United States.
  Since then, several more attacks on Indian immigrants have been closely covered by the Indian news media. While the authorities have not linked all to anti-immigrant bigotry, the belief that Indians are under attack in America seems cemented in the minds of many.
  About 3.2 million people of Indian descent live in the United States, slightly more than 1 percent of the population, a Pew Research Center report found.
  Most hold green cards and H-1B visas, and are far more affluent and educated than the average American.
  Indian-Americans play an outsize role in Silicon Valley, where some, including Google's chief executive, Sundar Pichai, have founded or run some of the most successful companies.
  But success stories like Mr. Pichai's no longer inspire the jealousy they once did in India.
  Ms. Arora, leaving H. R. College of Commerce and Economics, where she had finished an exam, said her parents had reservations about sending her brother to the United States, where he had been planning to enroll in college this year.
  Ms. Arora said she, like her brother, ''did aspire to work and study in America, but I'm reconsidering.''
  The biggest reason, she said, was the violence directed against Indians.
  ''Every day, there's a new headline about an Indian or Asian getting killed,'' she said.
  Now, Ms. Arora said, she and others in India are looking more favorably on Europe for study and work, despite the upheaval over Britain's planned exit from the European Union. ''Comparatively, it's considered safer,'' she said.
  In the end, Mr. Trump's policies may benefit their home country by cutting off the brain drain, Ms. Arora and other Indians said. ''All the intelligent people are coming back and can work here,'' she added.
  As students of Mumbai's colleges reviewed dog-eared question papers with friends on the sidewalk after finishing their exams, they returned again and again to astonishment that someone like Mr. Trump could be elected.
  ''I was like, 'Wow, how did you elect somebody like him?''' said Shantanu Sivan, 20, who studies mass media at Wilson College. ''I think I lost hope in the people of America.''
  Ananya Gupta, 21, who studies financial management at K. C. College, laced his disappointment with contempt.
  ''That just shows where they stand intellectually, electing a person of Trump's nature as a president,'' he said.
  When asked if he had an opinion on America under Mr. Trump, Mr. Gupta, standing across the street from his college, among other students at a beverage stand, replied, ''Who doesn't?''
  ''Of course as a child, I used to dream about going to America, the land of opportunity.'' But today, he said, ''I wouldn't want to go there.''
  Not everyone is so negative about America under Mr. Trump. Devanshu Jain, 21, said he still planned to study and work there.
  ''There's racism in India, too,'' he said. ''Who doesn't want to work for Goldman Sachs in New York City, right?''
  But he said some friends were ''so shaken up about what's happening'' that they have transferred from American universities to Canadian institutions in recent months.
  At Mumbai's Todi Mills, an old mill area converted in recent years into restaurants, bars and office space for young entrepreneurs, Mr. Trump's America is also viewed with trepidation.
  ''People are really thinking America's going downhill,'' said Shikha Mittal, 33, founder of Be.artsy, a nine-person firm specializing in using art for marketing.
  ''It's hard to take him seriously because the perception is so nonserious about him, that he's not fit for the role he's got,'' Ms. Mittal said. ''It's affected how people think about America. What made people vote for him? What sort of people have voted for him?''
  Around the corner, Abhishek Singh, 23, sat with a friend at a patio table of a pub, worrying about the effect of Mr. Trump on the world.
  ''The U.S. has been such a good country with such good policies,'' said Mr. Singh, a brewer. ''And this guy comes to power, and you don't know what he might actually do.''
  Mr. Singh, who dreams about owning a pub some day, said he was scared by Mr. Trump's recent bombings in Syria and Afghanistan.
  ''He might start World War III,'' Mr. Singh said. ''He might kill us all.''
  Still, some Indians seem willing to overlook what they find offensive about Mr. Trump if he is tough on Pakistan.
  India has fought three wars with Pakistan, and many Indians think it is behind terrorist attacks in the country. Mr. Trump's tough talk on terrorism has given these Indians hope.
  ''On one side, he's absolutely a mad guy,'' said Abhay Bhalerao, 50, the founder and managing director of a software company that provides price comparison data.
  ''But on other side, he seems to understand that Pakistan is the bad guy.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/23/world/asia/india-trump-america.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Workers at Amrut Software in Mumbai. Unnerved and angered by President Trump and an increase in anti-immigrant sentiment in the United States, fewer Indians are applying to American universities and seeking H-1B visas for skilled workers. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ATUL LOKE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: NEGATIVE NEWS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); VIOLENT CRIME (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (87%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (87%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); HATE CRIME (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (77%); CITIZENSHIP (74%); TERRORISM (72%); TERRORISM & COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (67%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (50%)

Industry: EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY ADMISSIONS (87%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (87%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%)

Geographic: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (74%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (70%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (94%); MEXICO (79%)

Load-Date: April 24, 2017


End of Document
One Face of Immigration in America Is a Family Tree Rooted in Asia
The New York Times 
September 16, 2018 Sunday 16:24 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1885 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan and Sabrina Tavernise
Highlight: More of the United States population is foreign-born now than at any time since 1910. Many immigrants came through family reunification policies that the Trump administration hopes to scale back.
Body


LAS VEGAS — The young engineer arrived in America when he was 23 with a good education and little else. He landed a job at a nuclear test site, and built a home in Nevada. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, he brought his wife, mother, five sisters and a brother over from India, his native land.
In later years, his siblings sponsored family members of their own, and their clan now stretches from Nevada to Florida, New Jersey to Texas — more than 90 Americans nurtured on the strength of one ambitious engineer, Jagdish Patel, 72.
In late June, four generations of Patels assembled for a reunion in Las Vegas, a gathering that included a venture capitalist, a network engineer, physicians, dentists and students.
“I am so glad that I came to America,” Mr. Patel said recently, sitting in the custom-designed house he built in Las Vegas, complete with a home theater where he hosts Super Bowl parties and a marble-lined Hindu temple room. “I brought everyone here,” he said, “and we have provided valuable service to this country.”
The share of the United States population that is foreign-born has reached its highest level since 1910, according to government data released last week. But in recent years, the numbers have been soaring not so much with Latin Americans sweeping across the border, but with educated people from Asia obtaining visas — families like the Patels, who have taken advantage of “family reunification” provisions that have been a cornerstone of federal immigration law for half a century.
Since the Patels began flocking to America in the 1970s, millions of other Indians have arrived to work as programmers and engineers in Silicon Valley, doctors in underserved rural areas and researchers at universities. The majority were sponsored by relatives who came before them. Others arrived on work visas and were later sponsored for legal residency, or green cards, by their employers.
The Trump administration has framed immigration as a threat to the nation’s security and to American workers, a drastic departure from the longtime consensus that immigration was a net positive for the country. The president’s public priorities have often focused on fortifying the southwest border, but his administration is also working to scale back decades of legal migration that have led to Asians, not Latin Americans, becoming the largest group of new foreign-born residents since 2010.
Already, the administration has quietly begun taking steps to cut back legal immigration, under the banner of “Buy American and Hire American,” which the president framed in an executive order last year. Some experts predict that the number of immigrants granted permanent legal residency in the 2018 fiscal year, which ends on Sept. 30, will show a rare decline.
Without passing new legislation, the administration has pursued a number of policies that are slowing legal immigration. It has reduced refugee admissions; narrowed who is eligible for asylum; made it more difficult to qualify for permanent residency or citizenship; and tightened scrutiny of applicants for high-skilled worker visas, known as H-1Bs.
A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had jumped by 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the previous quarter. Government requests for additional information on applications doubled in the same period.
Green-card applicants sponsored by an employer now must undergo in-person interviews, a step that previously was taken only in cases that raised concerns.
The Trump administration is pushing policies supposedly intended to favor immigrants who have valuable skills at a time when newcomers already are, on average, at their most educated. Nearly half of all foreign-born people who have arrived since 2010 have college degrees, compared with about 30 percent of native-born residents.
“We are having this debate about getting our system to be merit-based, but it really in effect already is one,” said David Bier, an immigration policy analyst at the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C. “The least-known fact about legal immigration to the U.S. is that it’s much more educated than the general U.S. population.”
Of the 1.1 million green cards granted in 2017, about two-thirds went to people sponsored by relatives, compared to just 12 percent who were sponsored through employment.
Immigration has taken center stage in many Republican election campaigns this year. Representative Ron DeSantis, the party’s candidate for governor of Florida, released a video in which he tells his daughter to “build the wall” as she plays with blocks. Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor of Georgia, ran an ad saying he would “round up criminal illegals” in his pickup truck.
“The big story here is just the massive misperception about the nature of immigration in the U.S.,” said Edward Alden, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who specializes in immigration policy. “The lion’s share of public attention is focused on what is now a very small number of people coming here illegally and showing up at the border seeking asylum.
“The reality is that a growing percentage of immigrants coming to the U.S. are highly educated, and are exactly the sort of people we want to be attracting.”
Supporters of Mr. Trump’s position say that this trend is an incidental result of a policy that does not guarantee such an outcome.
“We need to construct a system that discourages endless chains of relatives coming in,” said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which supports curbs on immigration. “We have an immigration system that rewards people who have relatives in the United States, rather than people who have skills and education.”
Michael Bars, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency which is focusing most of the new scrutiny on legal immigration, said the government’s aim is not to close the borders but to protect against fraud, human trafficking and gang activity, “defending our system from those seeking to exploit it at the expense of U.S. workers, lawful-abiding applicants and petitioners.”
There are still an estimated 11 million people in the country illegally, and that represents a major political issue.
“Eleven million people is not a small number,” said Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer at the Pew Research Center “But it is certainly the case that unauthorized immigration from Mexico is getting a lot more attention than the numbers seem to warrant.” Mr. Passel said fewer Mexicans were caught at the border in fiscal 2017, which ended on Sept. 30, than in any year since the late 1960s.
Under the Trump administration’s plan, the number of family-based green cards issued would be reduced from the 804,793 granted in 2016 to about 487,000 a year, according to an analysis by Julia Gelatt and Sarah Pierce of the Migration Policy Institute — a 40 percent reduction in family-tied green cards and a 27 percent reduction overall.
“Trump is the first of any modern president to advocate for reducing legal immigration,” Ms. Pierce said.
Currently, American citizens like Mr. Patel can sponsor minor children, unmarried and married adult children, and spouses, parents and brothers and sisters. Green-card holders are limited to sponsoring minor children and unmarried adult children.
Under the new proposal, Americans would lose the right to petition for their parents, adult or married children, or siblings; they could sponsor only spouses and minor children. Green-card holders would be limited further, to sponsoring minor children only, not adult children.
The current system dates to 1965, when Congress passed the Immigration and Nationality Act, which wiped away the old system of country quotas established in the 1920s that many considered racist. The idea was to treat people from all countries equally, and the law’s central pillar was to give American citizens the ability to invite family members who were still abroad. It also allowed for some immigration based on skills.
Some experts argue that the real implications of the 1965 law are only now dawning on the wider population, as the face of the country changes — and that realization is what has been driving much of the emotion in politics.
“The 1965 act really changed the look and feel of the country in a fundamental way, but it took 50 years for the country to come to terms with that,” said Muzaffar Chishti, director of the New York office of the Migration Policy Institute.
Madeline Hsu, a professor of Asian-American studies at the University of Austin, Texas, said there were only about 12,000 Indian immigrants in the United States in 1960. The foreign-born Indian population last year stood at about 2.6 million, according to the Brookings Institution, and it had risen by almost half since 2010.
The 1965 law opened up the United States to people from India like Jagdish Patel.
He recalls that at his engineering college back in the Indian state of Gujarat, “when America started to allow people from different countries to come, we all decided to get ready to go.”
Mr. Patel immigrated in 1968 and enrolled at Youngstown State University in Ohio, where he earned a master’s degree in structural engineering. He returned in 1971 to marry, and because he had a green card, he was able to sponsor his wife, Amita.
In 1977, he became a United States citizen, and sponsored his brother Jay and Jay’s wife for green cards. By 1985, he had also sponsored his mother, five sisters and their husbands and children, most of whom settled in the New York-New Jersey area.
And he had American-born children of his own. His son, Satya, is now a venture capitalist in San Francisco, after working as an executive at Google and at Twitter; his daughter, Sita Montgomery, is an interior designer in Salt Lake City with 140,000 followers on Instagram.
Now retired, Mr. Patel savors time to play golf and to travel — so far, he has visited 50 countries. He devoted a year to planning the Patel reunion in June.
The eldest Patel to attend the event, which included bowling, banquet dinners and a talent show, was 88; the youngest was nine months old. Mr. Patel gave each attendee a royal-blue booklet, its cover emblazoned with a crown and the words “Royal Patel Family Reunion.” Its pages depict the sprawling Patel family tree, starting in India.
“In America, you can still succeed as an immigrant, irrespective of skin color, religion or country of origin,” said Mr. Patel, who likes to point out that President Trump’s wife, Melania, sponsored her parents to come to the country she has adopted.
“All this Twitter and campaign stuff is mostly just talk,” he said. “Trump knows in his mind that immigration works. Family reunification will stay.”
PHOTO: Jagdish Patel at his home in Las Vegas. He moved to the United States in 1968, when he was 23, and later sponsored family members to join him. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Roger Kisby for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • Melania Trump’s Parents Become U.S. Citizens, Using ‘Chain Migration’ Trump Hates
    • What Is ‘Chain Migration’? Here’s the Controversy Behind It
    • Thousands of Indian Women Find Their American Dreams in Jeopardy
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); FAMILY (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); IMMIGRATION LAW (79%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (79%); REFUGEES (79%); RURAL EMPLOYMENT (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); LEGISLATION (76%); MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS (74%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (69%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (60%); VENTURE CAPITAL (54%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (50%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Pew Research Center (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Visas (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Indian-Americans (%); Foreign Workers (%); Census (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Migration Policy Institute (%); India (%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS (74%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (69%); VENTURE CAPITAL (54%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (57%)

Geographic: LAS VEGAS, NV, USA (93%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (71%); NEVADA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (96%); ASIA (92%); INDIA (92%); LATIN AMERICA (90%)

Load-Date: November 2, 2018


End of Document
How to Reverse the Demographic Decline
The New York Times
November 7, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section TW; Column 0; SpecialSections; Pg. 12; GUEST ESSAY
Length: 1526 words
Byline: By Shikha Dalmia
Body


Over the past century, two moments that transformed America and positioned it as the global economic leader were the post-World War II economic boom and the I.T. revolution of the 1990s. In both cases, America tore down many forms of discrimination and other barriers to harness the talents of marginalized groups in the country and to welcome new ones, injecting demographic vitality into the economy. 
  To continue America's upward trajectory in the 21st century, the country must reverse its current demographic decline. As the Census Bureau reported last week, in the past decade, the U.S. population grew at the second-slowest rate since the government started counting in 1790 -- and the slowest since the 1930s.
  The most expeditious way out might be if the federal government gave up its monopoly on immigration and allowed states to bring in workers from anywhere in the world, based on their own labor needs, without being held to federal quotas. The growing concern is that the United States is facing a population bust. The U.S. fertility rate, which had bucked Europe's low-fertility trend during the past century, is now around 1.73 children per woman -- roughly on par with that of Denmark and Britain.
  Declining population growth because of lower fertility rates by definition means that the ratio of young to old declines -- which is not a formula for a dynamic economy or a competitive country. The risk-taking and experimentation of young workers make them the engine of capitalism. They are also more mobile: They can move to places where they will be most productive.
  That is what America had in abundance after World War II. The Nobel prize-winning economist Vernon Smith notes that the prewar American labor force was quite immobile. But the returning 16 million World War II veterans, having traveled to foreign lands, weren't daunted by moving within their own country for jobs.
  The domestic shortage of men during the war also broke down barriers that had kept teenagers, women and Black Americans out of the labor force.
  Young men like Mr. Smith (who worked at a Boeing factory in Wichita, Kan., from age 16 to 18) entered the work force and gained valuable skills and experience in the postwar economy. At the same time, weakening social norms against working women, even married ones, increased female labor participation by 50 percent between 1940 and 1945. The shortage of men also opened opportunities for Black workers, helping to trigger the second Great Migration from the South.
  Some of these barriers shot up again after the war to accommodate the returning veterans. Still, there were gains: After the World War II generation, the baby boom generation, together with its progeny, kept the American work force humming until the 1980s.
  The seeds of the 1990s I.T. revolution were planted in the 1960s. That era of civil rights activism dismantled at least many formal barriers preventing robust Black participation in the economy. And it eliminated the 1924 Johnson-Reed Act, which had blocked foreign talent. This law had not only cut immigration rates overall but imposed national-origin quotas expressly designed to maintain America's Western European ethnic makeup by discouraging immigration from Eastern Europe and Asia. Its end in 1965 resulted in 58.5 million new immigrants over the next 50 years, about 25 percent Asian. Many were high-tech professionals from China and India.
  Their innovations and entrepreneurship helped power the I.T. revolution that transformed the world. According to a study by the nonpartisan National Foundation for American Policy, more than half of the 91 start-ups that became $1 billion companies had one or more immigrant founders. Likewise, the Partnership for a New American Economy found that immigrants or their children had founded more than 40 percent of the 2010 Fortune 500 companies.
  So what's the cure for America's dwindling demographic vitality?
  A new baby boom generation would be enormously difficult to produce in a world with easy birth control. On average, women say they want 2.5 children. But returning America to just a 2.1 replacement level through cash incentives would be ''prohibitively costly,'' as Lyman Stone of the American Enterprise Institute concluded after examining how these policies fared in European and other countries.
  Instead, America might borrow a page from Canada. Its immigration policy is expressly meant to offset its aging population and low birthrates. Canada's immigration intake is 0.9 percent of its population -- or three times America's per capita rate.
  It has admitted immigrants in an ingenious way. In 1998, Canada initiated its Provincial Nominee Program, which gives most provinces a quota, based on their population, of immigrants to sponsor as they see fit (in addition to the immigrants the federal government in Ottawa admits). A province sets criteria based on its needs for workers, and it can sponsor immigrants from anywhere in the world for permanent residency, provided they pass a basic background and health check. (The federal government has the final say.)
  The average processing time for this program is about 18 months. In the United States, by contrast, many low-skilled immigrants on work visas have no pathway to green cards, and highly skilled immigrants on H-1B visas wait years -- and in the case of Indian and Chinese nationals, up to half a century.
  Although, in principle immigrants, sponsored by a Canadian province are free to relocate to another province anytime, in practice the five-year retention rate for many provinces is upwards of 80 percent, according to a 2017 assessment by the Canadian government. That's because the granular matching between skills and the local labor market ensures employment, which removes the main reason that immigrants leave. The program started small, but from 2021 to 2023, about 30 percent of Canada's total immigrant admissions are expected to be through it.
  America should begin its own version of this program but take it one step further and let states set their own limits on foreign workers. This would get federal bureaucrats out of the business of centrally planning the labor market for the whole country. States that understand their own labor markets would do a much better job of finding suitable workers for their businesses.
  The states wouldn't have to hew to the federal high-skilled and low-skilled distinction for visas. Right now, both high-tech and low-tech states are suffering from a tight labor market. States that don't want or need immigrant workers could opt out of the program. Foreign workers would be free to travel anywhere in the country, but they would be limited to jobs in participating states until they are naturalized. This would be an improvement over the existing system for them, since work visas currently tether them to a single employer, unless they find a new employer to undertake the onerous process of sponsoring them. It would also reassure states that they would have a measure of control over the level of in-migration from other states, at least for some time.
  States wouldn't be required to participate, but they would face an inherent incentive to do so because businesses are far more likely to prefer locations where there are suitably skilled, motivated workers. Such a program would render the current broken and dysfunctional federal immigration system beside the point. (Constitutionally, immigration is a federal function, but nothing prevents Washington from voluntarily giving states more latitude to make their own decisions about foreign workers. Other aspects of immigration policy can remain in federal hands.)
  Fiscally costly schemes won't be necessary to attract immigrants. These workers are highly motivated to build their lives in America and will happily pay fees for state sponsorship. They often come to America during their peak productive years after another society has usually borne the cost of raising them, which bestows a one-time fiscal windfall on America. Also, given that immigrant fertility rates may not typically drop to native levels for a generation or two, foreign workers would stabilize the population for longer than would a short-term family-policy approach.
  Another benefit of federalizing immigration would be that the restored demographic health and improved economic performance of participating states would make it easier for U.S. citizens to see immigrants as assets and saviors rather than liabilities and threats. America would then have a material -- not just an idealistic -- interest in redoubling its commitment to its core value of pluralism and tolerance.
  Shikha Dalmia (@shikhadalmia) is a visiting fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University studying the rise of populist authoritarianism and a columnist at The Week.
  The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We'd like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here's our email: letters@nytimes.com
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/18/opinion/us-canada-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY O.O.P.S. FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: BUSINESS NEWS (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (90%); FERTILITY RATES (90%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (90%); POPULATION GROWTH (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); LABOR FORCE (89%); WORLD WAR II (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); BABY BOOMERS (78%); CENSUS (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (78%); NOBEL PRIZES (78%); POPULATION DECLINE (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); TRENDS (78%); VETERANS (78%); WOMEN (78%); DISCRIMINATION (77%); WOMEN WORKERS (77%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (75%); GOVERNMENT STATISTICS AGENCIES (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (74%); ECONOMICS (73%); FERTILITY & INFERTILITY (72%); ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (70%); IMMIGRATION (68%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (68%); AWARDS & PRIZES (67%)

Company:  BOEING CO (52%)

Organization: US CENSUS BUREAU (57%)

Ticker: BOE (LSE) (52%); BA (NYSE) (52%)

Industry: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (52%); NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (52%); NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (52%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (52%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (50%)

Geographic: WICHITA, KS, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); DENMARK (79%); EUROPE (79%)

Load-Date: November 7, 2021


End of Document
Owning a Piece of America
The New York Times
October 2, 2014 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1253 words
Byline: By DIONNE SEARCEY
Body


Arun Kumar owns three apartments in New Delhi, where he has carved out a comfortable life as part of India's rapidly expanding middle class. Not long ago, he also became a global landlord, picking up an inexpensive three-bedroom house and a duplex nearly 8,000 miles away, in St. Louis.
For Mr. Kumar and other affluent Indians, American real estate is a security blanket. Faced with what some have considered a bubble in real estate prices in major Indian cities and a sometimes jittery Bombay Stock Exchange, they are joining a wave of buyers from other countries who see the recovering United States housing market as one of the best places to put their money these days.
The wealthy elite from China, Latin America and elsewhere have bought pieds-à-terre in glassy towers in Manhattan, luxury condos in Miami and homes along the West Coast. Law enforcement investigations have found that some foreign investors are using American real estate holdings, at least in part, to hide cash and other assets from authorities in their home country.
But many less-than-superrich foreign investors just want a safe place to put extra savings, and their investments tend to be much less grandiose than the trophy properties that have drawn most of the attention. And for Indians in particular, who long trusted in gold to protect their wealth, American real estate offers a ''very, very attractive destination,'' said Subir Gokarn, director of research at Brookings India in New Delhi.
Jed Kolko, chief economist at Trulia, an online marketplace for residential real estate, said the most popular property searches for people from India were in and around Silicon Valley, where technology firms heavily recruit from India; in the Boston and Philadelphia areas near universities that have numerous students from India; and in suburban areas of New Jersey and in Queens, where there are established Indian-American communities.
In an echo of the late 1980s, foreign investment in United States real estate has taken off again. A survey from the National Association of Realtors estimates that from April 2013 to March of this year, total sales to international clients were about $92.2 billion, a 35 percent increase over the previous 12 months. The figure includes purchases by recent immigrants.
Foreign buyers now make up 7 percent of total existing-home sales of $1.2 trillion, according to the survey. Of those, Indians represent 6 percent of the purchases, spending $5.8 billion, up from $3.9 billion over the same period a year ago and on par with buyers from Britain.
Canadians have long bought American property and still do so in big numbers, with purchases centered for the most part in Arizona, Florida and more recently in Las Vegas. Canada still accounts for the largest share of buyers, but China is the fastest-growing source of clients, according to the realtors' group.
And Chinese buyers are bigger spenders. Their real estate purchases in the United States nearly doubled from last April to last March, increasing to $22 billion from the previous period. They accounted for nearly a quarter of all international sales in the current period.
''Most people who can come here, they are pretty wealthy,'' said Grace Tian, a broker with Realty Mark Associates in Philadelphia who often works with Chinese clients.
In contrast, buyers from India are a more eclectic group.
These include parents living in India who buy apartments for students attending college, making sure the units have concierge service and an extra bedroom so they can visit for extended periods, several real estate agents said. After the students leave college, the parents often keep the apartment and rent it out.
''It's a good investment in their eyes and it can be a better deal instead of them paying dorm costs or renting somewhere else,'' said Michael DiMella, a managing partner with the Charlesgate Realty Group in Boston whose Indian clients have bought near Northeastern University.
At the same time, the riverfront Newport area of Jersey City has emerged as popular with Indian buyers.
On a recent evening, commuters returning home from Manhattan wove between the high rises, passing advertisements for Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa, an Indian reality dance TV show, and Raaz Specialty Indian Cuisine. A poster in the nearby train station for an Indian news website featured a riff about pani puri, a popular Indian street snack.
A cluster of mothers who had recently arrived from India gathered outside a playground with their toddlers. For now, they were renting apartments with their husbands, but said they hoped to buy condos in the area soon, citing conveniences for young mothers like a grocery store within walking distance, gym and parks, and a fast commute to the city.
Irene Barnaby, a broker with Weichert Realtors in Jersey City, said her Indian clients generally spent about $600,000 to $800,000 on condos. Some buyers pay cash because traditional banks won't give them mortgages without a credit history in the United States. But she has also created relationships with smaller banks that will lend money to her clientele.
''They can get exactly what they want in this area,'' Ms. Barnaby said.
Padmanabhan Palani, president of the condo association board at the 443-unit James Monroe tower, said the area was comfortable for many people just arriving from India or elsewhere in Asia, because it resembles the high-rise districts of Mumbai and Hong Kong. Plus, he said, his building was close to the train station.
''In a snowstorm, 100 meters is very important in how far you walk,'' said Mr. Palani, who came to the United States 12 years ago on a work visa for a technology job and is now a permanent resident.
Some United States-based brokers are capitalizing on the growing interest from Indians.
Myron Von Raesfeld, a real estate agent in the heart of Silicon Valley, said his firm started working with technology companies in 1999 to offer seminars teaching immigrants with H-1B work visas the intricacies of the American real estate market.
He now offers the seminar at 80 companies, in part to keep ahead of the competition. ''Realtors are becoming very astute at this foreign wave,'' he said.
Indian real estate agents are also getting in on the action. Vikram Somani, owner of Property Hunters in Mumbai, has turned to the American market, noting that title insurance is available and the buying process is far more organized.
Rohit Prakash, president of American Full House in Austin, Tex., is recruiting brokers like Mr. Somani to round up Indian clients. His firm, created four years ago, arranges limited liability partnerships helping his clients overcome tax issues and red tape that otherwise would apply to foreign investors.
''There's a sexiness to say I own property in the U.S., a little bit of bragging rights,'' Mr. Prakash said. ''But for them to know how to go about how to do this, they were clueless.''
One of his clients is Mr. Kumar, who bought his St. Louis properties sight unseen, spending about $100,000 for a three-bedroom single-family home and a two-unit house.
So far the investment hasn't been as good as Mr. Kumar had hoped. One of the units sat empty for longer than expected, and a roof had a problem that needed to be fixed.
''I'm hopeful this year it will be better,'' said Mr. Kumar, who is considering buying property in Silicon Valley in the future. ''In any case, I was looking at investment in the U.S.A. for the long term.''
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/02/business/owning-a-piece-of-america.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Arun Kumar bought a three-bedroom house and a duplex in St. Louis. He also owns apartments in New Delhi. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER DaSILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
The Newport area of Jersey City on the riverfront has emerged as a popular neighborhood for Indian investors to purchase property. (B1)
 Playing at a park in the Newport area of Jersey City, a popular spot for property purchases. Below,  a train station in Jersey City. Some condo owners said the area was popular because nearby  high-rises resembled districts in Mumbai and Hong Kong. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT STOLARIK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)  CHART: Investors From Abroad: Buyers from five countries account for over half  of international home sales, with those from India  ranked third, paying a median of $343,000. (Source: National Association of Realtors)        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FOREIGN INVESTMENT (90%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (90%); HOUSING MARKET (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); PROPERTY PRICES (78%); ECONOMICS (76%); PRICES (76%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (76%); EXISTING HOME SALES (74%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (73%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (73%); SUBURBS (73%); IMMIGRATION (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (72%); ECONOMIC BUBBLE (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); REAL ESTATE BUBBLE (71%); STOCK EXCHANGES (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (68%); COASTAL AREAS (53%)

Company:  TRULIA INC (57%)

Organization: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS (59%)

Industry: REAL ESTATE (92%); FOREIGN OWNED REAL ESTATE (89%); HOUSING MARKET (89%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (89%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (89%); PROPERTY PRICES (78%); REAL ESTATE INVESTING (78%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (78%); SECOND & VACATION HOMES (78%); CONDOMINIUMS (77%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (76%); EXISTING HOME SALES (74%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (73%); RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS (73%); REAL ESTATE BUBBLE (71%); STOCK EXCHANGES (71%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (87%); BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); MIAMI, FL, USA (79%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (77%); NEW DELHI, INDIA (73%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (58%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); INDIA (95%); CANADA (92%); CHINA (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: October 2, 2014


End of Document
Can Facebook Fix Its Own Worst Bug?; Feature
The New York Times 
April 25, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAGAZINE
Length: 5740 words
Byline: FARHAD MANJOO
Highlight: Mark Zuckerberg now acknowledges the dangerous side of the social revolution he helped start. But is the most powerful tool for connection in human history capable of adapting to the world it created?
Body


In early January, I went to see Mark Zuckerberg at MPK20, a concrete-and-steel building on the campus of Facebook’s headquarters, which sits across a desolate highway from the marshy salt flats of Menlo Park, Calif. The Frank Gehry-designed building has a pristine nine-acre rooftop garden, yet much of the interior — a meandering open-plan hallway — appears unfinished. There are exposed air ducts and I-beams scribbled with contractors’ marks. Many of the internal walls are unpainted plywood. The space looks less like the headquarters of one of the world’s wealthiest companies and more like a Chipotle with standing desks. It’s an aesthetic meant to reflect — and perhaps also inspire employee allegiance to — one of Facebook’s founding ideologies: that things are never quite finished, that nothing is permanent, that you should always look for a chance to take an ax to your surroundings.
The mood in overwhelmingly liberal Silicon Valley at the time, days before Donald Trump’s inauguration, was grim. But Zuckerberg, who had recently returned from his 700-acre estate on the Hawaiian island of Kauai, is preternaturally unable to look anything other than excited about the future. “Hey, guys!” he beamed, greeting me and Mike Isaac, a Times colleague who covers Facebook. Zuckerberg wore a short-sleeve gray T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, which is his Steve Jobsian daily uniform: Indoor Zuck.
Zuckerberg used to be a nervous speaker, but he has become much less so. He speaks quickly but often unloads full paragraphs of thought, and sometimes his arguments are so polished that they sound rehearsed, which happened often that morning. “2016 was an interesting year for us,” he said as the three of us, plus a P.R. executive, sat around a couple of couches in the glass-walled conference room where he conducts many of his meetings. (There are many perks to working at Facebook, but no one, not even Zuckerberg, has a private office.) It was an understatement and a nod to the obvious: Facebook, once a mere app on your phone, had become a global political and cultural force, and the full implications of that transformation had begun to come into view last year. “If you look at the history of Facebook, when we started off, there really wasn’t news as part of it,” Zuckerberg went on. But as Facebook grew and became a bigger part of how people learn about the world, the company had been slow to adjust to its new place in people’s lives. The events of 2016, he said, “set off a number of conversations that we’re still in the middle of.”
Nearly two billion people use Facebook every month, about 1.2 billion of them daily. The company, which Zuckerberg co-founded in his Harvard dorm room 13 years ago, has become the largest and most influential entity in the news business, commanding an audience greater than that of any American or European television news network, any newspaper or magazine in the Western world and any online news outlet. It is also the most powerful mobilizing force in politics, and it is fast replacing television as the most consequential entertainment medium. Just five years after its initial public offering, Facebook is one of the            10 highest market-capitalized public companies in the world.
As recently as a year ago, Zuckerberg might have proudly rattled off these facts as a testament to Facebook’s power. But over the course of 2016, Facebook’s gargantuan influence became its biggest liability. During the U.S. election, propagandists — some working for money, others for potentially state-sponsored lulz — used the service to turn fake stories into viral sensations, like the one about Pope Francis’ endorsing Trump (he hadn’t). And fake news was only part of a larger conundrum. With its huge reach, Facebook has begun to act as the great disseminator of the larger cloud of misinformation and half-truths swirling about the rest of media. It sucks up lies from cable news and Twitter, then precisely targets each lie to the partisan bubble most receptive to it.
After studying how people shared 1.25 million stories during the campaign, a team of researchers at M.I.T. and Harvard implicated Facebook and Twitter in the larger failure of media in 2016. The researchers found that social media created a right-wing echo chamber: a “media network anchored around Breitbart developed as a distinct and insulated media system, using social media as a backbone to transmit a hyperpartisan perspective to the world.” The findings partially echoed a long-held worry about social news: that people would use sites like Facebook to cocoon themselves into self-reinforcing bubbles of confirmatory ideas, to the detriment of civility and a shared factual basis from which to make collective, democratic decisions. A week and a half after the election, President Obama bemoaned “an age where there’s so much active misinformation and it’s packaged very well and it looks the same when you see it on a Facebook page or you turn on your television.”
After the election, Zuckerberg offered a few pat defenses of Facebook’s role. “I’m actually quite proud of the impact that we were able to have on civic discourse over all,” he said when we spoke in January. Misinformation on Facebook was not as big a problem as some believed it was, but Facebook nevertheless would do more to battle it, he pledged. Echo chambers were a concern, but if the source was people’s own confirmation bias, was it really Facebook’s problem to solve?
It was hard to tell how seriously Zuckerberg took the criticisms of his service and its increasingly paradoxical role in the world. He had spent much of his life building a magnificent machine to bring people together. By the most literal measures, he’d succeeded spectacularly, but what had that connection wrought? Across the globe, Facebook now seems to benefit actors who want to undermine the global vision at its foundation. Supporters of Trump and the European right-wing nationalists who aim to turn their nations inward and dissolve alliances, trolls sowing cross-border paranoia, even ISIS with its skillful social-media recruiting and propagandizing — all of them have sought in their own ways to split the Zuckerbergian world apart. And they are using his own machine to do it.
In Silicon Valley, current events tend to fade into the background. The Sept. 11 attacks, the Iraq war, the financial crisis and every recent presidential election occurred, for the tech industry, on some parallel but distant timeline divorced from the everyday business of digitizing the world. Then Donald Trump won. In the 17 years I’ve spent covering Silicon Valley, I’ve never seen anything shake the place like his victory. In the span of a few months, the Valley has been transformed from a politically disengaged company town into a center of anti-Trump resistance and fear. A week after the election, one start-up founder sent me a private message on Twitter: “I think it’s worse than I thought,” he wrote. “Originally I thought 18 months. I’ve cut that in half.” Until what? “Apocalypse. End of the world.”
Trump’s campaign rhetoric felt particularly personal for an industry with a proud reliance upon immigrants. Stephen K. Bannon, Trump’s campaign chief executive and now chief White House strategist, once suggested that there were too many South Asian chief executives in tech. More than 15 percent of Facebook’s employees are in the United States on H-1B visas, a program that Trump has pledged to revamp. But the outcome also revealed the depth of the Valley’s disconnection with much of the rest of the country. “I saw an election that was just different from the way I think,” says Joshua Reeves, a Bay Area native who is a co-founder of Gusto, a human-resources software start-up. “I have this engineering brain that wants to go to this analytical, rational, nonemotional way of looking at things, and it was clear in this election that we’re trending in a different direction, toward spirited populism.”
Underneath it all was a nagging feeling of complicity. Trump had benefited from a media environment that is now shaped by Facebook — and, more to the point, shaped by a single Facebook feature, the same one to which the company owes its remarkable ascent to social-media hegemony: the computationally determined list of updates you see every time you open the app. The list has a formal name, News Feed. But most users are apt to think of it as Facebook itself.
If it’s an exaggeration to say that News Feed has become the most influential source of information in the history of civilization, it is only slightly so. Facebook created News Feed in 2006 to solve a problem: In the social-media age, people suddenly had too many friends to keep up with. At the time, Facebook was just a collection of profiles, lacking any kind of central organization. To figure out what any of your connections were up to, you had to visit each of their profiles to see if anything had changed. News Feed fixed that. Every time you open Facebook, it hunts through the network, collecting every post from every connection — information that, for most Facebook users, would be too overwhelming to process themselves. Then it weighs the merits of each post before presenting you with a feed sorted in order of importance: a hyperpersonalized front page designed just for you.
Scholars and critics have been warning of the solipsistic irresistibility of algorithmic news at least since 2001, when the constitutional-law professor Cass R. Sunstein warned, in his book “Republic.com,” of the urgent risks posed to democracy “by any situation in which thousands or perhaps millions or even tens of millions of people are mainly listening to louder echoes of their own voices.” (In 2008, I piled on with my own book, “True Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-Fact Society.”) In 2011, the digital activist and entrepreneur Eli Pariser, looking at similar issues, gave this phenomenon a memorable name in the title of his own book: “The Filter Bubble.”
Facebook says its own researchers have been studying the filter bubble since 2010. In 2015, they published an in-house study, which was criticized by independent researchers, concluding that Facebook’s effect on the diversity of people’s information diet was minimal. News Feed’s personalization algorithm did filter out some opposing views in your feed, the study claimed, but the bigger effect was users’ own choices. When News Feed did show people views contrary to their own, they tended not to click on the stories. For Zuckerberg, the finding let Facebook off the hook. “It’s a good-sounding theory, and I can get why people repeat it, but it’s not true,” he said on a call with analysts last summer.
Employees got the same message. “When Facebook cares about something, they spin up teams to address it, and Zuck will come out and talk about it all the time,” one former executive told me. “I have never heard of anything close to that on the filter bubble. I never sensed that this was a problem he wanted us to tackle. It was always positioned as an interesting intellectual question but not something that we’re going to go focus on.”
Then, last year, Facebook’s domination of the news became a story itself. In May, Gizmodo reported that some editors who had worked on Facebook’s Trending Topics section had been suppressing conservative points of view. To smooth things over, Zuckerberg convened a meeting of conservative media figures and eventually significantly reduced the role of human editors. Then in September, Facebook            deleted a post by a Norwegian writer that included the photojournalist Nick Ut’s iconic photo of a naked 9-year-old girl, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, running in terror after a napalm attack during the Vietnam War, on the grounds that it ran afoul of Facebook’s prohibition of child nudity.
Facebook, under criticism, reinstated the picture, but the photo incident stuck with Zuckerberg. He would bring it up unbidden to staff members and to reporters. It highlighted, for him, the difficulty of building a policy framework for what Facebook was trying to do. Zuckerberg wanted to become a global news distributor that is run by machines, rather than by humans who would try to look at every last bit of content and exercise considered judgment. “It’s something I think we’re still figuring out,” he told me in January. “There’s a lot more to do here than what we’ve done. And I think we’re starting to realize this now as well.”
It struck me as an unsatisfying answer, and it later became apparent that Zuckerberg seemed to feel the same way. On a Sunday morning about a month after the first meeting, I got a call from a Facebook spokesman. Zuckerberg wanted to chat again. Could Mike and I come back on Monday afternoon?
We met again in the same conference room. Same Zuck outfit, same P.R. executive. But the Zuckerberg who greeted us seemed markedly different. He was less certain in his pronouncements than he had been the month before, more expansive and questioning. Earlier that day, Zuckerberg’s staff had sent me a draft of a 5,700-word manifesto that, I was told, he spent weeks writing. The document, “Building Global Community,” argued that until now, Facebook’s corporate goal had merely been to connect people. But that was just Step 1. According to the manifesto, Facebook’s “next focus will be developing the social infrastructure for community — for supporting us, for keeping us safe, for informing us, for civic engagement, and for inclusion of all.” If it was a nebulous crusade, it was also vast in its ambition.
The last manifesto that Zuckerberg wrote was in 2012, as part of Facebook’s application to sell its stock to the public. It explained Facebook’s philosophy — what he called “the hacker way” — and sketched an unorthodox path for the soon-to-be-public company. “Facebook was not originally created to be a company,” he wrote. “It was built to accomplish a social mission: to make the world more open and connected.”
What’s striking about that 2012 letter, read through the prism of 2017, is its certainty that a more “open and connected” world is by definition a better one. “When I started Facebook, the idea of connecting the world was not controversial,” Zuckerberg said now. “The default assumption was that the world was incrementally just moving in that direction. So I thought we can connect some people and do our part in helping move in that direction.” But now, he said, whether it was wise to connect the world was “actually a real question.”
Zuckerberg’s new manifesto never quite accepts blame for any of the global ills that have been laid at Facebook’s feet. Yet by the standards of a company release, it is remarkable for the way it concedes that the company’s chief goal — wiring the globe — is controversial. “There are questions about whether we can make a global community that works for everyone,” Zuckerberg writes, “and whether the path ahead is to connect more or reverse course.” He also confesses misgivings about Facebook’s role in the news. “Giving everyone a voice has historically been a very positive force for public discourse because it increases the diversity of ideas shared,” he writes. “But the past year has also shown it may fragment our shared sense of reality.”
At the time of our second interview, the manifesto was still only a draft, and I was surprised by how unsure Zuckerberg seemed about it in person. He had almost as many questions for us — about whether we understood what he was trying to say, how we thought it would land in the media — as we had for him. When I suggested that it might be perceived as an attack on Trump, he looked dismayed. He noted several times that he had been noodling over these ideas since long before November. A few weeks earlier, there was media speculation, fueled by a postelection tour of America by Zuckerberg and his wife, that he was laying the groundwork to run against Trump in 2020, and in this meeting he took pains to shoot down the rumors. When I asked if he had chatted with Obama about the former president’s critique of Facebook, Zuckerberg paused for several seconds, nearly to the point of awkwardness, before answering that he had.
Facebook’s spokespeople later called to stress that Obama was only one of many people to whom he had spoken. In other words: Don’t read this as a partisan anti-Trump manifesto. But if the company pursues the admittedly airy aims outlined in “Building Global Community,” the changes will echo across media and politics, and some are bound to be considered partisan. The risks are especially clear for changes aimed at adding layers of journalistic ethics across News Feed, which could transform the public’s perception of Facebook, not to mention shake the foundations of its business.
The Facebook app, and consequently News Feed, is run by one of Zuckerberg’s most influential lieutenants, a 34-year-old named Chris Cox, the company’s chief product officer. Ten years ago, Cox dropped out of a graduate program in computer science at Stanford to join Facebook. One of his first assignments was on the team that created News Feed. Since then, he has become an envoy to the media industry. Don Graham, the longtime publisher of The Washington Post who was for years a member of Facebook’s board, told me that he felt Cox, among Facebook staff, “was at the 99.9th percentile of interest in news. He thought it was important to society, and he wanted Facebook to get it right.”
For the typical user, Cox explained when I met him on a morning in October at MPK20, News Feed is computing the relative merits of about 2,000 potential posts in your network every time you open the app. In sorting these posts, Facebook does not optimize for any single metric: not clicks or reading time or likes. Instead, he said, “what you really want to get to is whether somebody, at the end of the day, would say, ‘Hey, my experience today was meaningful.’ ” Personalizing News Feed, in other words, is a very big “math problem,” incorporating countless metrics in extraordinarily complicated ways. Zuckerberg calls it “a modern A.I. problem.”
Last summer, I sat in on two meetings in another glass-walled MPK20 conference room, in which News Feed’s engineers, designers, user-research experts and managers debated several small alterations to how News Feed displays certain kinds of posts. The conversations were far from exciting — people in jeans on couches looking at PowerPoints, talking quietly about numbers — and yet I found them mesmerizing, a demonstration of the profound cultural differences between how news companies like The Times work and how Facebook does. The first surprise was how slowly things move, contrary to the freewheeling culture of “the hacker way.” In one meeting, the team spent several minutes discussing the merits of bold text in a certain News Feed design. One blessing of making social software is that you can gauge any potential change to your product by seeing how your users react to it. That is also the curse: At Facebook, virtually every change to the app, no matter how small or obviously beneficial, is thoroughly tested on different segments of the audience before it’s rolled out to everyone.
The people who work on News Feed aren’t making decisions that turn on fuzzy human ideas like ethics, judgment, intuition or seniority. They are concerned only with quantifiable outcomes about people’s actions on the site. That data, at Facebook, is the only real truth. And it is a particular kind of truth: The News Feed team’s ultimate mission is to figure out what users want — what they find “meaningful,” to use Cox and Zuckerberg’s preferred term — and to give them more of that.
This ideal runs so deep that the people who make News Feed often have to put aside their own notions of what’s best. “One of the things we’ve all learned over the years is that our intuition can be wrong a fair amount of the time,” John Hegeman, the vice president of product management and a News Feed team member, told me. “There are things you don’t expect will happen. And we learn a lot from that process: Why didn’t that happen, and what might that mean?” But it is precisely this ideal that conflicts with attempts to wrangle the feed in the way press critics have called for. The whole purpose of editorial guidelines and ethics is often to suppress individual instincts in favor of some larger social goal. Facebook finds it very hard to suppress anything that its users’ actions say they want. In some cases, it has been easier for the company to seek out evidence that, in fact, users don’t want these things at all.
Facebook’s two-year-long battle against “clickbait” is a telling example. Early this decade, the internet’s headline writers discovered the power of stories that trick you into clicking on them, like those that teasingly withhold information from their headlines: “Dustin Hoffman Breaks Down Crying Explaining Something That Every Woman Sadly Already Experienced.” By the fall of 2013, clickbait had overrun News Feed. Upworthy, a progressive activism site co-founded by Pariser, the author of “The Filter Bubble,” that relied heavily on teasing headlines, was attracting 90 million readers a month to its feel-good viral posts.
If a human editor ran News Feed, she would look at the clickbait scourge and make simple, intuitive fixes: Turn down the Upworthy knob. But Facebook approaches the feed as an engineering project rather than an editorial one. When it makes alterations in the code that powers News Feed, it’s often only because it has found some clear signal in its data that users are demanding the change. In this sense, clickbait was a riddle. In surveys, people kept telling Facebook that they hated teasing headlines. But if that was true, why were they clicking on them? Was there something Facebook’s algorithm was missing, some signal that would show that despite the clicks, clickbait was really sickening users?
To answer these questions, Cox and his team hired survey panels of more than a thousand paid “professional raters” around the world who answer questions about how well News Feed is working. Starting in 2013, Facebook began adding first dozens and then hundreds and then thousands of data points that were meant to teach the artificial-intelligence system that runs News Feed how people were reacting to their feeds. Facebook noticed that people would sometimes click open a clickbaity story but spend very little time on it. In other cases, lots of people would click on a story but few would share or Like it. Headlines on stories that people seemed to reject often contained a set of signature phrases (“you’ll never believe,” “this one trick,” etc.) or they came from a set of repeat-offender publishers.
The more such signals Facebook incorporated into the feed, the more clickbait began to drop out of the feed. Since its 2013 peak, Upworthy’s traffic has declined; it now averages 17.5 million visitors a month. The site has since disavowed clickbait. “We sort of unleashed a monster,” Peter Koechley, Upworthy’s co-founder, told a conference in 2015. “Sorry for that.”
Cox suggested that it was not exactly correct to say that Facebook, as a company, decided to fight clickbait. What actually happened was that Facebook found better ways to listen to users, who were themselves rejecting clickbait. “That comes out of good-quality panels and measurement systems, rather than an individual decision saying, ‘Hey, I really want us to care about clickbait,’ ” he says.
This approach — looking for signs of user dissatisfaction — could curb stories that constitute the most egregious examples of misinformation. Adam Mosseri, Facebook’s vice president in charge of News Feed, says that Facebook has begun testing an algorithm change that would look at whether people share an article after reading it. If few of the people who click on a story decide to share it, that might suggest people feel misled by it and it would get lower billing in the feed.
But the solution to the broader misinformation dilemma — the pervasive climate of rumor, propaganda and conspiracy theories that Facebook has inadvertently incubated — may require something that Facebook has never done: ignoring the likes and dislikes of its users. Facebook believes the pope-endorses-Trump type of made-up news stories are only a tiny minority of pieces that appear in News Feed; they account for a fraction of 1 percent of the posts, according to Mosseri. The question the company faces now is whether the misinformation problem resembles clickbait at all, and whether its solutions will align as neatly with Facebook’s worldview. Facebook’s entire project, when it comes to news, rests on the assumption that people’s individual preferences ultimately coincide with the public good, and that if it doesn’t appear that way at first, you’re not delving deeply enough into the data. By contrast, decades of social-science research shows that most of us simply prefer stuff that feels true to our worldview even if it isn’t true at all and that the mining of all those preference signals is likely to lead us deeper into bubbles rather than out of them.
After the election, Margaret Sullivan, the Washington Post columnist and a former public editor of The Times, called on Facebook to hire an executive editor who would monitor News Feed with an eye to fact-checking, balance and editorial integrity. Jonah Peretti, the founder of BuzzFeed, told me that he wanted Facebook to use its data to create a kind of reputational score for online news, as well as explore ways of strengthening reporting through monetary partnerships.
“At some point, if they really want to address this, they have to say, ‘This is good information’ and ‘This is bad information,’ ” says Emily Bell, the director for the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia Journalism School. “They have to say, ‘These are the kinds of information sources that we want to privilege, and these others are not going to be banned from the platform, but they are not going to thrive.’ In other words, they have to create a hierarchy, and they’re going to have to decide how they’re going to transfer wealth into the publishing market.”
There aren’t many technical reasons Facebook could not implement such plans. The hurdles are institutional and philosophical, and ultimately financial too. Late last year, Facebook outlined a modest effort to curb misinformation. News Feed would now carry warning labels: If a friend shares a viral story that has been flagged and shot down by one of Facebook’s fact-checking partners (including Snopes and PolitiFact), you’ll be cautioned that the piece has been “disputed.” But even that slight change has been met with fury on the right, with Breitbart and The Daily Caller fuming that Facebook had teamed up with liberal hacks motivated by partisanship. If Facebook were to take more significant action, like hiring human editors, creating a reputational system or paying journalists, the company would instantly become something it has long resisted: a media company rather than a neutral tech platform.
In many ways, the worry over how Facebook changes the news is really a manifestation of a grander problem with News Feed, which is simply dominance itself. News Feed’s aggressive personalization wouldn’t be much of an issue if it weren’t crowding out every other source. “To some degree I feel like the Pottery Barn Rule applies,” says Pariser, the Upworthy chief executive. “They play a critical role in our information circulatory system, and so — lucky them — all of the problems therein are significantly on their shoulders.”
During our first meeting in January, I posed this question to Zuckerberg: “When you see various problems in the media, do you say to yourself, ‘I run Facebook, I can solve that?’ ”
“Um,” he started, and then paused, weighing his words as carefully as American presidents once did. “Not usually.” He argued that some of Facebook’s critics’ proposed fixes for news on the service, such as hiring editors, were impractical due to Facebook’s scale and global diversity. Personalization, he said, remained a central tenet. “It really gets back to, like, what do people want at a deep level,” he said. “There’s this oversimplified narrative that a company can get very successful by just scratching a very superficial itch, and I don’t really think that’s right over the long term.”
Yet by our second meeting, Zuckerberg’s position seemed to have evolved. Facebook had by then announced plans for the Facebook Journalism Project, in which the company would collaborate with news companies on new products. Facebook also created a project to promote “news literacy” among its users, and it hired the former CNN news anchor Campbell Brown to manage the partnership between it and news companies. Zuckerberg’s tone toward critics of Facebook’s approach to news had also grown far more conciliatory. “I think it’s really important to get to the core of the actual problem,” he said. “I also really think that the core social thing that needs to happen is that a common understanding needs to exist. And misinformation I view as one of the things that can possibly erode common understanding. But sensationalism and polarization and other things, I actually think, are probably even stronger and more prolific effects. And we have to work on all these things. I think we need to listen to all the feedback on this.”
Still, in both our conversation and his new manifesto, Zuckerberg remained preoccupied with the kind of problems that could be solved by the kind of hyperconnectivity he believed in, not the ones caused by it. “There’s a social infrastructure that needs to get built for modern problems in order for humanity to get to the next level,” he said. “Having more people oriented not just toward short-term things but toward building the long-term social infrastructure that needs to get built across all these things in order to enable people to come together is going to be a really important thing over the next decades.” By way of example, he pointed to Safety Check, Facebook’s system for letting people tell their friends that they’ve survived some kind of dangerous event, like a natural disaster or terrorist attack.
“We’re getting to a point where the biggest opportunities I think in the world ... problems like preventing pandemics from spreading or ending terrorism, all these things, they require a level of coordination and connection that I don’t think can only be solved by the current systems that we have,” Zuckerberg told me. What’s needed, he argues, is some global superstructure to advance humanity.
This is not an especially controversial idea; Zuckerberg is arguing for a kind of digital-era version of the global institution-building that the Western world engaged in after World War II. But because he is a chief executive and not an elected president, there is something frightening about his project. He is positioning Facebook — and, considering that he commands absolute voting control of the company, he is positioning himself — as a critical enabler of the next generation of human society. A minor problem with his mission is that it drips with megalomania, albeit of a particularly sincere sort. With his wife, Priscilla Chan, Zuckerberg has pledged to give away nearly all of his wealth to a variety of charitable causes, including a long-term medical-research project to cure all disease. His desire to take on global social problems through digital connectivity, and specifically through Facebook, feels like part of the same impulse.
Yet Zuckerberg is often blasé about the messiness of the transition between the world we’re in and the one he wants to create through software. Building new “social infrastructure” usually involves tearing older infrastructure down. If you manage the demolition poorly, you might undermine what comes next. In the case of the shattering media landscape, Zuckerberg seems finally to have at least noticed this problem and may yet come up with fixes for it. But in the meantime, Facebook rushes headlong into murky new areas, uncovering new dystopian possibilities at every turn.
A few months after I spoke with Zuckerberg, Facebook held its annual developer conference in San Jose, Calif. At last year’s show, Zuckerberg introduced an expanded version of Facebook’s live streaming service which had been promised to revolutionize how we communicate. In the year since, Live had generated iconic scenes of protest, but it was also used to broadcast a terrorist attack in Munich and at least            one suicide. Hours before Zuckerberg’s appearance at the conference, police announced that a Cleveland man who had killed a stranger and posted a video on Facebook had shot himself after a manhunt.
But as he took the stage in San Jose, Zuckerberg was ebullient. He started with a few dad jokes and threatened to read his long manifesto on stage. For a brief moment, there was a shift in tone: Statesman Zuck. “In all seriousness, this is an important time to work on building community,” he said. He offered Facebook’s condolences to the victim in Cleveland; the incident, he said, reminded Facebook that “we have a lot more to do.”
Just as quickly, though, Zuckerberg then pivoted to Facebook’s next marvel, a system for digitally augmenting your pictures and videos. The technical term for this is “augmented reality.” The name bursts with dystopian possibilities — fake news on video rather than just text — but Zuckerberg never mentioned them. The statesman had left the stage; before us stood an engineer.
Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.
Farhad Manjoo is a technology columnist for The New York Times. He is working on a book about what he calls the Frightful Five: Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft — the five technology giants that are swallowing up the rest of the economy.
PHOTOS: The News Feed team at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. (MM40-MM41); Mark Zuckerberg at his desk. No one at the company has a private office. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SPENCER LOWELL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM42)
 DRAWING (DRAWING BY MIKE MCQUADE) (MM38-MM39)
Related Articles
    • Inside Facebook’s (Totally Insane, Unintentionally Gigantic, Hyperpartisan) Political-Media Machine
    • How the Internet Is Loosening Our Grip on the Truth
    • Facebook Mounts Effort to Limit Tide of Fake News
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%); Facebook Inc (%); Rumors and Misinformation (%); Social Media (%); The Filter Bubble (Book) (%); Presidential Election of 2016 (%); News and News Media (%)

Ticker: Facebook Inc

Industry: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%)

Person: MARK ZUCKERBERG (90%); FRANK GEHRY (72%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (79%); HAWAII, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

Load-Date: May 1, 2017


End of Document
In One Family Tree, a Reflection of Immigration
The New York Times
September 17, 2018 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1833 words
Byline: By MIRIAM JORDAN and SABRINA TAVERNISE
Body


LAS VEGAS -- The young engineer arrived in America when he was 23 with a good education and little else. He landed a job at a nuclear test site, and built a home in Nevada. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, he brought his wife, mother, five sisters and a brother over from India, his native land.
In later years, his siblings sponsored family members of their own, and their clan now stretches from Nevada to Florida, New Jersey to Texas -- more than 90 Americans nurtured on the strength of one ambitious engineer, Jagdish Patel, 72. 
  In late June, four generations of Patels assembled for a reunion in Las Vegas, a gathering that included a venture capitalist, a network engineer, physicians, dentists and students.
  ''I am so glad that I came to America,'' Mr. Patel said recently, sitting in the custom-designed house he built in Las Vegas, complete with a home theater where he hosts Super Bowl parties and a marble-lined Hindu temple room. ''I brought everyone here,'' he said, ''and we have provided valuable service to this country.''
  The share of the United States population that is foreign-born has reached its highest level since 1910, according to government data released last week. But in recent years, the numbers have been soaring not so much with Latin Americans sweeping across the border, but with educated people from Asia obtaining visas -- families like the Patels, who have taken advantage of ''family reunification'' provisions that have been a cornerstone of federal immigration law for half a century.
  Since the Patels began flocking to America in the 1970s, millions of other Indians have arrived to work as programmers and engineers in Silicon Valley, doctors in underserved rural areas and researchers at universities. The majority were sponsored by relatives who came before them. Others arrived on work visas and were later sponsored for legal residency, or green cards, by their employers.
  The Trump administration has framed immigration as a threat to the nation's security and to American workers, a drastic departure from the longtime consensus that immigration was a net positive for the country. The president's public priorities have often focused on fortifying the southwest border, but his administration is also working to scale back decades of legal migration that have led to Asians, not Latin Americans, becoming the largest group of new foreign-born residents since 2010.
  Already, the administration has quietly begun taking steps to cut back legal immigration, under the banner of ''Buy American and Hire American,'' which the president framed in an executive order last year. Some experts predict that the number of immigrants granted permanent legal residency in the 2018 fiscal year, which ends on Sept. 30, will show a rare decline.
  Without passing new legislation, the administration has pursued a number of policies that are slowing legal immigration. It has reduced refugee admissions; narrowed who is eligible for asylum; made it more difficult to qualify for permanent residency or citizenship; and tightened scrutiny of applicants for high-skilled worker visas, known as H-1Bs.
  A recent analysis of government data by the National Foundation for American Policy, a nonpartisan research group, found that the denial rate for H-1B visa petitions had jumped by 41 percent in the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year, compared with the previous quarter. Government requests for additional information on applications doubled in the same period.
  Green-card applicants sponsored by an employer now must undergo in-person interviews, a step that previously was taken only in cases that raised concerns.
  The Trump administration is pushing policies supposedly intended to favor immigrants who have valuable skills at a time when newcomers already are, on average, at their most educated. Nearly half of all foreign-born people who have arrived since 2010 have college degrees, compared with about 30 percent of native-born residents.
  ''We are having this debate about getting our system to be merit-based, but it really in effect already is one,'' said David Bier, an immigration policy analyst at the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C. ''The least-known fact about legal immigration to the U.S. is that it's much more educated than the general U.S. population.''
  Of the 1.1 million green cards granted in 2017, about two-thirds went to people sponsored by relatives, compared to just 12 percent who were sponsored through employment.
  Immigration has taken center stage in many Republican election campaigns this year. Representative Ron DeSantis, the party's candidate for governor of Florida, released a video in which he tells his daughter to ''build the wall'' as she plays with blocks. Brian Kemp, the Republican nominee for governor of Georgia, ran an ad saying he would ''round up criminal illegals'' in his pickup truck.
  ''The big story here is just the massive misperception about the nature of immigration in the U.S.,'' said Edward Alden, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, who specializes in immigration policy. ''The lion's share of public attention is focused on what is now a very small number of people coming here illegally and showing up at the border seeking asylum.
  ''The reality is that a growing percentage of immigrants coming to the U.S. are highly educated, and are exactly the sort of people we want to be attracting.''
  Supporters of Mr. Trump's position say that this trend is an incidental result of a policy that does not guarantee such an outcome.
  ''We need to construct a system that discourages endless chains of relatives coming in,'' said Mark Krikorian, executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies, which supports curbs on immigration. ''We have an immigration system that rewards people who have relatives in the United States, rather than people who have skills and education.''
  Michael Bars, a spokesman for United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the agency which is focusing most of the new scrutiny on legal immigration, said the government's aim is not to close the borders but to protect against fraud, human trafficking and gang activity, ''defending our system from those seeking to exploit it at the expense of U.S. workers, lawful-abiding applicants and petitioners.''
  There are still an estimated 11 million people in the country illegally, and that represents a major political issue.
  ''Eleven million people is not a small number,'' said Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer at the Pew Research Center ''But it is certainly the case that unauthorized immigration from Mexico is getting a lot more attention than the numbers seem to warrant.'' Mr. Passel said fewer Mexicans were caught at the border in fiscal 2017, which ended on Sept. 30, than in any year since the late 1960s.
  Under the Trump administration's plan, the number of family-based green cards issued would be reduced from the 804,793 granted in 2016 to about 487,000 a year, according to an analysis by Julia Gelatt and Sarah Pierce of the Migration Policy Institute -- a 40 percent reduction in family-tied green cards and a 27 percent reduction overall.
  ''Trump is the first of any modern president to advocate for reducing legal immigration,'' Ms. Pierce said.
  Currently, American citizens like Mr. Patel can sponsor minor children, unmarried and married adult children, and spouses, parents and brothers and sisters. Green-card holders are limited to sponsoring minor children and unmarried adult children.
  Under the new proposal, Americans would lose the right to petition for their parents, adult or married children, or siblings; they could sponsor only spouses and minor children. Green-card holders would be limited further, to sponsoring minor children only, not adult children.
  The current system dates to 1965, when Congress passed the Immigration and Nationality Act, which wiped away the old system of country quotas established in the 1920s that many considered racist. The idea was to treat people from all countries equally, and the law's central pillar was to give American citizens the ability to invite family members who were still abroad. It also allowed for some immigration based on skills.
  Some experts argue that the real implications of the 1965 law are only now dawning on the wider population, as the face of the country changes -- and that realization is what has been driving much of the emotion in politics.
  ''The 1965 act really changed the look and feel of the country in a fundamental way, but it took 50 years for the country to come to terms with that,'' said Muzaffar Chishti, director of the New York office of the Migration Policy Institute.
  Madeline Hsu, a professor of Asian-American studies at the University of Austin, Texas, said there were only about 12,000 Indian immigrants in the United States in 1960. The foreign-born Indian population last year stood at about 2.6 million, according to the Brookings Institution, and it had risen by almost half since 2010.
  The 1965 law opened up the United States to people from India like Jagdish Patel.
  He recalls that at his engineering college back in the Indian state of Gujarat, ''when America started to allow people from different countries to come, we all decided to get ready to go.''
  Mr. Patel immigrated in 1968 and enrolled at Youngstown State University in Ohio, where he earned a master's degree in structural engineering. He returned in 1971 to marry, and because he had a green card, he was able to sponsor his wife, Amita.
  In 1977, he became a United States citizen, and sponsored his brother Jay and Jay's wife for green cards. By 1985, he had also sponsored his mother, five sisters and their husbands and children, most of whom settled in the New York-New Jersey area.
  And he had American-born children of his own. His son, Satya, is now a venture capitalist in San Francisco, after working as an executive at Google and at Twitter; his daughter, Sita Montgomery, is an interior designer in Salt Lake City with 140,000 followers on Instagram.
  Now retired, Mr. Patel savors time to play golf and to travel -- so far, he has visited 50 countries. He devoted a year to planning the Patel reunion in June.
  The eldest Patel to attend the event, which included bowling, banquet dinners and a talent show, was 88; the youngest was nine months old. Mr. Patel gave each attendee a royal-blue booklet, its cover emblazoned with a crown and the words ''Royal Patel Family Reunion.'' Its pages depict the sprawling Patel family tree, starting in India.
  ''In America, you can still succeed as an immigrant, irrespective of skin color, religion or country of origin,'' said Mr. Patel, who likes to point out that President Trump's wife, Melania, sponsored her parents to come to the country she has adopted.
  ''All this Twitter and campaign stuff is mostly just talk,'' he said. ''Trump knows in his mind that immigration works. Family reunification will stay.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/16/us/immigration-family-chain-migration-foreign-born.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Jagdish Patel at home in Las Vegas. He moved to the United States in 1968 and later sponsored relatives in India to join him. At left are photos from his wedding, as well as his two children's. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROGER KISBY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A12)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FAMILY (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); RURAL EMPLOYMENT (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS (74%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (69%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (60%); VENTURE CAPITAL (54%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS (74%); HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS (69%); VENTURE CAPITAL (54%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (50%)

Geographic: LAS VEGAS, NV, USA (93%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (71%); NEVADA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (96%); LATIN AMERICA (90%); ASIA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: September 17, 2018


End of Document
A Davos Deferred; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
December 20, 2021 Monday 08:30 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1731 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Jason Karaian, Sarah Kessler, Stephen Gandel, Michael J. de la Merced, Lauren Hirsch and Ephrat Livni
Highlight: The World Economic Forum postponed its annual gathering of business and government leaders over fears of the Omicron variant.
Body


The World Economic Forum postponed its annual gathering of business and government leaders over fears of the Omicron variant.
Omicron forces another change 
The World Economic Forum said this morning that it was postponing its annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland, from next month to “early summer,” citing the spread of the Omicron variant. The move suggests new uncertainties for business travel, yet another headache for C.E.O.s amid rising case counts and new questions about government efforts to contain the coronavirus. Meanwhile, U.S. stock futures are down sharply, following European and Asian markets.
Many businesses are becoming increasingly cautious. The World Economic Forum, after consulting with experts and the Swiss government, said it will instead hold virtual sessions next month. (Travel, business and otherwise, faces new pressures: Israel added the U.S. to its no-fly list, while the N.H.L. called off games involving cross-border travel until after Christmas.) In other developments:
    • “Saturday Night Live” sent home its audience and most of its cast and crew at the last minute, while Radio City canceled the rest of the Rockettes’ performances for the year. CNN barred all nonessential employees from its U.S. offices.
    • JPMorgan Chase told American workers who don’t work in bank branches that each team should determine who needs to come into the office over the next few weeks.
    • Not even top executives are unaffected: Rich Handler, the C.E.O. of the investment bank Jefferies, said he has been quarantining after testing positive for the coronavirus. (Lawmakers including Senator Elizabeth Warren also tested positive recently.)
The fate of a federal vaccine mandate for large companies became cloudier. On Friday, a federal appeals courtlifted a legal block on the rule, though appeals to the Supreme Court were immediately filed. The next day, OSHA pushed back the deadline for full enforcement of the rule until February.
Another matter that may become more confusing is what counts as “fully vaccinated.” While the Labor Department doesn’t currently require booster shots as part of its rule for large companies, it is strongly encouraging them. Some local authorities, like New York City, have already said they plan to change the definition of fully vaccinated to include boosters, as are companies like Jefferies. On the other hand, the Olympics isn’t mandating boosters for athletes. Douglas Brayley, an employment lawyer at the law firm Ropes &amp; Gray, suggested that companies are increasingly facing a difficult choice: “I wonder if there’s some reluctance to go back to people who they already had to cajole into getting the vaccine, ‘Oh, and by the way, please get one more shot.’”
Other challenges lie ahead. The spike in Omicron cases is straining America’s testing capacity, making it harder for employers who want to make regular Covid checks part of their office protocol. In Britain, the country’s health secretary, Sajid Javid, wouldn’t rule out further restrictions before Christmas.
More pandemic news:
    • Moderna said new data show a booster shot of its vaccine significantly raises antibody levels to combat the Omicron variant.
    • The N.F.L. is ending weekly Covid testing for vaccinated players who are asymptomatic.
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
Peng Shuai retracts her sexual assault claim. The Chinese tennis star told a Singaporean newspaper that she had never been sexually assaulted, apparently walking back an accusation made on social media against a top government official. Her disappearance after that post stirred worldwide concern about her safety and spurred calls to boycott the Winter Olympics in Beijing next month.
A Chinese A.I. giant revives its I.P.O. plans. SenseTime revised its listing plans, with a goal of trading on the Hong Kong stock market by year end. The company had pulled its I.P.O. after the U.S. imposed new sanctions on it over Beijing’s use of its products against ethnic Muslim minorities in the Xinjiang region.
Elon Musk puts a price tag on his taxes. The Tesla chief tweeted that he will end up paying over $11 billion this year — potentially the biggest tax bill in U.S. history — in an effort to knock back criticism that he paid little to no taxes in recent years. That said, he always faced a big tax liability because of Tesla stock options he was granted.
The fate of Tony Hsieh’s fortune is stuck in court. One year after the Zappos founder died from injuries from a mysterious fire, his $500 million estate remains the subject of legal fighting between his family and his friends, The Wall Street Journal reports. Challenges in sorting out the mess include sorting through promises to associates, some scribbled on sticky notes.
“Spider-Man: No Way Home” breaks box-office records. The latest Marvel film collected over $253 million in sales in the U.S. and Canada, for the third-highest opening weekend in Hollywood history. That gives some hope for the movie industry, as the pandemic and the rise of streaming services ate into theater ticket sales.
Wall Street gives up on Biden’s big bill 
After Senator Joe Manchin, the West Virginia Democrat whose vote was crucial to passing President Biden’s $2.2 trillion social spending bill, said he would oppose the legislation as written, he did more than set off blowback from the White House. Manchin also forced many Wall Street prognosticators to quickly rewrite their forecasts for 2022.
The news will likely add more volatility to the market. Whether the bill is officially dead, delayed or poised for a major rewrite, investors must grapple with yet more political uncertainty on top of worries about the Omicron variant and inflation. 
Goldman Sachs, for one, lowered its growth expectations. Strategists there told clients last night that it was cutting its real G.D.P. forecast for 2022, including to 2 percent in the first quarter from 3 percent. The Goldman team said Democrats may yet pass some provisions in the Biden bill, focused on manufacturing and supply chain issues, but were less likely to approve measures like extending the expanded child tax credit.
But Wall Street is likely to cheer the demise of some other provisions. The Goldman strategists said it was less likely now that corporate taxes would go up, having previously predicted that those higher rates would reduce the S&amp;P 500’s earnings by 3 percent next year. Many investors also feared, as Manchin does, that the bill would have increased inflation, even as multiple economists said that likely wasn’t true.
“Is the conservator making decisions in the best interest of the conservatee or the business manager who they owe a debt to?” 
— Anthony Palmieri, the incoming head of the National Guardianship Association, on new revelations by The Times about a loan from Louise Taylor, who was Britney Spears’s business manager, and James Spears, who kept Spears in a conservatorship for years.
Suiting up for the Big Board 
Today, the luxury men’s suit maker Ermenegildo Zegna will become, it says, the first Italian fashion brand to list on the New York Stock Exchange. It’s doing so via one of Wall Street’s big trends, a special-purpose acquisition company, DealBook’s Lauren Hirsch and The Times’s Vanessa Friedman write.
Meet the new Zegna. It’s going public by merging with a SPAC run by the former UBS leader Sergio Ermotti. The deal values Zegna — which will drop “Ermenegildo,” the first name of both its founder and his grandson, the company’s current C.E.O. — at about $3 billion. New investors will inject $760 million in new capital into the business, which the company may use in part to keep investing in its Italian textile supply chain. The Zegna family will still keep a roughly 66 percent stake.
The deal represents multiple bets:
    • A rebound in luxury. Rising consumer confidence pushed the luxury market’s growth this year up nearly 30 percent over 2020. Zegna itself expects to bring in about $1.35 billion in sales this year.
    • An ability to keep moving beyond suits. Zegna generated about half of its sales from leisurewear, up from 38 percent in 2016, and plans to keep focusing on that category and other areas like children’s wear. “They’ve done a lot of homework to be more credible and more appealing outside of formal wear — and I think they’ve gone a long way with that work,” Luca Solca, an analyst at Bernstein, told The Times.
    • A bigger future. As it competes against French luxury conglomerates like LVMH and Kering, Zegna has ambitions to grow as well. It has acquired the label Thom Browne and invested millions in Italian textile manufacturers, and may take advantage of its stock and easier access to financing for future acquisitions. “One part of the reason we did what we did is because of scale,” Gildo Zegna, the company’s C.E.O., told The Times. “Don’t ask me how big scale would be, but surely bigger than what it is right now.”
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
    • Canada’s Bank of Montreal will buy Bank of the West from BNP Paribas for $16.3 billion, in one of the biggest banking takeovers in recent memory. (Bloomberg)
    • The Chinese real estate developer Kaisa failed to make several bond payments on dollar bonds and has begun financial restructuring talks with creditors. (WSJ)
    • Mondee, whose software helps agents find flight deals, is reportedly near a deal to go public by merging with a SPAC. (WSJ)
    • How oil giants like Exxon Mobil and Shell became big targets for activist investors. (FT)
Policy
    • Business leaders and lawmakers worry about dwindling federal pandemic aid amid the surge of the Omicron variant. (WaPo)
    • President Biden’s approach to overhauling the H-1B worker visa program may put him at odds with other Democrats. (Politico)
    • Some Amazon shareholders asked the e-commerce giant’s board to conduct an independent audit of workplace safety at the company. (The Verge)
Best of the rest
    • Jeffrey Epstein was so close to the family of the financier Glen Dubin that Dubin’s children called him “Uncle F.” (Bloomberg)
    • No more 8 a.m. meetings, and other resolutions for 2022. (NYT)
    • Generation Z is increasingly choosing e-sports over physical ones. (NYT)
    • A peppermint shortage has left some candy stores short of canes days before Christmas. (Insider)
    • “So much happened in 2021. But did it?” (NYT)
We’d like your feedback! Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO:  (PHOTOGRAPH BY Denis Balibouse/Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (91%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (90%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); VACCINES (90%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS (89%); BUSINESS TRAVEL (79%); CORONAVIRUSES (78%); COVID CORONAVIRUS (78%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MANDATORY COVID VACCINATIONS (78%); MANDATORY VACCINATIONS (78%); VIRUSES (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (76%); LAWYERS (76%); EXECUTIVES (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (73%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (73%); SPORTS & RECREATION (73%); VIRTUAL EVENTS (73%); OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY AGENCIES (71%); OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY LAW (71%); COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS REGULATION & POLICY (68%); LAW & LEGAL SYSTEM (68%); APPEALS (67%); APPEALS COURTS (67%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (67%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (66%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); FUTURES (55%); Coronavirus Omicron Variant (%); Ermenegildo Zegna Holditalia SpA (%); World Economic Forum (%); Manchin, Joe III (%); Vaccination and Immunization (%)

Company:  JPMORGAN CHASE & CO (83%)

Organization: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (94%)

Ticker: JPM (NYSE) (83%); JPM (LSE) (83%)

Industry: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (83%); NAICS523999 MISCELLANEOUS FINANCIAL INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES (83%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING & SECURITIES DEALING (83%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (83%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (83%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION COMPANIES (83%); SIC6022 STATE COMMERCIAL BANKS (83%); VACCINES (90%); BUSINESS TRAVEL (79%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (78%); MANDATORY COVID VACCINATIONS (78%); MANDATORY VACCINATIONS (78%); TRAVEL INDUSTRY (78%); LAWYERS (76%); TRAVEL BANS (76%); BANKING & FINANCE (75%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (73%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (71%); BANK BRANCHES (65%); FUTURES (55%)

Person: JOE MANCHIN (74%); ELIZABETH WARREN (50%); Manchin, Joe III

Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); SWITZERLAND (92%)

Load-Date: December 20, 2021


End of Document
Workers in Silicon Valley Weigh in on Obama's Immigration Order
The New York Times
November 24, 2014 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2014 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3
Length: 1148 words
Byline: By VINDU GOEL
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- Silicon Valley's constant stream of new apps and services depends on hundreds of thousands of foreign-born engineers to help create them. So the technology industry has been pushing for changes to the nation's immigration policy for more than a decade to allow more skilled workers into the country.
President Obama's executive action on immigration last week falls well short of what both immigrants and industry leaders were seeking. The most vexing issues they face, like speeding up the process for obtaining permanent residency and getting more visas for high-skilled technology work, would require an act of Congress.
Nonetheless, some immigrants working in technology were heartened by the president's actions and said they could potentially make life and work in the United States easier.
One of Mr. Obama's initiatives, for example, would give entrepreneurs starting a company a special founder's visa, provided that they raise outside funding. That appeals to Laks Srini, a founder of the San Francisco start-up Zenefits.
Right now, the law is so Kafkaesque that Mr. Srini, who is from India, had to get his American co-founder, Parker Conrad, to officially hire him as Zenefits' database administrator simply to transfer his visa from his previous employer so they could create the company.
In less than two years, the two of them have built Zenefits, an online service that helps companies manage their employee benefits, into a company with 450 employees.
But Mr. Srini, the chief technology officer, still has not been able to upgrade his visa to a more flexible type that reflects his role at the company. He is applying for a visa for people of extraordinary talent -- nicknamed the ''I am awesome'' visa because it essentially requires applicants to meet about a dozen requirements to prove eminence in their fields.
Gesturing at the cluster of desks around his own open-plan work space, Mr. Srini said the American visa restrictions had also crimped his ability to hire talented engineers. Because the primary visas used to hire software workers, known as H-1B visas, run out in a few days when the lottery is opened every April, he really has one chance a year to hire foreigners. And if they don't win the lottery, they have to wait another year, often forcing Zenefits to find someone else.
''When you're a start-up, you live and die by speed,'' Mr. Srini said.
Zenefits plans for now to divert some potential San Francisco jobs to Vancouver, where Canadian immigration laws make it much easier to bring in foreign engineers.
He said that immigration was a ''gnarly problem'' but one thing the politicians fighting in Washington don't understand is that for every foreign engineer Zenefits hires, it also hires more than 10 American citizens or permanent residents to do various jobs.
Two of the Obama administration's other proposals could help Zenefits and other Silicon Valley companies with their recruiting.
One would extend the amount of time that someone who has earned an American science or technology degree could work at a company after graduation. Currently the limit for such ''optional practical training'' is 29 months. Mr. Obama has directed immigration officials to begin a formal process to set more permissive rules for the program.
A longer training period would help companies hire more workers than the current annual cap of 85,000 new H-1B visas allows.
Mr. Srini said provisions that would allow spouses of high-tech visa holders to work would also help. Zenefits has lost promising overseas job applicants because they had wives who did not want to give up the ability to work so that their husbands could take jobs in the United States.
Glynn Morrison, a Scotsman on an H-1B visa who was one of Zenefits' earliest employees, said his wife, a South Korean citizen, is still unable to work after nearly two years in the United States. She wants to be an accountant, but cannot legally work even as a basic bookkeeper. Although she has a bachelor's degree, she is considering a second degree just to get a work permit, he said.
''It doesn't make sense to have so many people in America not working,'' Mr. Morrison said. ''You want them to pay taxes.''
While Mr. Srini and Mr. Morrison will most likely find ways to stay in the United States for the long term, the future is more hazy for Charlotte Brugman, a Dutch citizen who is working at Samahope, a small San Francisco nonprofit that provides medical services in developing countries.
Ms. Brugman said that she and her Swiss husband, an M.B.A. student at the University of California, Berkeley, were trying to figure out what Mr. Obama's proposals meant for them.
Ms. Brugman's ability to work is tied to the visa of her husband, Johannes Koeppel, who is on a Fulbright scholarship that entitles him to a more permissive visa. The spouses of other foreign students at the Berkeley business school cannot work at all.
Although Mr. Koeppel is also building an online travel start-up with two American co-founders, when he finishes his business degree next year, it's unclear how much longer he and his wife can stay in the country. Without a change in visa status, they would have to leave after 18 months.
Mr. Koeppel is hoping to qualify for the founder's visa that Mr. Obama has proposed. But based on the details released so far, he may be in a Catch-22: It's difficult to get that visa without raising money from investors, and it's difficult to raise money if the investors don't know if the founder can stay in the country.
Confounding everyone is the vagueness of the president's proposals. While it's clear that he cannot solve the biggest problems without going to Congress, people in the tech industry said they still did not understand how exactly his proposals would play out. In many cases, the president has outlined broad ideas, which have been assigned to the immigration agencies and various task forces to figure out.
''The two lines in the speech did not really give us much more clarity about what it will mean for us,'' Ms. Brugman said.
Collectively, the president's visa proposals for highly skilled workers would add about 147,000 people to the work force by 2024, according to an analysis by the White House's Council of Economic Advisers.
That's too little, too late for many in the technology industry.
Carl Guardino, chief executive of the Silicon Valley Leadership Group, which represents most of the region's large tech companies, said the industry was disappointed that Mr. Obama never followed through on his original campaign promise to pass comprehensive immigration legislation in his first year in office.
''He talked eloquently and in depth about low-wage workers, and I appreciate that,'' Mr. Guardino said, referring to the president's speech on Thursday. ''But from an innovation economy perspective? I wasn't expecting a lot, and it lived up to my expectations.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/24/technology/workers-in-silicon-valley-weigh-in-on-obamas-immigration-order.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Glynn Morrison, left, a Scotsman, is an engineer at the start-up Zenefits. Laks Srini, the company's chief technology officer, who is from India, has been unable to upgrade his visa to reflect his role.
 Charlotte Brugman, a Dutch citizen, can work because her husband's Fulbright scholarship entitles him to a more permissive visa. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (77%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (73%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (71%); OFFICE DESIGN (68%); WORKSPACE OPTIONS (68%)

Industry: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (73%); LOTTERIES (60%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (77%)

Geographic: SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (74%); VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (50%); BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (50%); UNITED STATES (94%); CANADA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: November 26, 2014


End of Document
What Google and Twitter Say About Trump’s First 100 Days
The New York Times 
April 28, 2017 Friday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 588 words
Byline: MATT STEVENS
Highlight: The results of their data analyses aren’t all that shocking. It turns out the president posts a lot, and people searched Google for information on immigration.
Body


The rulers of the social media and search worlds have run their high-powered analytics to give us incisive new insight into President Trump’s first 100 days in office.
And the results, are … well, basically what you’d expect.
We now have data to support the claim that, yes, our commander in chief posts often on Twitter about the media and making America great; we also now know that people spent his first few months in office searching mostly for information about immigration and other related topics.
But let’s start with Mr. Trump himself.
In a report released on Friday, Twitter examined how Mr. Trump leveraged his favorite social media platform during this early stage. They said Mr. Trump had posted a total of 486 times as of 1 p.m. on Day 98. (The New York Times has published an interactive feature catalog           ing           posts from the start of his presidency.)
A less rigorous analysis by yours truly found that, by comparison, former President Barack Obama sent out a dozen messages on Twitter over that span; Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, however, sent a ton; Beyoncé did not send any.
Mr. Trump sent Twitter messages containing the word “great” most often, followed by “America/American” and “news/media,” according to Twitter. Other words in the top 10 included: “jobs,” “big” and “fake news.”
Given that so many of his favorite phrases involved the news, it only makes sense that some of the Twitter handles that Mr. Trump mentioned most were media companies. The handle @Whitehouse topped the list, but @CNN and @FoxNews were close behind. The handles @nytimes and @foxandfriends tied for second — presumably for different reasons.
In its 100-days report, Twitter said Mr. Trump was mentioned most on Jan. 20 — his inauguration. Users also mentioned the president frequently on Twitter when he signed controversial executive orders, when he claimed that Mr. Obama had him wiretapped and when one of Mr. Trump’s senior advisers urged television viewers to buy fashion products marketed by his daughter.
Google similarly found in its analysis that search interest in Mr. Trump peaked during his first day in office before beginning a gradual decline.
Still, if Mr. Trump seeks a “win” over Mr. Obama, he can now say that he was searched 140 percent more than the former president during their respective first 100 days, according to the Google Trends analysis released Wednesday.
Among the questions people asked Google to answer the most in that period:
 “How many executive orders has Trump signed?”
 “What countries did Trump ban?
 “Why did Trump bomb Syria?”
Unsurprisingly, topics like immigration and Syria also topped the list of topics people searched for frequently during the first 100 days. Terms related to immigration such as H-1B visas, which allow employers to bring in foreign workers for years at a time, and            DACA, which refers to a program called Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, also garnered big interest.
And although many of the issues that divide the country were among those that people searched most, one needs only to turn back to Twitter for a possible sign of unity.
The president’s most reposted message since Jan. 20?
Peaceful protests are a hallmark of our democracy. Even if I don't always agree, I recognize the rights of people to express their views. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 22, 2017
Maybe, just maybe, we all can just get along.
Related Articles
    • Visa Applications Pour In by Truckload Before Door Slams Shut
    • Trump’s Soft Spot for Dreamers Alienates Immigration Hard-Liners
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: DATA ANALYTICS (90%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (90%); SOCIAL MEDIA (90%); TRUMP'S FIRST 100 DAYS (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); TRENDS (78%); RANKINGS (74%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); NEGATIVE TECHNOLOGY NEWS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); WIRETAPPING (50%); Social Media (%); Google Inc (%); Twitter (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Ticker: Google Inc; Google Inc; Twitter

Industry: DATA ANALYTICS (90%); SOCIAL MEDIA (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); MEDIA & TELECOMMUNICATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (91%); BARACK OBAMA (78%); JUSTIN TRUDEAU (70%); BEYONCE KNOWLES (54%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: SYRIA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

Load-Date: April 29, 2017


End of Document
The Democrats Have an Immigration Problem; Feature
The New York Times 
October 10, 2018 Wednesday 16:26 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: MAGAZINE
Length: 7156 words
Byline: Robert Draper
Highlight: Family separations, multibillion-dollar border-wall schemes, unleashed ICE officers —the Trump presidency has taught the Democrats what they stand against.  Now they have to figure out what they stand for.
Body


In early June, the Washington office of Representative Pramila Jayapal began to hear rumors about the women. They had crossed into Texas, where Border Patrol officers promptly arrested them. But now the women were somewhere around Seattle, the city Jayapal represents.
Her staff made calls. Usually, undocumented immigrants in the area were held at the Northwest Detention Center, a private facility operated under a contract with Immigration and Customs Enforcement. But the detention center had not received the women. There were too many of them for ICE to house. Instead, as Jayapal learned on June 7, the mothers were now inmates at a Bureau of Prisons facility near the Seattle-Tacoma airport.
Jayapal flew home to Seattle the following night. She showed up at the federal prison the next morning and was escorted to the three pods where the new inmates were held. There were 174 women. Many of them had come to the United States with their children, some as young as 5. A majority were from the violence-racked Central American countries El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras; others had traveled from as far as China and the Democratic Republic of Congo. All of them sought asylum. Some of them, after crossing the Rio Grande, spent their first night in the United States shivering in their damp clothes on Mylar sheets in the sprawling processing center in McAllen, Tex., nicknamed the hielera, or icebox.
But at least their children had been with them. Now they were gone. The immigration authorities would not say where the children had been taken or when they would be returned. As part of the Trump administration’s zero-tolerance policy, several thousand children were being separated from their parents at the border — a tactic that previous administrations had avoided and that the mothers could not have anticipated. Meanwhile, the 174 women, having been denied initial interviews to determine whether their asylum claims merited their protection under international law, were instead piled onto airplanes and flown to the Pacific Northwest, where they were given slips of paper with their children’s names on them.
Jayapal sat and listened to the women for nearly three hours. Then, outside the prison, she spoke into an aide’s video camera. After vowing to help return the separated children to their parents, Jayapal set her sights on ICE. “I am going to do everything I can in my power,” she said, “to stop funding a rogue agency at the Department of Homeland Security.”
Of the 535 current members of Congress, only 12 are immigrants, and Jayapal is one of them. The first Indian-American woman to be elected to the House, Jayapal, who is now 53, came to the United States at age 16, unaccompanied and on a student visa — not to flee chaos but to attend great universities (Georgetown and Northwestern) and then make a comfortable living (first by executing leveraged buyouts at PaineWebber on Wall Street and then by selling heart defibrillators out of Cincinnati). She left the private sector in 1991 to work for nonprofits, and in 2001, a year after becoming an American citizen, she became an immigration rights organizer. She developed a reputation for her fierce intelligence, energy and media savvy — and appetite for the national stage. She was elected to Congress as a Democrat on the same night that Donald Trump won the presidency.
Trump’s incendiary immigration policies have afforded Jayapal a spotlight seldom made available to freshman legislators. But in pledging to “stop funding a rogue agency,” Jayapal directed the spotlight onto the Democratic Party’s ambivalent feelings about immigration. Jayapal represents a new breed of liberal politician who is — along with some of this year’s other congressional candidates, like Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan — more wedded to social-justice movements than to the slow grind of governance. For years, a number of immigration advocates had been agitating to abolish ICE. Now Jayapal was on record as the first member of Congress to openly endorse doing so.
On June 25, her colleague Mark Pocan of Wisconsin — the co-chairman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, of which Jayapal is first vice chairwoman — announced that he would soon be introducing a bill that would form a new agency to replace ICE within a year; Jayapal joined as a co-sponsor. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, believed by many to be positioning herself for a presidential run in 2020, jumped on the bandwagon, telling Chris Cuomo on CNN, “I think you should reimagine ICE under a new agency with a very different mission.”
But the party’s most prominent immigration policymakers in the House — Luis V. Gutiérrez of Illinois and Zoe Lofgren of California — were not at all happy with the Abolish ICE bill. “I talked to Mark and told him, ‘I don’t think this is a good bill,’ ” Lofgren, a former immigration lawyer, told me. “It lets President Trump off the hook. ICE is doing what he told them to do.” Gutiérrez, a note of bewilderment in his voice, said: “I mean, you want to change the conversation from the inhumanity of caging children to abolishing ICE? They must have been jumping for joy at the White House.” (Indeed, Trump subsequently scoffed: “Nancy Pelosi and the Democrats want to abolish the brave men and women of ICE. What I want to do is abolish the killers in ISIS.”)
The bill’s proponents also seemed oblivious to how it would play in districts less liberal than, say, Seattle. In late June, while the notion of abolishing ICE was first being voiced by elected Democrats, Representative Peter J. Visclosky of Indiana expressed his consternation during a caucus meeting. “I’ve been here a long time,” he said, according to one person who was present as well as notes taken by a second attendee. “At one time, there were eight Democrats from Indiana” in the House. “Now there are two.”
The economic conditions in Indiana remained a source of overriding concern for his constituents, Visclosky said. In meetings with them, “they said that they will vote for me — implying that they won’t vote for other Democrats. I’m trying to help them with their jobs.” He went on: “I support everything that this caucus is doing on immigration, and on the Syrian population. But I just hope that someday this caucus shows the same energy and passion” when “we talk about jobs.” Several in the caucus applauded.
When Representative Kevin McCarthy, a California Republican and the House majority leader, got wind of the Abolish ICE bill, he gleefully offered to schedule it for an immediate vote. Jayapal and Pocan saw the bind they were in with their caucus and indicated that they would vote against their own bill if it were brought to the floor. McCarthy retaliated with a bill declaring support for ICE. “It’s a political vote,” Representative Nancy Pelosi, the minority leader, advised Democrats. “Treat it politically.” Jayapal and most of her fellow Democrats simply voted “present,” though several from conservative districts — including Visclosky — voted for the resolution.
McCarthy’s stunt may have been cynical, but the Democrats were in no position to claim the moral high ground. Hardly for the first time, the party had entered the immigration debate with palpable misgivings — and then, at the brink of action, scattered. “Democrats don’t even agree with their own bill they introduced,” McCarthy triumphantly crowed on the House floor. “They lack the courage of their so-called convictions.”
Few issues have been made more black and white by the Trump administration than the highly complex matter of immigration. A quarter-century ago, both political parties had the same room-temperature appraisal of immigrants. But while Republicans have reacted to the question of whether immigrants strengthen the United States in a mostly static way over time — 30 percent responding positively in 1994 and 35 percent doing so in 2016, according to a Pew Research study — the favorable view among Democrats has risen sharply over the same period, to 78 percent from 32 percent.
Today the Democratic Party is generally pro-immigration. And yet many of its elected officeholders remain deeply wary of saying so and especially conflicted about how to address the flaws in the country’s immigration system — or whether to address them at all. Their reasoning may be as simple as this: Unlike Republican voters, who routinely punish their politicians for being insufficiently anti-immigrant, Democratic voters do not reward theirs for being forthrightly pro-immigrant.
“Fifteen years ago, we viewed the immigration-reform community as the redheaded stepchild of the Democratic coalition,” said Frank Sharry, the executive director of America’s Voice, an immigration advocacy group. “Unions were skeptical, if not opposed. Environmentalists were conflicted. And civil rights groups didn’t see us as central to their cause.”
There are other reasons immigration has yet to reliably animate Democratic lawmakers. One of them was evident when I met Sharry in his office in a WeWork rental space in downtown Washington. Relative to other progressive special interests, the immigrant rights movement has traditionally been a pauper’s crusade, lacking in billionaire benefactors and financially outmatched by ideological rivals like the Center for Immigration Studies, the Federation of American Immigration Reform and NumbersUSA.
Mark Zuckerberg, Laurene Powell Jobs and George Soros have recently begun donating to specific immigration causes like family reunification and giving seed money to migrant entrepreneurs. But in general, said Kevin Appleby, a senior director at the Center for Migration Studies of New York, a nonpartisan immigration think tank affiliated with the Catholic Church, “some of the immigration funders can blow hot and cold, because they’re as frustrated as we are when there’s not a lot of progress on the immigration-reform front.”
Immigrants, meanwhile, are a less than formidable electoral force. Undocumented immigrants (there are roughly 22.1 million, according to a new Yale study) cannot vote. The country’s estimated 27.3 million eligible Latino voters, a subset of whom constitute the dominant demographic group among legal immigrants, consistently turn out in low numbers. Never was this more apparent than in the 2016 presidential election, when Hillary Clinton’s welcoming stance toward undocumented immigrants failed to generate any increase in Hispanic turnout, even against an opponent who began his campaign with a speech characterizing Mexican immigrants as rapists and drug dealers.
But there is another explanation for why immigration has long been relegated to the Democratic Party’s back burner. Until recently, Americans have tended to view immigration less as a moral issue and more in crass economic terms. “Though everyone says the system is broken, there’s also a nod-nod wink-wink belief that it is broke, so don’t fix it,” Appleby said. “The crops are being picked. The tables are being bused. The only wronged party are the undocumented immigrants with little political power, and no one’s ever been voted out of office because immigration reform failed to pass.”
Instead, since long before Trump, Democratic politicians have feared that supporting immigrants would result in being voted out of office — specifically by conservative constituents who fear Muslim terrorists or undocumented Latinos taking advantage of public services, overrunning schools and hospitals. President Bill Clinton understood this dynamic well. During his triangulating quest for re-election in 1996, Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, which added more border fencing and piled on further penalties for those illegally crossing into the United States.
Immigration advocates were pleasantly surprised when Clinton’s successor, George W. Bush, made good on his campaign rhetoric to prioritize immigration reform. Bush’s White House advisers spent the summer of 2001 contriving a pathway to citizenship for some three million undocumented immigrants, with legislative support from fellow Republicans like Senator John McCain and Representative Paul D. Ryan. That effort extended to the early morning of Sept. 11, when White House officials had scheduled a gathering in a Capitol office building to discuss immigration policies, up to and including amnesty, that “were a lot more liberal than anything we’re seeing today,” says Mike Gempler, the executive director of the Washington Growers League, a nonprofit advocacy group for farmers in Washington State.
Pramila Jayapal was living in Seattle and directing a technology transfer fund in September 2001 when a local schoolteacher friend informed her that Muslim and Arab children were skipping school because they were being bullied by classmates. Jayapal formed the Hate Free Zone Campaign of Washington, an organization that led a pro bono legal effort that halted the deportation of more than 2,700 Somali immigrants — part of the Bush administration’s post-Sept. 11 immigration crackdown that also started deportation proceedings against 14,000 Muslims under a “special registration” policy designed by Attorney General John Ashcroft’s immigration adviser, Kris Kobach. (Kobach would later, as Kansas secretary of state, advocate aggressive voter-ID laws as well as a Muslim registry and serve as the vice chairman of Trump’s short-lived commission to investigate election fraud.)
In 2008, Hate Free Zone morphed into OneAmerica, a group advocating equal justice and human rights for immigrants. In November of that year, Jayapal wept while watching Barack Obama win the presidency. Like most Democrats, she assumed that a progressive black senator who had been a community organizer and whose father was Kenyan would be more sympathetic to immigrants than a wealthy conservative Texan.
But Jayapal had no illusions about her party’s commitment to the issue. Aside from a few champions — chief among them Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Lofgren and Gutiérrez — Democrats had shown only flagging support for immigration reform during the Bush presidency. In 2006, the current and future Democratic Senate leaders, Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer, initially resisted a comprehensive reform package sponsored by McCain and Kennedy because, Frank Sharry says, “all they cared about was winning back the Senate, and they didn’t want to hand Bush a victory.” But when it failed in the House and was replaced by a bill to build several hundred miles of secure fencing along the border, both Democratic leaders voted for it — as did Hillary Clinton and Obama, both senators at the time.
A year later, the Democrats controlled both chambers of Congress, and Gutiérrez thought the moment was ripe for immigration legislation. “I go to Speaker Nancy Pelosi, and I say, ‘I got this bill,’ ” he recalled. “She says, ‘Go find me 45 to 50 Republicans who’ll sign onto the bill, and come back and we’ll talk.’ I’m like: What the [expletive]? We’re, like, in the majority. Why do I have this onus on me? But I knew why. Nancy Pelosi isn’t going to put the majority at risk.”
The concern was prescient. Roughly a third of Senate Democrats sided against a comprehensive immigration bill in 2007, which would have provided more money for border fencing as well as a new process for undocumented residents in the United States to eventually obtain citizenship. Most of the dissenting caucus members came from conservative states, but a few others were union allies, like Bernie Sanders, the independent from Vermont — “this progressive icon,” Gutiérrez snickered, “racing from the Senate floor to go on ‘Lou Dobbs’ to say how he’s standing up for the American worker.”
In the fall of 2007, Niki Tsongas, a Democrat, won a House special election in Massachusetts that should not have been as close as it was. Democrats widely believed that Tsongas hurt her chances when, two days before the election, she stated that undocumented immigrants ought to be able to obtain a driver’s license. In what Sharry would term an “iconic” moment for the immigrant rights community, Rahm Emanuel, then the chairman of the House Democratic caucus, told The Washington Post that immigration had “emerged as the third rail of American politics. And anyone who doesn’t realize that isn’t with the American people.”
Obama named Emanuel his chief of staff immediately after his victory in 2008, which sent an unsettling signal to Gutiérrez. “A few weeks after the election, I’m shooting pool with a bunch of lawyer buddies, and I decide to show them how cool I am by calling on my cellphone my brother from Chicago, the president-elect of the United States,” Gutiérrez recalled this summer in his Washington office. “Barack — I can’t believe it — he picks up! I said, ‘Listen, I gotta come down and talk to you.’ ” When they later met in person, Gutiérrez said, “I brought up immigration. And I remember, he said: ‘Luis, we’re losing hundreds of thousands of jobs. It’s economic chaos. This is not the time.’ He said, ‘Let’s try it in 120 days.’ ”
Still, Gutiérrez, Jayapal and other immigration advocates were unprepared for what came next. Obama’s secretary of homeland security, Janet Napolitano, and the director of ICE, John Morton, began issuing deportations at a record pace, while continuing Bush’s policy of workplace raids. After an outcry from immigrant groups, ICE shifted its tactics from busting workers to the more visually antiseptic practice of auditing businesses. But the effect was just as crippling, said Gempler of the Washington Growers League: “The audits we characterized as slow-moving raids.”
With the Democratic administration more preoccupied with demonstrating its commitment to enforcing laws than with fixing a dysfunctional system, immigration advocates realized that their own strategy needed reappraising. “One of the major inflection moments in the immigration rights movement was in 2009 and 2010, after waiting around for Obama to prioritize immigration reform, which he didn’t do,” recalls Deepak Bhargava of the social-justice group Center for Community Change. “And within the community, after a big debate, the decision was made to go after him.”
Among the activists who did was Jayapal. “Pramila was one of the leaders who most forthrightly said, ‘We’re not about electing Democrats; we’re about representing the rights of our constituents,’ ” Bhargava recalled. “It was the right decision, but it did come with criticism from Democratic politicians and other groups like labor unions, who said, ‘We don’t go after Democrats.’ But she’s always been a movement person first.”
In June 2010, Jayapal and other demonstrators were arrested after blocking an intersection in downtown Seattle to protest Obama’s reluctance to push for immigration reform. She spent the night in jail for the first time in her life. Jayapal and other advocates were now referring to the Democratic president as the “deporter in chief.” They made their case to White House officials and Democratic lawmakers; Bhargava recalls seeing Jayapal get into a heated argument with Schumer over whether Obama should be denounced for the deportations. (Neither Jayapal nor Schumer recalls the encounter.)
Schumer and other Democratic leaders concurred with Obama that the party needed to demonstrate to voters that it cared about border security. Still, the Department of Homeland Security during Obama’s first term seemed more interested in achieving peak numbers — 419,000 deportations in 2012 — than focusing on criminals. As one of the administration’s key staff members on immigration, Cecilia Muñoz, the director of the White House Domestic Policy Council, conceded to me recently: “It’s fair to say they” — meaning Napolitano and Morton — “were too tentative in refining enforcement policy. That really didn’t happen until the second term.”
But, Muñoz maintained, Obama was in fact committed to fixing the country’s immigration system. “And we got no takers, on either the Democratic or Republican side,” she recalled. “This was in 2010, when we’re still in an economic free-fall. And every time Obama went out and said, ‘I want to do something about immigration reform,’ Axelrod’s phone would light up from Democrats: ‘Please make him stop talking about this,’ ” she said, referring to David Axelrod, a senior adviser to the president. “They were worried about the 2010 midterms, thinking that any conversation about immigration was a conversation we weren’t having about job security.”
That same year, a new immigration issue emerged that would test the convictions of both parties as well as the electorate. A decade before, Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois was inspired by a young constituent, Tereza Lee, a piano prodigy who had arrived in the United States with her undocumented Korean parents when she was 2\xC2. Durbin first drafted the Dream Act, which would provide legal status to people in Lee’s position, in 2001. But it went nowhere until 2010, when he began showing up at the White House with lists of children who were at risk of deportation.
The concept of protecting children from deportation when America was the only country most of them had ever known appeared to enjoy more widespread public support than any previous immigration issue. A 2010 Gallup poll showed that 54 percent of respondents supported passing the Dream Act.
Durbin enlisted an important Democratic ally: Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader. As a congressman in 1993, Reid wrote a bill denying citizenship to children born in America to undocumented immigrants. But since then, he had undergone a metamorphosis, albeit a convenient one. Seeing the Latino vote in his home state of Nevada as the key to his re-election victory in 2010, he vowed to bring Durbin’s Dream Act to the floor right after the midterm elections.[Here’s a guide to everything you need to know about the November elections.]
Reid did as promised. But as had been the case with the Democrats and Bush in 2006, the Republicans had no interest in handing Obama a victory. Nor did they feel they had to: As with another proposal that polled well, universal background checks for gun purchases, the idea of protecting immigrant children from deportation seemed to enjoy only mile-wide-and-inch-deep support, with no discernible electoral consequence for defying it. Though a version of the Dream Act sponsored by Representative Lucille Roybal-Allard of California passed in the House by eight votes, the Senate bill fell five votes short of overcoming a filibuster, thanks in part to the “no” votes of five Democratic senators.
Leading the opposition was Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who condemned the Dream Act as “a reward for illegal activity.” Sessions, the ranking Republican member on the Senate Judiciary Committee, typically framed the immigration debate as a straightforward matter of enforcing laws on the books, but he also openly stoked white fears, later warning of a scenario in which “we’ll have the highest percentage of Americans, nonnative born, since the founding of the republic.”
Immigration advocates expected no less from Sessions. What disappointed them was the president’s failure to rally support for the Dream Act. “It was another case of Obama saying, ‘We’re with you,’ but then spending his political capital elsewhere,” recalls Kevin Appleby. Among Obama’s legislative priorities in the 2010 lame-duck session, “we were last on the list. Then Obama comes out in the Rose Garden and says, ‘My biggest disappointment is that the Dream Act didn’t pass.’ I wanted to throw my shoe at the TV.”
The defeat was an especially embittering moment for the newest protagonists of the immigration movement: the Dreamers themselves, many of them teenagers who were now at risk of being deported to countries they had barely lived in. Thousands of them organized marches, sit-ins, hunger strikes and visits to Capitol Hill. Obama was persuaded to issue the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals executive order in 2012, which issued Dreamers a renewable two-year deportation deferral. The recipients, however, were by now under no illusions. “Obama didn’t give DACA to us out of the goodness of his heart,” says Cristina Jiménez Moreta, the daughter of undocumented Ecuadorean immigrants, a founder of the nation’s largest youth immigrant organization, United We Dream, and a 2017 MacArthur fellow. “He had to be pressured and pushed through a two-year campaign. So we know there is nothing they will do on their own unless there is people power creating the conditions where they’re forced to act.”
Trump’s arrival in Washington provided an adrenaline jolt that the immigration movement had not experienced in decades. In short order, the new president made Sessions his attorney general and named as his senior policy adviser Sessions’s former aide Stephen Miller, a staunch immigration opponent who put his stamp on Trump’s policies and speeches on the issue during the campaign. Trump instituted what he called “extreme vetting” of foreign visitors and renewed his pledge to make building a border wall a priority. And he repeatedly refused to condemn white supremacists, even those who violently attacked counterprotesters at a rally in Charlottesville, Va. The immigrant community’s various factions — Dreamers; Latino, Asian and Muslim groups; advocates for women and skilled H-1B visa applicants; naturalized citizens; and asylum seekers — now found a common foe. “Trump in a weird way unified us,” says Jorge L. Barón of the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project. “Whatever divisions there used to be, his attacks have gone through so many people that all of us feel embattled.”
In September 2017, Trump ordered a six-month phaseout of Obama’s DACA executive order. Then in January, he summoned Durbin and Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, to the Oval Office with the intention of signing a deal that would ratify DACA in exchange for funding for the border wall. When Miller and John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, learned of the impending deal, they ushered Senators Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia, both immigration hard-liners, to meet with Trump first.
The president’s disposition had changed by the time Durbin and Graham arrived. He characterized Haiti and various African nations as “shithole countries,” wondered aloud why America wasn’t welcoming more Norwegian immigrants and abandoned the legislative compromises that were on the table. “He said he wanted a wall,” Gutiérrez said of the torpedoed DACA deal. “He got me to say O.K. Bernie Sanders, all of them. And then he told us to go [expletive] ourselves.”
The Democrats voted to shut down the federal government over Trump’s rescinded DACA deal. But Schumer, now the Senate minority leader, relented after a mere three days, prompting United We Dream members to stage sit-ins in his Senate office. Durbin privately reminded Cristina Jiménez Moreta that Congress was duty-bound to find legislative solutions.
Jiménez remained unrepentant when I asked her later about the sit-ins. “The days are gone for any Democrat to think that saying ‘I stand with immigrants’ is enough,” she told me. “We expect to see them boldly put forward an alternative to the administration’s mass-deportation agenda. We expect the Democratic approach to be complete opposition to Trump and in complete alignment with what the rest of the country stands behind.”
Jayapal acknowledged recently that “a government shutdown for an immigration issue was pretty unimaginable a few years ago.” Still, she said: “It was too short. If you’re going to do something like that, you’ve got to stick it out. Otherwise, what have you accomplished?”
In the immigration movement from which Jayapal rose to prominence, politicians are broadly seen as forces of intransigence and at times dismaying ignorance. People close to Jayapal told me that she ran for Congress in no small measure because of her disenchantment with the elected officials she had encountered in both the state and national arenas. It has also been her tendency, even going back to her early days as an activist, to assert herself in ways that might rankle those who had been putting in hard work long before she arrived on the scene.
The notion of outside agitator abruptly turned insider is a more familiar figure on the right than the left in Washington these days, and more recognizable to someone from the Tea Party movement than to a consummate legislator like Lofgren or Durbin. Mark Meadows, who is the chairman of the ultraconservative House Freedom Caucus, told me that he considers Jayapal “a worthy adversary” and added: “The Washington power structure likes to pat people like us on the head and say, ‘Those are really good ideas; now wait your turn.’ Well, I’m too old to wait my turn, and she’s too smart to wait hers.”
In September, National Journal reported that Jayapal, who is expected to be the co-chairwoman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus next year, intends to take a page from the Freedom Caucus and, in concert with Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, form a voting bloc to drag their party aggressively leftward. A senior Democratic leadership aide wrote to me: “I think this is very bad for them. The last thing they want is to be associated with the Tea Party/Freedom Caucus. I also think it is a strategic mistake to be talking about their ‘power’ and not focused on 1) taking back the House and 2) the issues.”
To many Democrats, the opportunity to capitalize on Trump’s unpopularity is one they cannot afford to blow amid ideological infighting. As Deepak Bhargava of the Center for Community Change says: “I tell my liberal friends, right now, the president is winning. Because he won an election on this stuff, and until we can show that a new American majority will actually show up, we’re likely to get more and more of these policies.”
Trump seems convinced that what won him the presidency will remain politically potent this November. At rallies for Republican congressional candidates, the president reliably promotes his long-promised border wall while accusing Democrats of coddling the transnational MS-13 gang. “They’re more interested in taking care of criminals than they are in taking care of you,” he declared at a rally for the Senate hopeful Marsha Blackburn in Nashville in May. More discreetly, Stephen Miller has reportedly pressed Department of Homeland Security lawyers to finalize a new measure that could penalize citizenship and green-card applicants for having lawfully received public assistance like health care subsidies or food stamps, practically inviting Democrats to defend immigrant welfare recipients. Two months ago, Newt Gingrich, an informal adviser to Trump, casually framed the death of Mollie Tibbets, a young woman in Iowa who was allegedly murdered by a Mexican immigrant who the authorities have claimed was in the country illegally, as an electoral bonanza for his party. “If Mollie Tibbets is a household name by October,” Gingrich told a reporter, “Democrats will be in deep trouble.”
A top Republican staff member on Capitol Hill recently shared with me internal Republican polls indicating that in eight swing districts, the No.1 issue among voters’ concerns is immigration. Republican groups have launched attack ads accusing vulnerable Democrats like Matt Cartwright in Pennsylvania, Kyrsten Sinema in Arizona and Heidi Heitkamp in North Dakota of supporting sanctuary cities. And in the Pennsylvania Senate race, Representative Lou Barletta, a Republican and one of Trump’s earliest supporters, has sent out a fund-raising letter attacking the incumbent, Bob Casey, as one of the Senate’s “‘open borders’ leftists,” while saying of immigration in general, “America is at war.”
But when Republicans used this playbook last year, the politics of immigration proved not quite what they hoped them to be. In the Virginia governor’s race, Ed Gillespie, the Republican candidate, adopted Trump’s immigrant-villifying rhetoric and lost to the Democrat, Ralph S. Northam, by nine points. “Gillespie ran the kinds of MS-13 ads that are now running in other parts of the country,” Geoff Garin, who was Northam’s pollster in that race, told me. “We measured a real backlash to that advertising with suburban voters, in part because it connected Gillespie to the anti-immigrant thrust of Trump’s persona.”
Casey has similarly withstood Barletta’s attacks, refusing to run away from his pro-immigration record, and as of this writing enjoys an 18-point lead. Senators Jon Tester of Montana and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, two Democratic incumbents from conservative states that were overwhelmingly carried by Trump in 2016, are ahead of their Republican opponents by four and eight points, respectively, despite each having voted for the failed bipartisan immigration-reform legislation in 2013 that conservatives derided as “amnesty.”
The possibility that these seats might stay Democratic could conceivably set the stage for the party to retake the Senate. It could also make 2018 the year when immigration at last emerges as an electorally rewarding issue for Democrats. As Lynda Tran, a founder of the consulting firm 270 Strategies and herself a child of Vietnamese immigrants, said: “Where immigration was never a motivating issue for Democrats the way it’s been for Republicans, that’s starting to shift. One of the great ironies of Trump’s attacks on immigrants and people of color is that the public increasingly sees immigration as a good thing.”
The question, for immigration organizers, is what the Democrats intend to do with the power the midterm elections may bring them. When I put the matter to Jayapal, she replied: “I mean, I have notions about the easy things. To me, that’s the Dream Act. Some reversal of the family-separation policy. The real question, though, is what can we do that dramatically reins in enforcement?” Referring to a bill she helped write last year that would, among other things, replace mandatory detention of every undocumented individual apprehended at the border with greater case-by-case discretion, Jayapal added: “I think there are pieces of my detention-reform bill that could pass both chambers. Trump probably wouldn’t sign it, but it would show what we’re talking about. Maybe some of the pieces around due process and the courts. I think we could get some limits on privatization of immigration detention facilities.”
These did not strike me as “easy things.” Trump had made zero-tolerance enforcement of immigration laws a centerpiece of his presidency. He had also turned down multiple opportunities to legalize Dreamers. Jayapal seemed to think that Democratic control of the House might help sway Trump. “The question is, what would we have to give up for it?” Jayapal mused. “Would he demand a down payment for his wall? Maybe that’s the only way he gets it.”
For that matter, would newly emboldened progressive groups who had just helped return Democrats to the House majority agree to such a trade-off? “The huge issue of the whole debate,” Jayapal conceded, “is how we get people to stand together. Early in the movement, Dreamers were new to advocacy. Some of them were 12 or 14 years old. They understand now, through trial and error, that if they get a deal but their parents get deported, it’s not acceptable. That’s been a challenge for some of the other groups, too. Like the H-1Bs — my people,” she said with a laugh, referring to the fact that Jayapal herself, while awaiting naturalization, had relied on the visa that permits certain specialized foreign workers to stay in the United States. “They’re like, ‘Forget everything else; just put us in some bill!’ I don’t feel any harshness toward them. I know they feel this urgency about their life.” With a barely audible sigh, Jayapal said quietly: “Mostly, it’s hard. It’s really hard.”
She was speaking as the young and precariously documented immigrant she had once been, driving an Aerostar van filled with heart defibrillators through small towns in Indiana, where the locals often inquired as to where the dark-skinned saleswoman was from. But her words were also those of a policymaker chasing a frustratingly elusive consensus.
In mid-August, I followed Jayapal through a typical day of talking to her constituents, a fast-moving schedule that included consoling a young Latino house painter who had taken refuge in a Seattle church to avoid deportation and accompanying a Mexican dance instructor and his family to the regional headquarters of ICE to request a stay in his deportation proceedings. The congresswoman had also spent much of her morning with 15 local immigration advocates. Many of them had known Jayapal for years; one had been arrested with her while protesting Obama’s deportation policies back in 2010. “I’d love to hear what you all are seeing on the ground,” she began, “but also to start to think about what next year looks like, should we take back the House. We haven’t been able to put forward a proactive immigration policy — we’ve been so reactive. So we need to show what our strategy is. We need to think about what an immigration policy looks like.”[Learn more about the five battlefields for control of the House.]
One by one, they offered an exhausting litany of concerns. Stephen Miller was laying siege to the refugee-resettlement program. H-1B visa acceptance rates had slowed to a crawl. Delays for some naturalization applicants now reached five years. Immigrants were fearful about what might happen to them if they truthfully answered the question about their citizenship on the coming census form. The Customs and Border Protection office in Spokane appeared to be extending its search-and-seizure rights beyond the 100-mile limit prescribed by federal law. But, as Jayapal had observed, these concerns were reactions to Trump’s war on immigration. None of the activists expressed larger thoughts about what she termed “the moral imagination around immigration.” They were, as she sympathetically put it, “mired in the latest crisis.”
Back in Washington, on the morning of Sept. 26, Jayapal met with representatives from 11 of the nation’s most influential immigration rights advocates — among them, United We Dream, the A.C.L.U., the Center for Community Change and the organization Jayapal had founded, OneAmerica. They discussed 35 pieces of pending legislation that could build toward an immigration agenda for the next two years. Three of the bills — the Dream Act, a measure to guarantee automatic citizenship to certain adoptees and a series of steps intended to reduce the backlog of immigration cases — the group believed could pass the House and the Senate and be signed into law by Trump. Nineteen bills, they figured, could pass only the House. Twelve would require changes to achieve any hope of passage. And one, relating to minimizing bail for detainees, they agreed was “unlikely to pass, but important for movement building.”
That a first-term congresswoman was presiding over such a gathering, before her party had retaken even one chamber of Congress, could be seen as presumptuous. Then again, House Republicans spent eight years perfecting their condemnations of Obamacare while giving little thought to what should replace it; now millions of Americans had lost their health care, and those same Republicans were at pains to explain their negligence to voters. Jayapal was not going to endure a similar fiasco.
It was the kind of substantive, forward-thinking meeting Jayapal had been craving. No sooner did she leave it, however, than there was yet another fire to put out. The House was set to vote at 1:30 that afternoon on a series of measures under “closed rule,” in which no amendments could be offered. Among them was a resolution offered by Kevin McCarthy, the majority leader.
Like his July countermeasure to support ICE, this new resolution bore all the telltale imprints of an election-year ploy. Taking note of the fact that the City of San Francisco permits undocumented residents to vote in local school board elections, the resolution declared that “allowing illegal immigrants the right to vote devalues the franchise and diminishes the voting power of United States citizens.” McCarthy’s resolution seemed designed to put Democrats in a corner. Either they would be voting against the liberal policy of a city that happened to be represented by Nancy Pelosi, or they would be voting to let undocumented immigrants cast ballots in an American election.
Just before the vote, I asked Luis Gutiérrez what he intended to do. “I’m gonna tell them to kiss my Puerto Rican ass,” he replied. But, he acknowledged, the bill was a wily strategic move. The Democrats had complained for months about Russia’s interference in the 2016 election; now they were ushering illegal immigrants into the polling booths? “The trap has been sprung,” he said. “It’s like ‘I Love Lucy’: We’ve got some ’splaining to do. Which is what the Republicans want. What’s the adage? If you’re explaining, you’re losing.”
Gutiérrez is retiring in January after 26 years in the House. Like Jayapal, he entered Congress with a reputation as a rabble-rouser; he will exit it with a reputation as a patient negotiator. Frank Sharry speaks of Jayapal as “the next Luis.” But Jayapal didn’t share Gutiérrez’s belief that Democrats owed anyone an explanation for their votes on McCarthy’s resolution. “They’re scared,” she said of the Republicans. “We should just make it clear: We support immigrants, this proposition is ludicrous and move on. That’s a better approach than trying to hew to the old method of trying to make everyone feel comfortable.”
At about 11 that evening, she was home in her apartment near the Capitol when her legislative director emailed her the roll-call vote for McCarthy’s resolution. The numbers stunned her. Only 70 of her Democratic colleagues, including Gutiérrez, had joined her in voting against it. An additional 69 had voted “present.” Fully 49 — about one-fourth of the Democratic caucus — had voted for it.
“This is crazy,” Jayapal emailed me shortly after the vote. Maybe 10 or 12 of her compatriots were in districts challenging enough to warrant voting with the Republicans. But 49? There was so much fear inside her caucus — and outside, so much frustration from her organizer friends. Somehow Jayapal would have to navigate both sides — agitating and legislating, crossing the border back and forth, somberly aware that when it came to immigration issues, even an easy vote felt to some like a perilous journey, destination unknown.
Robert Draper is a writer at large for the magazine. He last wrote about Dan Scavino, the White House social-media director. 
PHOTO: The Families Belong Together march last June. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mark Peterson/Redux FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (91%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PRISONERS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (88%); DEMOCRACIES (79%); INTERVIEWS (79%); ARRESTS (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (66%); LEVERAGED BUYOUTS (50%); Democratic Party (%); Midterm Elections (2018) (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Immigration Detention (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Organization: BUREAU OF PRISONS (57%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); AIRPORTS (76%); AIRCRAFT (74%)

Person: PRAMILA JAYAPAL (79%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (93%); TACOMA, WA, USA (78%); MCALLEN, TX, USA (73%); WASHINGTON, USA (93%); NORTHWEST USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%); DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%); GUATEMALA (79%); HONDURAS (79%)

Load-Date: November 3, 2018


End of Document
Why the C.E.O. Behind Match.com and Tinder Took a Stand on the Texas Abortion Law; corner office
The New York Times 
December 24, 2021 Friday 13:15 EST


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 1777 words
Byline: David Gelles
Highlight: Shar Dubey runs some of the world’s most popular online dating sites. A restrictive new law prompted her to speak out.
Body


When Texas lawmakers this summer passed a restrictive abortion law, corporate America was largely silent. Asked to comment about one of the most divisive issues imaginable, executives who had spoken up about voting rights, gun control and climate change were conspicuously quiet.
Then there was Shar Dubey. As other C.E.O.s avoided the controversy, Ms. Dubey — the chief executive of Match Group, which runs online dating sites including Match.com, OKCupid and Tinder — confronted it head-on.
“As a Texas resident, I am shocked that I now live in a state where women’s reproductive laws are more regressive than most of the world, including India,” she said in an email to employees, while announcing she was creating a fund to support Match employees affected by the new law. “Surely everyone should see the danger of this highly punitive and unfair law.”
For Ms. Dubey, who has maintained a relatively low profile even while ascending to the top job at a company worth $37 billion, it was an unusual foray into political activism, and a reminder of the power she wields as one of the few top female executives in the technology industry.
Ms. Dubey, who was born and raised in India, has reached the top ranks of corporate America quietly. As a young woman, she studied at the Indian Institute of Technology, where the future Google chief executive Sundar Pichai was her classmate and friend. She then got her master’s in material science and engineering from Ohio State University, and worked her way up through a series of jobs, including Texas Instruments and the Princeton Review, before joining Match in 2006.
Hoping to fit in, Ms. Dubey shortened her name from Sharmistha to Shar. And in a quest to understand the United States, she watched countless hours of sitcoms after work.
Having taken over as C.E.O. of Match last year, Ms. Dubey is presiding over some of the busiest online dating sites at a moment when a pandemic-weary country is still looking for love.
“Some of our highest trafficked days are right around Christmas,” she said. “Everybody goes home, gets nagged by their family about being single, and makes their New Year’s resolutions. Some of our peak activity is a result of that.”
This interview was condensed and edited for clarity.
Can you tell me a bit about your childhood and growing up in India?
I grew up in this little town called Jamshedpur, which is in the northeastern part of India, about four hours from Calcutta. It was the first planned town of the famous Tata steel company. My dad was a professor of mechanical engineering, so we lived on campus of an engineering school. It was a bit of a bubble where everybody knew that your ticket to a better life went through a good education, and that was a big influence.
Both my parents were very ambitious for me, which was unusual. Growing up in India in the ’70s and ’80s, it was the boys who had to get educated, and the girls who had to grow up to become good homemakers. But my parents never thought I should be raised differently than my brother. My dad always said: “The first thing you’ve got to do is learn to stand on your own two feet. It doesn’t matter after that. Everything else is sort of easy.” So I studied and got exposed to the broader world, mostly through books. I always knew that there was a bigger and more interesting world out there for me to go check out.
You were one of the only women in your class at I.I.T. Was it a welcoming environment, or did you face discrimination?
Yes. I happened to become the only girl in my class of some 80 to 100 boys. I almost quit in the first week of landing there. There were these stadium seats where 20 people can sit in a row, and I would go sit on in the middle of the first row, and then everybody would move away from me because nobody wanted to sit next to me. My lab partner wouldn’t come do his labs with me.
I was like, “How am I going to navigate this? Nobody wants to talk to me. Am I going to survive four years?” And a girl who was a couple of years senior to me told me, “If you’re going to quit, who else is going to lose out? Grit it up and go figure out how you’re going to survive this.” And I did.
How did you make your way to Ohio State for grad school?
After I graduated, I went back to my hometown and got a job with the steel company. It became clear to me that the number of opportunities for me as a woman engineer in India were going to be limited. So I worked for a year, saved up money, and a year later, I saved up $800 and took my first plane ride of my life to Columbus, Ohio, on a very, very cold night. I didn’t even know where I was going to sleep that night.
What was the first kind of job that you got after graduating from Ohio State?
It was at an aerospace engineer manufacturing company in rural Pennsylvania. I happened to be the first woman engineer they had ever hired, and I was the first foreigner that they ever did an H-1B visa processing for. So that was my introduction to corporate America.
I was suddenly in charge of a shop floor that was run by people who had been there for decades, and now here’s a woman who’s supposed to tell them what to do, and she talks funny. They would let me know that I wasn’t clear enough in my conversations with them, and there was a particular supervisor who did not relish the idea of me coming in there. So it became the big motivation of my life that I was going to win him over before I was done there.
How did you go about doing that?
I realized that when people meet you for the first time they focus on all the things that are different about you. They get so distracted and hung up about all the differences that they don’t actually see the substance of what you bring to the conversation. So there were a few things that I realized I had to change.
So I did shorten my name at that time, so it was easier. And I had to work on my accent, and get up to speed on all the pop culture and references that I had missed. I didn’t know anybody in that little town of Reading, Pa., so I watched a lot of TV. I would watch all the old sitcoms from “Golden Girls” to “Cheers,” and I would get myself familiar with the words and the sayings, and the cultural references that I had no idea about. They became important conversational things that I could use to be accessible and relatable to people.
Outside of that, I figured I was going to outwork everybody. I will be the first one there and the last one out. And at the end of about a year and a half when I left, the supervisor who I had made a point of winning over cried at my farewell. That was one of the biggest accomplishments of my career.
“Taking us backward while much of the world is moving forward? That didn’t sit well with me.”
What was the hardest thing you’re dealing with as C.E.O. right now?
Maintaining the trust equity that comes with building relationships. It was an advantage for me when I became C.E.O., because I had been at the company a long time. But there were a lot more people that I’d never met. And if you don’t meet folks over time, the longer you’re stuck with not meeting in person, that trust equity gets harder and harder.
Why did you take a stand when Texas lawmakers passed their restrictive new abortion law this summer?
The company did not take a stand. I took a stand, and I tried to make that clear. I created the fund personally. I didn’t think it was the appropriate place for the company to jump in, given we are a very diverse company. We have headquarters in Texas. But when someone came and asked me specifically, what do you think about this as a woman with the life experience that I’ve had, it just didn’t sit right with me to say “no comment” on an issue that I really clearly thought was just wrong. Taking us backward while much of the world is moving forward? That didn’t sit well with me.
Match has been more welcoming of some online regulations than many of the big tech companies. Can you explain where your positions diverge?
For most of Big Tech, privacy comes first. Apple famously doesn’t unlock a phone, even for a terrorist. We’ve always known that safety was existential for our category, because we’re introducing strangers on our platform who eventually go meet in real life. So for us it’s not only privacy, or only safety, but a balance, and it’s not always easy. If you skew in favor of privacy, you’re never going to be able to track and do the kinds of moderation, etc., that you need to do.
The in-person world, the I.R.L. world, is hundreds and hundreds of years of civilization, where we have figured out a code of conduct and behavior, rules of engagement, laws, law enforcement and all the rest. Now so much of our lives are moving online, onto this world, and we still haven’t figured out what is the right level of anonymity versus your real personas online. What is the code of behavior? What is tolerated or not? Let alone laws and law enforcement. There’s no law enforcement on these platforms. That’s the conversation that’s still happening.
Do you feel like the big tech companies are taking enough responsibility for the real-world consequences of what happens on their platforms?
It’s super challenging, and in the absence of real laws and enforcement, we’re all making stuff up. One of the things which is easier for us, as a one-on-one introduction platform, is that we have a much harder stance on bad behavior. A cuss word is enough for us to kick you out of the platform.
But I’m not sure it is right for Facebook and Twitter to be responsible for defining what is hate speech. It’s a complicated problem, which is why I think we need the trifecta of the regulators, the tech platforms and ultimately society. You and me have to decide what is acceptable and what is not acceptable in this online world, in the same way that we have, over centuries, determined what’s acceptable and not acceptable in the real world.
How has dating changed during the pandemic?
Behavioral change is usually very incremental. But there are points in time when you do see step changes, and I think a few different step changes happened during the pandemic. A lot of people suddenly reprioritized life’s priorities and realized, “I don’t want to be locked down alone again.” They appreciated the value of a partner, and the lack of value of loneliness.
People became more realistic and honest about themselves and who they were looking for. One of the big things that came back was physical looks were less important. If that sustains, that is a good thing for humanity.
David Gelles is the Corner Office columnist and a business reporter. Follow him on LinkedIn and Twitter: @dgelles. 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY GUERIN BLASK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: ABORTION (90%); ABORTION LAWS (90%); ABORTION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); DATING SERVICES (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); ONLINE DATING SERVICES (90%); TECHNOLOGY (90%); COURTSHIP & DATING (89%); ENGINEERING (87%); GUN CONTROL (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); WOMEN (78%); WOMEN WORKERS (78%); STUDENT HOUSING (75%); ACTIVISM (73%); POLITICAL ACTIVISM (73%); WEAPONS & ARMS (72%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); MATERIALS SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (66%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (64%); Dubey, Shar (%); Content Type: Personal Profile (%); Match Group Inc. (%); Match.com (%); Online Dating (%); Computers and the Internet (%); Executives and Management (Theory) (%)

Company: GOOGLE LLC (82%);  TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC (53%);  TATA STEEL LTD (50%)

Ticker: TXN (NASDAQ) (53%); TTST (LSE) (50%); TATASTEEL (NSE) (50%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (82%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS333318 OTHER COMMERCIAL & SERVICE INDUSTRY MACHINERY MANUFACTURING (53%); SIC3674 SEMICONDUCTORS & RELATED DEVICES (53%); SIC3578 CALCULATING & ACCOUNTING MACHINERY, EXCEPT ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (53%); NAICS331221 ROLLED STEEL SHAPE MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS331210 IRON & STEEL PIPE & TUBE MANUFACTURING FROM PURCHASED STEEL (50%); NAICS331110 IRON & STEEL MILLS & FERROALLOY MANUFACTURING (50%); ABORTION LAWS (90%); ABORTION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); DATING SERVICES (90%); ONLINE DATING SERVICES (90%); ENGINEERING (87%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (64%); TELEVISION COMEDIES (50%)

Person: SUNDAR PICHAI (77%); Dubey, Shar

Geographic: KOLKATA, WEST BENGAL, INDIA (57%); TEXAS, USA (93%); OHIO, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (91%)

Load-Date: December 26, 2021


End of Document
The Cruel Waste of America's Tech Talent
The New York Times
January 16, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
Length: 889 words
Byline: By JOSHUA DAVIS
Joshua Davis is the co-founder of Epic Magazine and a contributing editor at Wired. His book ''Spare Parts'' follows the 2004 Carl Hayden Robotics Team.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO -- WHEN audiences watch the movie ''Spare Parts'' in theaters this month, they will see the kind of Hollywood ending that has eluded the immigration debate in Congress.
The film is based on my reporting about four young immigrants who built an underwater robot. In the movie, which closely reflects the true story, the students enter the nation's pre-eminent robotics competition, an event sponsored by NASA and the Navy. They win widespread recognition for their accomplishments and, when the movie ends in 2004, their future is bright.
Unfortunately, that's not how the story really ends.
All four students were born in Mexico and were brought across the border illegally as children. Though they grew up in Arizona and viewed themselves as Americans, the law did not. They lived with the daily threat of deportation. Oscar Vazquez dreamed of joining the Army -- he was officer of the year in his J.R.O.T.C. program -- but discovered he couldn't enlist because he didn't have legal residency. Cristian Arcega was a geeky brainiac who found few outlets for his smarts in gang-torn West Phoenix. Lorenzo Santillan was a former gang member himself looking to stay clean. And Luis Aranda, the only one who had gotten a work permit, just the year before, was a hulking giant of a kid who rarely spoke.
This ragtag group from Carl Hayden Community High School in West Phoenix constructed the robot out of cheap plastic tubing and garbage. It smelled so bad, they called the machine Stinky. The other entrants -- almost all college students -- had corporate sponsors and serious budgets. This was an underwater robotics contest, but Carl Hayden didn't even have a swimming pool. Nonetheless, Stinky came in first place.
After the event, lower ranked contestants went on to rewarding jobs at tech companies and research institutes. Meanwhile, the Carl Hayden students struggled to afford tuition for college.
Lorenzo Santillan considered becoming a mechanical engineer, but instead earned a cheaper associate degree in cooking. Today he works as a line cook. Luis Aranda studied cooking as well but did not complete a degree and now works as a janitor.
Cristian Arcega, the most technically skilled member of the team, made it to Arizona State University on a scholarship. But in 2006, during his freshman year, Arizona voters passed Proposition 300, an anti-immigrant measure that prohibits undocumented students from receiving any state financial aid or qualifying for in-state tuition -- more than tripling his tuition. He dropped out and is now unemployed. He is trying to crowdfund enough money to return to school full time.
Oscar Vazquez's story is the most dramatic. He also had a scholarship to A.S.U., and after working menial jobs for a year, was able to attend. He was a sophomore when Proposition 300 passed, and managed to stay in school only by piecing together more scholarships, all while leading the university's robotics team to regional championships. He graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering in 2009 and applied for legal residency.
Not only was his application denied, but he was also summarily banned from the United States for 10 years for living here without a visa. He ended up working on an assembly line in Mexico.
After a year, his ban was reversed when Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, interceded on his behalf. Mr. Vazquez returned, enlisted in the Army, and served a tour of combat duty in Afghanistan. He is finally a citizen, and repairs trains in Montana for the railroad company BNSF.
Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, the program created by President Obama's executive order that shields some undocumented students and young adults from deportation, didn't go into effect until 2012. Had it been in place when the Carl Hayden students were in high school, allowing them to legally work, their lives might have turned out very differently. They have surmounted enormous odds, but none were able to professionally pursue their passion for robotics. It is a startling rebuke to the American dream.
House Republicans seem to view this as a fitting outcome. This week, John A. Boehner, the speaker of the House, introduced legislation that would roll back the president's order. If he is successful, talented young people like Mr. Santillan and Mr. Arcega could be deported at any moment. ''After a while you get used to disappointment,'' Mr. Arcega said to me this week. ''I try not to have high expectations anymore.''
Those who oppose granting residency to these immigrants argue that it would deny resources to existing residents and citizens. But we've already invested in these students all through elementary and high school. Why not continue and get a return on that investment?
There is rising demand for the talent these students possess. We grant roughly 85,000 H1B visas, for immigrants with special skills, to engineers to fill jobs here. In doing so, we overlook a generation of students who are deemed foreigners but who grew up here and plan to stay. When their visas expire, a majority of H1B visa holders will leave, and take the skills they developed with them. At a time when science and technology prowess will be critical to this country's growth, we can't afford to squander the homegrown brainpower of students like Oscar, Lorenzo, Luis and Cristian.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/16/opinion/the-cruel-waste-of-americas-tech-talent.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANGIE WANG)        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Op-Ed

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: FILM (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); ROBOTICS (89%); SCHOLARSHIPS & GRANTS (89%); STUDENT EXPENSES & FINANCING (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); TUITION FEES (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); MOVIE REVIEWS (78%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (78%); ARMIES (77%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (76%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (76%); HIGH SCHOOLS (76%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (76%); MILITARY SERVICE (76%); STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (76%); DEPORTATION (72%); POLITICAL DEBATES (72%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (71%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (68%); MUNICIPAL FINANCE (67%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (61%); CROWDFUNDING (50%)

Industry: FILM (90%); ROBOTICS (89%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); MOVIE REVIEWS (78%); ARMIES (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); SUBMARINES & SUBMERSIBLES (77%); COLLEGE STUDENTS (76%); HIGH SCHOOLS (76%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (76%); MILITARY SERVICE (76%); SPONSORSHIP (76%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (71%)

Geographic: PHOENIX, AZ, USA (71%); ARIZONA, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: January 16, 2015


End of Document
The Women Who Still Like Trump; News Analysis
The New York Times 
April 29, 2017 Saturday 00:00 EST


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: SUNDAY-REVIEW
Length: 1506 words
Byline: SUSAN CHIRA
Highlight: “He doesn’t care what you think. I’m kind of that way, too, so I can respect that.”
Body


After the election, exit polls suggested that 53 percent of white women had voted for Donald Trump. I interviewed about a dozen white women who explained why they voted for him. At the 100-day mark, most pronounce themselves pleased and believe the country is moving in the right direction.
Not one expressed concern that his administration might hurt women’s rights — most dismissed objections of those on the left about how few women he had appointed to his cabinet; the potential defunding of Planned Parenthood, which several mistakenly believed received federal funding for abortions; and even the viral photos showing roomfuls of men proposing to remove maternity care and mammogram screenings from required health insurance benefits.
They are willing to give President Trump time to deliver results, and uniformly blame Congress and out-of-line judges for blocking him on health care, immigration and other initiatives. Some are critical of his travel ban, his tweets and his impulsivity, and some worry about entanglements in foreign wars, but their biggest plea is that he remember they elected him to be an unconventional politician.
Here are excerpts, condensed and edited, from their comments.
A President ‘Who Has Balls’
Voter: Pam Cornett, 46 as of December. Formerly self-employed, now working in customer service.
Home: Chattanooga, Tenn.
I think it’s going great. He’s done exactly what he said he’s going to do. I think that’s amazing. I think we actually have a president who has balls. I feel like America’s safer with him as president. I feel that he actually cares about America and will do what he says.
I think our economy is making a turnaround. People are more confident because of him being president. The stock market’s going up as well.
I don’t think that he’s out for popular opinion. I think that he’s going to do what he thinks is best. He doesn’t care what you think. I’m kind of that way, too, so I can respect that.
The ‘Sell Talk’
Voter: Deb Alighire, 44. Engineer and program manager at Mopar, a subsidiary of Fiat Chrysler Automobiles.
Home: Clarkston, Mich.
Right away he was meeting with the Big Three; I remember feeling like my heart warmed. Somebody cares about us. Then I see him getting on the helicopter with his grandkids and that’s very endearing.
I’m happy with the H-1B visa reform. A friend got laid off, he was watching all his co-workers get laid off sequentially; they’re being replaced by H-1B visa people.
We got to be able to get birth control if we don’t have money. That was my love of Obama, my birth control was free. We need to care about 50 percent of the population and what they’re going to do. Especially the group of women that don’t have the means to pay for it. Jesus, say you’re working at Walmart and then you have a baby, what are you going to do? You’ve got to have the care.
On his tweeting, it’s almost like the sell talk — we’re going to win. Trying to rally the troops. I think that’s why he acts the way he does, the phrases he repeats, that’s how he managed his companies. It makes sense, it’s more of a corporate thing to do.
Racism on Both Sides
Voter: Taylor Davis, 28. Works in a small business.
Home: Enfield, Conn.
Feminism feels very exclusive — if you don’t vote the same or feel the same on these platform issues like pro-choice, you can’t be part of their club. We have to give women voice and weave them into politics. We can have equality with men, and it doesn’t have to be equal balance. I’m all for women getting ahead in politics or business. I’m not a self-hating woman.
Now that I’ve become a Republican, I’ve heard a lot of outrageously racist things, from both sides, and I’m not happy about that. I am very disappointed that there is so much of a divide. He’s focusing a lot on crimes and gangs, law and order, but that’s not the only facet when it comes to minorities in this country, specifically African-Americans. I’m worried about mass incarceration rates and so on. A huge reason I didn’t vote for Hillary Clinton: incarceration of minorities went up under Bill Clinton.
Peace Through Strength
Voter: Robin Mueller, 42 as of December. Preschool teacher.
Home: Sterling Heights, Mich.
I like how he’s handling Syria, North Korea and China. I agree with the peace-through-strength idea. The gassing of innocent women and children is very disturbing to me.
Especially after seeing what is going on in Syria, to turn them away, especially the women and the children, we’ve got to figure out something. This area has a lot of Syrian refugees. I met a little girl. She was just a sweet beautiful child, you could tell by her face, she did not have it good where she came from. She just kept hugging me and grabbing on to me.
I’m not delusional to think that terrorist groups won’t send in people with these large groups of refugees here. You have to figure out a good way to fix this and keep America safe as well. Why wasn’t Saudi Arabia on that list? I know why they weren’t. We all know why. There are countries that we don’t want to upset or make angry because we think we need them. I was not a fan of the executive order, the way it was done.
Take Away the Twitter
Voter: Katie Holder, 39. Owns a weight-loss business.
Home: Gulf Shores, Ala.
Well, I’ve been pretty pleased. Kind of disappointed that we haven’t really come together as a country yet.
If they’re sitting here spying on us in our homes, then why wouldn’t they spy on a major candidate? They were spying on Hillary, why wouldn’t they spy on him? I’m saying it wouldn’t shock me. Not one bit.
I think, unfortunately, somebody needs to take away the Twitter. I like that he’s able to talk to us, but for the love of God, somebody take away the phone. He would be a lot more effective that way. I don’t have a filter, but I’m not the president of the freaking United States.
I would like to see, as far as talking about Ivanka’s business, cut that out. Talking about “The Apprentice,” that kind of stuff, you’re done with that, at least for the next four years. Stop. You got much bigger fish to fry. It doesn’t help your case any at all. Of course, he’s new to being president and he’s new to politics. That just comes with learning a job, any job.
Reach Out to Democrats
Voter: Rebecca Gregory, 47. Nurse.
Home: Roseville, Mich.
He’s allowing the states to do what they want on Planned Parenthood, not defunding it on a federal level. I would like Planned Parenthood to be funded, and I’m sure in some states it won’t be because of that. Being a Republican candidate, I don’t see he has much choice on that.
It’s at least nice to see law enforcement given props during speeches and being supported — that’s a nice change.
I’m disappointed in the fact that he’s getting so much pushback on everything he tries to pass. He’s good at wheeling and dealing and offering things, if that’s what it takes. I’d like to see him reach out to Democrats, and I’d like to see them listening. There’s got to be compromise on both sides. We don’t have to like each other, but we have to work together. I’d want to see something happen and quick with the A.C.A. — it’s not going well. When that falters, people will be without insurance and without health care. I’m concerned about that.
What Is Congress Doing?
Voter: Guzin Karides, 50. Former lawyer, homemaker.
Home: Virginia Beach
What is Congress doing? They have failed on the health care bill. And they couldn’t get one voted on when they had a majority. It’s a little disgusting.
Why people like me love Trump so much — he doesn’t stand for it. We put someone in who’s not necessarily so Republican, it was more that he was for common-sense government.
I agree with what he did with the travel ban. I don’t think it’s a Muslim ban. He’s fulfilling his promise to protect the border and build a wall. Hopefully he’s learned who to count on, who not to count on in the last 100 days.
I love his tweets. He’s holding the media’s feet to the fire. He has a way to get his point of view out. I think Trump sometimes exaggerates things, but I don’t think he outright lies. Most rational people know what he means.
He wanted to prove he was different than Obama with one big mother bomb. But don’t get us dragged into these wars. I hope he stays an American president, not trying to become a world president, just because McCain and neocons would praise him. I hope he’s strong enough and stays thick-skinned enough. I imagine it’s very difficult for him to stick true to what he promises. He doesn’t always hear from us, the people.
I really do want him to spend more time in the White House and not to go to Florida so much. The people that put him in office need him to be there, and not travel so much to where he’s probably more comfortable. You’ve got to suck it up. If that’s my worst criticism, that’s not so bad.
I’d give him an A-, B+, Congress a failing grade.
Susan Chira (@susanchira) is a senior correspondent and editor on gender issues for The New York Times.
Related Articles
    • These Guys Really Like Trump
    • ‘You Focus on the Good’: Women Who Voted for Trump, in Their Own Words
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News Analysis

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); LAYOFFS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); FOREIGN LABOR (88%); CABINET OFFICES (78%); POLLS & SURVEYS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (78%); FAMILY PLANNING (76%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (76%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (75%); SELF EMPLOYMENT (75%); GRANDCHILDREN (73%); IMMIGRATION (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); ABORTION (70%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (70%); BREAST CANCER SCREENING (55%); Women and Girls (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Polls and Public Opinion (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); HEALTH INSURANCE (73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (73%); TRAVEL BANS (68%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); Trump, Donald J

Geographic: CHATTANOOGA, TN, USA (55%); TENNESSEE, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: April 30, 2017


End of Document
The Democrats Have an Immigration Problem
The New York Times
October 14, 2018 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 33; FEATURE
Length: 7180 words
Byline: By ROBERT DRAPER
Robert Draper is a writer at large for the magazine. He last wrote about Dan Scavino, the White House social-media director.
Body


In early June, the Washington office of Representative Pramila Jayapal began to hear rumors about the women. They had crossed into Texas, where Border Patrol officers promptly arrested them. But now the women were somewhere around Seattle, the city Jayapal represents.
Her staff made calls. Usually, undocumented immigrants in the area were held at the Northwest Detention Center, a private facility operated under a contract with Immigration and Customs Enforcement. But the detention center had not received the women. There were too many of them for ICE to house. Instead, as Jayapal learned on June 7, the mothers were now inmates at a Bureau of Prisons facility near the Seattle-Tacoma airport. 
  Jayapal flew home to Seattle the following night. She showed up at the federal prison the next morning and was escorted to the three pods where the new inmates were held. There were 174 women. Many of them had come to the United States with their children, some as young as 5. A majority were from the violence-racked Central American countries El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras; others had traveled from as far as China and the Democratic Republic of Congo. All of them sought asylum. Some of them, after crossing the Rio Grande, spent their first night in the United States shivering in their damp clothes on Mylar sheets in the sprawling processing center in McAllen, Tex., nicknamed the hielera, or icebox.
  But at least their children had been with them. Now they were gone. The immigration authorities would not say where the children had been taken or when they would be returned. As part of the Trump administration's zero-tolerance policy, several thousand children were being separated from their parents at the border -- a tactic that previous administrations had avoided and that the mothers could not have anticipated. Meanwhile, the 174 women, having been denied initial interviews to determine whether their asylum claims merited their protection under international law, were instead piled onto airplanes and flown to the Pacific Northwest, where they were given slips of paper with their children's names on them.
  Jayapal sat and listened to the women for nearly three hours. Then, outside the prison, she spoke into an aide's video camera. After vowing to help return the separated children to their parents, Jayapal set her sights on ICE. ''I am going to do everything I can in my power,'' she said, ''to stop funding a rogue agency at the Department of Homeland Security.''
  Of the 535 current members of Congress, only 12 are immigrants, and Jayapal is one of them. The first Indian-American woman to be elected to the House, Jayapal, who is now 53, came to the United States at age 16, unaccompanied and on a student visa -- not to flee chaos but to attend great universities (Georgetown and Northwestern) and then make a comfortable living (first by executing leveraged buyouts at PaineWebber on Wall Street and then by selling heart defibrillators out of Cincinnati). She left the private sector in 1991 to work for nonprofits, and in 2001, a year after becoming an American citizen, she became an immigration rights organizer. She developed a reputation for her fierce intelligence, energy and media savvy -- and appetite for the national stage. She was elected to Congress as a Democrat on the same night that Donald Trump won the presidency.
  Trump's incendiary immigration policies have afforded Jayapal a spotlight seldom made available to freshman legislators. But in pledging to ''stop funding a rogue agency,'' Jayapal directed the spotlight onto the Democratic Party's ambivalent feelings about immigration. Jayapal represents a new breed of liberal politician who is -- along with some of this year's other congressional candidates, like Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan -- more wedded to social-justice movements than to the slow grind of governance. For years, a number of immigration advocates had been agitating to abolish ICE. Now Jayapal was on record as the first member of Congress to openly endorse doing so.
  On June 25, her colleague Mark Pocan of Wisconsin -- the co-chairman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, of which Jayapal is first vice chairwoman -- announced that he would soon be introducing a bill that would form a new agency to replace ICE within a year; Jayapal joined as a co-sponsor. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, believed by many to be positioning herself for a presidential run in 2020, jumped on the bandwagon, telling Chris Cuomo on CNN, ''I think you should reimagine ICE under a new agency with a very different mission.''
  But the party's most prominent immigration policymakers in the House -- Luis V. Gutiérrez of Illinois and Zoe Lofgren of California -- were not at all happy with the Abolish ICE bill. ''I talked to Mark and told him, 'I don't think this is a good bill,' '' Lofgren, a former immigration lawyer, told me. ''It lets President Trump off the hook. ICE is doing what he told them to do.'' Gutiérrez, a note of bewilderment in his voice, said: ''I mean, you want to change the conversation from the inhumanity of caging children to abolishing ICE? They must have been jumping for joy at the White House.'' (Indeed, Trump subsequently scoffed: ''Nancy Pelosi and the Democrats want to abolish the brave men and women of ICE. What I want to do is abolish the killers in ISIS.'')
  The bill's proponents also seemed oblivious to how it would play in districts less liberal than, say, Seattle. In late June, while the notion of abolishing ICE was first being voiced by elected Democrats, Representative Peter J. Visclosky of Indiana expressed his consternation during a caucus meeting. ''I've been here a long time,'' he said, according to one person who was present as well as notes taken by a second attendee. ''At one time, there were eight Democrats from Indiana'' in the House. ''Now there are two.''
  The economic conditions in Indiana remained a source of overriding concern for his constituents, Visclosky said. In meetings with them, ''they said that they will vote for me -- implying that they won't vote for other Democrats. I'm trying to help them with their jobs.'' He went on: ''I support everything that this caucus is doing on immigration, and on the Syrian population. But I just hope that someday this caucus shows the same energy and passion'' when ''we talk about jobs.'' Several in the caucus applauded.
  When Representative Kevin McCarthy, a California Republican and the House majority leader, got wind of the Abolish ICE bill, he gleefully offered to schedule it for an immediate vote. Jayapal and Pocan saw the bind they were in with their caucus and indicated that they would vote against their own bill if it were brought to the floor. McCarthy retaliated with a bill declaring support for ICE. ''It's a political vote,'' Representative Nancy Pelosi, the minority leader, advised Democrats. ''Treat it politically.'' Jayapal and most of her fellow Democrats simply voted ''present,'' though several from conservative districts -- including Visclosky -- voted for the resolution.
  McCarthy's stunt may have been cynical, but the Democrats were in no position to claim the moral high ground. Hardly for the first time, the party had entered the immigration debate with palpable misgivings -- and then, at the brink of action, scattered. ''Democrats don't even agree with their own bill they introduced,'' McCarthy triumphantly crowed on the House floor. ''They lack the courage of their so-called convictions.''
  Few issues have been made more black and white by the Trump administration than the highly complex matter of immigration. A quarter-century ago, both political parties had the same room-temperature appraisal of immigrants. But while Republicans have reacted to the question of whether immigrants strengthen the United States in a mostly static way over time -- 30 percent responding positively in 1994 and 35 percent doing so in 2016, according to a Pew Research study -- the favorable view among Democrats has risen sharply over the same period, to 78 percent from 32 percent.
  Today the Democratic Party is generally pro-immigration. And yet many of its elected officeholders remain deeply wary of saying so and especially conflicted about how to address the flaws in the country's immigration system -- or whether to address them at all. Their reasoning may be as simple as this: Unlike Republican voters, who routinely punish their politicians for being insufficiently anti-immigrant, Democratic voters do not reward theirs for being forthrightly pro-immigrant.
  ''Fifteen years ago, we viewed the immigration-reform community as the redheaded stepchild of the Democratic coalition,'' said Frank Sharry, the executive director of America's Voice, an immigration advocacy group. ''Unions were skeptical, if not opposed. Environmentalists were conflicted. And civil rights groups didn't see us as central to their cause.''
  There are other reasons immigration has yet to reliably animate Democratic lawmakers. One of them was evident when I met Sharry in his office in a WeWork rental space in downtown Washington. Relative to other progressive special interests, the immigrant rights movement has traditionally been a pauper's crusade, lacking in billionaire benefactors and financially outmatched by ideological rivals like the Center for Immigration Studies, the Federation of American Immigration Reform and NumbersUSA.
  Mark Zuckerberg, Laurene Powell Jobs and George Soros have recently begun donating to specific immigration causes like family reunification and giving seed money to migrant entrepreneurs. But in general, said Kevin Appleby, a senior director at the Center for Migration Studies of New York, a nonpartisan immigration think tank affiliated with the Catholic Church, ''some of the immigration funders can blow hot and cold, because they're as frustrated as we are when there's not a lot of progress on the immigration-reform front.''
  Immigrants, meanwhile, are a less than formidable electoral force. Undocumented immigrants (there are roughly 22.1 million, according to a new Yale study) cannot vote. The country's estimated 27.3 million eligible Latino voters, a subset of whom constitute the dominant demographic group among legal immigrants, consistently turn out in low numbers. Never was this more apparent than in the 2016 presidential election, when Hillary Clinton's welcoming stance toward undocumented immigrants failed to generate any increase in Hispanic turnout, even against an opponent who began his campaign with a speech characterizing Mexican immigrants as rapists and drug dealers.
  But there is another explanation for why immigration has long been relegated to the Democratic Party's back burner. Until recently, Americans have tended to view immigration less as a moral issue and more in crass economic terms. ''Though everyone says the system is broken, there's also a nod-nod wink-wink belief that it is broke, so don't fix it,'' Appleby said. ''The crops are being picked. The tables are being bused. The only wronged party are the undocumented immigrants with little political power, and no one's ever been voted out of office because immigration reform failed to pass.''
  Instead, since long before Trump, Democratic politicians have feared that supporting immigrants would result in being voted out of office -- specifically by conservative constituents who fear Muslim terrorists or undocumented Latinos taking advantage of public services, overrunning schools and hospitals. President Bill Clinton understood this dynamic well. During his triangulating quest for re-election in 1996, Clinton signed the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act, which added more border fencing and piled on further penalties for those illegally crossing into the United States.
  Immigration advocates were pleasantly surprised when Clinton's successor, George W. Bush, made good on his campaign rhetoric to prioritize immigration reform. Bush's White House advisers spent the summer of 2001 contriving a pathway to citizenship for some three million undocumented immigrants, with legislative support from fellow Republicans like Senator John McCain and Representative Paul D. Ryan. That effort extended to the early morning of Sept. 11, when White House officials had scheduled a gathering in a Capitol office building to discuss immigration policies, up to and including amnesty, that ''were a lot more liberal than anything we're seeing today,'' says Mike Gempler, the executive director of the Washington Growers League, a nonprofit advocacy group for farmers in Washington State.
  Pramila Jayapal was living in Seattle and directing a technology transfer fund in September 2001 when a local schoolteacher friend informed her that Muslim and Arab children were skipping school because they were being bullied by classmates. Jayapal formed the Hate Free Zone Campaign of Washington, an organization that led a pro bono legal effort that halted the deportation of more than 2,700 Somali immigrants -- part of the Bush administration's post-Sept. 11 immigration crackdown that also started deportation proceedings against 14,000 Muslims under a ''special registration'' policy designed by Attorney General John Ashcroft's immigration adviser, Kris Kobach. (Kobach would later, as Kansas secretary of state, advocate aggressive voter-ID laws as well as a Muslim registry and serve as the vice chairman of Trump's short-lived commission to investigate election fraud.)
  In 2008, Hate Free Zone morphed into OneAmerica, a group advocating equal justice and human rights for immigrants. In November of that year, Jayapal wept while watching Barack Obama win the presidency. Like most Democrats, she assumed that a progressive black senator who had been a community organizer and whose father was Kenyan would be more sympathetic to immigrants than a wealthy conservative Texan.
  But Jayapal had no illusions about her party's commitment to the issue. Aside from a few champions -- chief among them Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Lofgren and Gutiérrez -- Democrats had shown only flagging support for immigration reform during the Bush presidency. In 2006, the current and future Democratic Senate leaders, Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer, initially resisted a comprehensive reform package sponsored by McCain and Kennedy because, Frank Sharry says, ''all they cared about was winning back the Senate, and they didn't want to hand Bush a victory.'' But when it failed in the House and was replaced by a bill to build several hundred miles of secure fencing along the border, both Democratic leaders voted for it -- as did Hillary Clinton and Obama, both senators at the time.
  A year later, the Democrats controlled both chambers of Congress, and Gutiérrez thought the moment was ripe for immigration legislation. ''I go to Speaker Nancy Pelosi, and I say, 'I got this bill,' '' he recalled. ''She says, 'Go find me 45 to 50 Republicans who'll sign onto the bill, and come back and we'll talk.' I'm like: What the [expletive]? We're, like, in the majority. Why do I have this onus on me? But I knew why. Nancy Pelosi isn't going to put the majority at risk.''
  The concern was prescient. Roughly a third of Senate Democrats sided against a comprehensive immigration bill in 2007, which would have provided more money for border fencing as well as a new process for undocumented residents in the United States to eventually obtain citizenship. Most of the dissenting caucus members came from conservative states, but a few others were union allies, like Bernie Sanders, the independent from Vermont -- ''this progressive icon,'' Gutiérrez snickered, ''racing from the Senate floor to go on 'Lou Dobbs' to say how he's standing up for the American worker.''
  In the fall of 2007, Niki Tsongas, a Democrat, won a House special election in Massachusetts that should not have been as close as it was. Democrats widely believed that Tsongas hurt her chances when, two days before the election, she stated that undocumented immigrants ought to be able to obtain a driver's license. In what Sharry would term an ''iconic'' moment for the immigrant rights community, Rahm Emanuel, then the chairman of the House Democratic caucus, told The Washington Post that immigration had ''emerged as the third rail of American politics. And anyone who doesn't realize that isn't with the American people.''
  Obama named Emanuel his chief of staff immediately after his victory in 2008, which sent an unsettling signal to Gutiérrez. ''A few weeks after the election, I'm shooting pool with a bunch of lawyer buddies, and I decide to show them how cool I am by calling on my cellphone my brother from Chicago, the president-elect of the United States,'' Gutiérrez recalled this summer in his Washington office. ''Barack -- I can't believe it -- he picks up! I said, 'Listen, I gotta come down and talk to you.' '' When they later met in person, Gutiérrez said, ''I brought up immigration. And I remember, he said: 'Luis, we're losing hundreds of thousands of jobs. It's economic chaos. This is not the time.' He said, 'Let's try it in 120 days.' ''
  Still, Gutiérrez, Jayapal and other immigration advocates were unprepared for what came next. Obama's secretary of homeland security, Janet Napolitano, and the director of ICE, John Morton, began issuing deportations at a record pace, while continuing Bush's policy of workplace raids. After an outcry from immigrant groups, ICE shifted its tactics from busting workers to the more visually antiseptic practice of auditing businesses. But the effect was just as crippling, said Gempler of the Washington Growers League: ''The audits we characterized as slow-moving raids.''
  With the Democratic administration more preoccupied with demonstrating its commitment to enforcing laws than with fixing a dysfunctional system, immigration advocates realized that their own strategy needed reappraising. ''One of the major inflection moments in the immigration rights movement was in 2009 and 2010, after waiting around for Obama to prioritize immigration reform, which he didn't do,'' recalls Deepak Bhargava of the social-justice group Center for Community Change. ''And within the community, after a big debate, the decision was made to go after him.''
  Among the activists who did was Jayapal. ''Pramila was one of the leaders who most forthrightly said, 'We're not about electing Democrats; we're about representing the rights of our constituents,' '' Bhargava recalled. ''It was the right decision, but it did come with criticism from Democratic politicians and other groups like labor unions, who said, 'We don't go after Democrats.' But she's always been a movement person first.''
  In June 2010, Jayapal and other demonstrators were arrested after blocking an intersection in downtown Seattle to protest Obama's reluctance to push for immigration reform. She spent the night in jail for the first time in her life. Jayapal and other advocates were now referring to the Democratic president as the ''deporter in chief.'' They made their case to White House officials and Democratic lawmakers; Bhargava recalls seeing Jayapal get into a heated argument with Schumer over whether Obama should be denounced for the deportations. (Neither Jayapal nor Schumer recalls the encounter.)
  Schumer and other Democratic leaders concurred with Obama that the party needed to demonstrate to voters that it cared about border security. Still, the Department of Homeland Security during Obama's first term seemed more interested in achieving peak numbers -- 419,000 deportations in 2012 -- than focusing on criminals. As one of the administration's key staff members on immigration, Cecilia Muñoz, the director of the White House Domestic Policy Council, conceded to me recently: ''It's fair to say they'' -- meaning Napolitano and Morton -- ''were too tentative in refining enforcement policy. That really didn't happen until the second term.''
  But, Muñoz maintained, Obama was in fact committed to fixing the country's immigration system. ''And we got no takers, on either the Democratic or Republican side,'' she recalled. ''This was in 2010, when we're still in an economic free-fall. And every time Obama went out and said, 'I want to do something about immigration reform,' Axelrod's phone would light up from Democrats: 'Please make him stop talking about this,' '' she said, referring to David Axelrod, a senior adviser to the president. ''They were worried about the 2010 midterms, thinking that any conversation about immigration was a conversation we weren't having about job security.''
  That same year, a new immigration issue emerged that would test the convictions of both parties as well as the electorate. A decade before, Senator Richard J. Durbin of Illinois was inspired by a young constituent, Tereza Lee, a piano prodigy who had arrived in the United States with her undocumented Korean parents when she was 2½. Durbin first drafted the Dream Act, which would provide legal status to people in Lee's position, in 2001. But it went nowhere until 2010, when he began showing up at the White House with lists of children who were at risk of deportation.
  The concept of protecting children from deportation when America was the only country most of them had ever known appeared to enjoy more widespread public support than any previous immigration issue. A 2010 Gallup poll showed that 54 percent of respondents supported passing the Dream Act.
  Durbin enlisted an important Democratic ally: Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader. As a congressman in 1993, Reid wrote a bill denying citizenship to children born in America to undocumented immigrants. But since then, he had undergone a metamorphosis, albeit a convenient one. Seeing the Latino vote in his home state of Nevada as the key to his re-election victory in 2010, he vowed to bring Durbin's Dream Act to the floor right after the midterm elections.[Here's a guide to everything you need to know about the November elections.]
  Reid did as promised. But as had been the case with the Democrats and Bush in 2006, the Republicans had no interest in handing Obama a victory. Nor did they feel they had to: As with another proposal that polled well, universal background checks for gun purchases, the idea of protecting immigrant children from deportation seemed to enjoy only mile-wide-and-inch-deep support, with no discernible electoral consequence for defying it. Though a version of the Dream Act sponsored by Representative Lucille Roybal-Allard of California passed in the House by eight votes, the Senate bill fell five votes short of overcoming a filibuster, thanks in part to the ''no'' votes of five Democratic senators.
  Leading the opposition was Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, who condemned the Dream Act as ''a reward for illegal activity.'' Sessions, the ranking Republican member on the Senate Judiciary Committee, typically framed the immigration debate as a straightforward matter of enforcing laws on the books, but he also openly stoked white fears, later warning of a scenario in which ''we'll have the highest percentage of Americans, nonnative born, since the founding of the republic.''
  Immigration advocates expected no less from Sessions. What disappointed them was the president's failure to rally support for the Dream Act. ''It was another case of Obama saying, 'We're with you,' but then spending his political capital elsewhere,'' recalls Kevin Appleby. Among Obama's legislative priorities in the 2010 lame-duck session, ''we were last on the list. Then Obama comes out in the Rose Garden and says, 'My biggest disappointment is that the Dream Act didn't pass.' I wanted to throw my shoe at the TV.''
  The defeat was an especially embittering moment for the newest protagonists of the immigration movement: the Dreamers themselves, many of them teenagers who were now at risk of being deported to countries they had barely lived in. Thousands of them organized marches, sit-ins, hunger strikes and visits to Capitol Hill. Obama was persuaded to issue the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals executive order in 2012, which issued Dreamers a renewable two-year deportation deferral. The recipients, however, were by now under no illusions. ''Obama didn't give DACA to us out of the goodness of his heart,'' says Cristina Jiménez Moreta, the daughter of undocumented Ecuadorean immigrants, a founder of the nation's largest youth immigrant organization, United We Dream, and a 2017 MacArthur fellow. ''He had to be pressured and pushed through a two-year campaign. So we know there is nothing they will do on their own unless there is people power creating the conditions where they're forced to act.''
  Trump's arrival in Washington provided an adrenaline jolt that the immigration movement had not experienced in decades. In short order, the new president made Sessions his attorney general and named as his senior policy adviser Sessions's former aide Stephen Miller, a staunch immigration opponent who put his stamp on Trump's policies and speeches on the issue during the campaign. Trump instituted what he called ''extreme vetting'' of foreign visitors and renewed his pledge to make building a border wall a priority. And he repeatedly refused to condemn white supremacists, even those who violently attacked counterprotesters at a rally in Charlottesville, Va. The immigrant community's various factions -- Dreamers; Latino, Asian and Muslim groups; advocates for women and skilled H-1B visa applicants; naturalized citizens; and asylum seekers -- now found a common foe. ''Trump in a weird way unified us,'' says Jorge L. Barón of the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project. ''Whatever divisions there used to be, his attacks have gone through so many people that all of us feel embattled.''
  In September 2017, Trump ordered a six-month phaseout of Obama's DACA executive order. Then in January, he summoned Durbin and Senator Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican, to the Oval Office with the intention of signing a deal that would ratify DACA in exchange for funding for the border wall. When Miller and John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, learned of the impending deal, they ushered Senators Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia, both immigration hard-liners, to meet with Trump first.
  The president's disposition had changed by the time Durbin and Graham arrived. He characterized Haiti and various African nations as ''shithole countries,'' wondered aloud why America wasn't welcoming more Norwegian immigrants and abandoned the legislative compromises that were on the table. ''He said he wanted a wall,'' Gutiérrez said of the torpedoed DACA deal. ''He got me to say O.K. Bernie Sanders, all of them. And then he told us to go [expletive] ourselves.''
  The Democrats voted to shut down the federal government over Trump's rescinded DACA deal. But Schumer, now the Senate minority leader, relented after a mere three days, prompting United We Dream members to stage sit-ins in his Senate office. Durbin privately reminded Cristina Jiménez Moreta that Congress was duty-bound to find legislative solutions.
  Jiménez remained unrepentant when I asked her later about the sit-ins. ''The days are gone for any Democrat to think that saying 'I stand with immigrants' is enough,'' she told me. ''We expect to see them boldly put forward an alternative to the administration's mass-deportation agenda. We expect the Democratic approach to be complete opposition to Trump and in complete alignment with what the rest of the country stands behind.''
  Jayapal acknowledged recently that ''a government shutdown for an immigration issue was pretty unimaginable a few years ago.'' Still, she said: ''It was too short. If you're going to do something like that, you've got to stick it out. Otherwise, what have you accomplished?''
  In the immigration movement from which Jayapal rose to prominence, politicians are broadly seen as forces of intransigence and at times dismaying ignorance. People close to Jayapal told me that she ran for Congress in no small measure because of her disenchantment with the elected officials she had encountered in both the state and national arenas. It has also been her tendency, even going back to her early days as an activist, to assert herself in ways that might rankle those who had been putting in hard work long before she arrived on the scene.
  The notion of outside agitator abruptly turned insider is a more familiar figure on the right than the left in Washington these days, and more recognizable to someone from the Tea Party movement than to a consummate legislator like Lofgren or Durbin. Mark Meadows, who is the chairman of the ultraconservative House Freedom Caucus, told me that he considers Jayapal ''a worthy adversary'' and added: ''The Washington power structure likes to pat people like us on the head and say, 'Those are really good ideas; now wait your turn.' Well, I'm too old to wait my turn, and she's too smart to wait hers.''
  In September, National Journal reported that Jayapal, who is expected to be the co-chairwoman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus next year, intends to take a page from the Freedom Caucus and, in concert with Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, form a voting bloc to drag their party aggressively leftward. A senior Democratic leadership aide wrote to me: ''I think this is very bad for them. The last thing they want is to be associated with the Tea Party/Freedom Caucus. I also think it is a strategic mistake to be talking about their 'power' and not focused on 1) taking back the House and 2) the issues.''
  To many Democrats, the opportunity to capitalize on Trump's unpopularity is one they cannot afford to blow amid ideological infighting. As Deepak Bhargava of the Center for Community Change says: ''I tell my liberal friends, right now, the president is winning. Because he won an election on this stuff, and until we can show that a new American majority will actually show up, we're likely to get more and more of these policies.''
  Trump seems convinced that what won him the presidency will remain politically potent this November. At rallies for Republican congressional candidates, the president reliably promotes his long-promised border wall while accusing Democrats of coddling the transnational MS-13 gang. ''They're more interested in taking care of criminals than they are in taking care of you,'' he declared at a rally for the Senate hopeful Marsha Blackburn in Nashville in May. More discreetly, Stephen Miller has reportedly pressed Department of Homeland Security lawyers to finalize a new measure that could penalize citizenship and green-card applicants for having lawfully received public assistance like health care subsidies or food stamps, practically inviting Democrats to defend immigrant welfare recipients. Two months ago, Newt Gingrich, an informal adviser to Trump, casually framed the death of Mollie Tibbets, a young woman in Iowa who was allegedly murdered by a Mexican immigrant who the authorities have claimed was in the country illegally, as an electoral bonanza for his party. ''If Mollie Tibbets is a household name by October,'' Gingrich told a reporter, ''Democrats will be in deep trouble.''
  A top Republican staff member on Capitol Hill recently shared with me internal Republican polls indicating that in eight swing districts, the No.1 issue among voters' concerns is immigration. Republican groups have launched attack ads accusing vulnerable Democrats like Matt Cartwright in Pennsylvania, Kyrsten Sinema in Arizona and Heidi Heitkamp in North Dakota of supporting sanctuary cities. And in the Pennsylvania Senate race, Representative Lou Barletta, a Republican and one of Trump's earliest supporters, has sent out a fund-raising letter attacking the incumbent, Bob Casey, as one of the Senate's '''open borders' leftists,'' while saying of immigration in general, ''America is at war.''
  But when Republicans used this playbook last year, the politics of immigration proved not quite what they hoped them to be. In the Virginia governor's race, Ed Gillespie, the Republican candidate, adopted Trump's immigrant-villifying rhetoric and lost to the Democrat, Ralph S. Northam, by nine points. ''Gillespie ran the kinds of MS-13 ads that are now running in other parts of the country,'' Geoff Garin, who was Northam's pollster in that race, told me. ''We measured a real backlash to that advertising with suburban voters, in part because it connected Gillespie to the anti-immigrant thrust of Trump's persona.''
  Casey has similarly withstood Barletta's attacks, refusing to run away from his pro-immigration record, and as of this writing enjoys an 18-point lead. Senators Jon Tester of Montana and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, two Democratic incumbents from conservative states that were overwhelmingly carried by Trump in 2016, are ahead of their Republican opponents by four and eight points, respectively, despite each having voted for the failed bipartisan immigration-reform legislation in 2013 that conservatives derided as ''amnesty.''
  The possibility that these seats might stay Democratic could conceivably set the stage for the party to retake the Senate. It could also make 2018 the year when immigration at last emerges as an electorally rewarding issue for Democrats. As Lynda Tran, a founder of the consulting firm 270 Strategies and herself a child of Vietnamese immigrants, said: ''Where immigration was never a motivating issue for Democrats the way it's been for Republicans, that's starting to shift. One of the great ironies of Trump's attacks on immigrants and people of color is that the public increasingly sees immigration as a good thing.''
  The question, for immigration organizers, is what the Democrats intend to do with the power the midterm elections may bring them. When I put the matter to Jayapal, she replied: ''I mean, I have notions about the easy things. To me, that's the Dream Act. Some reversal of the family-separation policy. The real question, though, is what can we do that dramatically reins in enforcement?'' Referring to a bill she helped write last year that would, among other things, replace mandatory detention of every undocumented individual apprehended at the border with greater case-by-case discretion, Jayapal added: ''I think there are pieces of my detention-reform bill that could pass both chambers. Trump probably wouldn't sign it, but it would show what we're talking about. Maybe some of the pieces around due process and the courts. I think we could get some limits on privatization of immigration detention facilities.''
  These did not strike me as ''easy things.'' Trump had made zero-tolerance enforcement of immigration laws a centerpiece of his presidency. He had also turned down multiple opportunities to legalize Dreamers. Jayapal seemed to think that Democratic control of the House might help sway Trump. ''The question is, what would we have to give up for it?'' Jayapal mused. ''Would he demand a down payment for his wall? Maybe that's the only way he gets it.''
  For that matter, would newly emboldened progressive groups who had just helped return Democrats to the House majority agree to such a trade-off? ''The huge issue of the whole debate,'' Jayapal conceded, ''is how we get people to stand together. Early in the movement, Dreamers were new to advocacy. Some of them were 12 or 14 years old. They understand now, through trial and error, that if they get a deal but their parents get deported, it's not acceptable. That's been a challenge for some of the other groups, too. Like the H-1Bs -- my people,'' she said with a laugh, referring to the fact that Jayapal herself, while awaiting naturalization, had relied on the visa that permits certain specialized foreign workers to stay in the United States. ''They're like, 'Forget everything else; just put us in some bill!' I don't feel any harshness toward them. I know they feel this urgency about their life.'' With a barely audible sigh, Jayapal said quietly: ''Mostly, it's hard. It's really hard.''
  She was speaking as the young and precariously documented immigrant she had once been, driving an Aerostar van filled with heart defibrillators through small towns in Indiana, where the locals often inquired as to where the dark-skinned saleswoman was from. But her words were also those of a policymaker chasing a frustratingly elusive consensus.
  In mid-August, I followed Jayapal through a typical day of talking to her constituents, a fast-moving schedule that included consoling a young Latino house painter who had taken refuge in a Seattle church to avoid deportation and accompanying a Mexican dance instructor and his family to the regional headquarters of ICE to request a stay in his deportation proceedings. The congresswoman had also spent much of her morning with 15 local immigration advocates. Many of them had known Jayapal for years; one had been arrested with her while protesting Obama's deportation policies back in 2010. ''I'd love to hear what you all are seeing on the ground,'' she began, ''but also to start to think about what next year looks like, should we take back the House. We haven't been able to put forward a proactive immigration policy -- we've been so reactive. So we need to show what our strategy is. We need to think about what an immigration policy looks like.''[Learn more about the five battlefields for control of the House.]
  One by one, they offered an exhausting litany of concerns. Stephen Miller was laying siege to the refugee-resettlement program. H-1B visa acceptance rates had slowed to a crawl. Delays for some naturalization applicants now reached five years. Immigrants were fearful about what might happen to them if they truthfully answered the question about their citizenship on the coming census form. The Customs and Border Protection office in Spokane appeared to be extending its search-and-seizure rights beyond the 100-mile limit prescribed by federal law. But, as Jayapal had observed, these concerns were reactions to Trump's war on immigration. None of the activists expressed larger thoughts about what she termed ''the moral imagination around immigration.'' They were, as she sympathetically put it, ''mired in the latest crisis.''
  Back in Washington, on the morning of Sept. 26, Jayapal met with representatives from 11 of the nation's most influential immigration rights advocates -- among them, United We Dream, the A.C.L.U., the Center for Community Change and the organization Jayapal had founded, OneAmerica. They discussed 35 pieces of pending legislation that could build toward an immigration agenda for the next two years. Three of the bills -- the Dream Act, a measure to guarantee automatic citizenship to certain adoptees and a series of steps intended to reduce the backlog of immigration cases -- the group believed could pass the House and the Senate and be signed into law by Trump. Nineteen bills, they figured, could pass only the House. Twelve would require changes to achieve any hope of passage. And one, relating to minimizing bail for detainees, they agreed was ''unlikely to pass, but important for movement building.''
  That a first-term congresswoman was presiding over such a gathering, before her party had retaken even one chamber of Congress, could be seen as presumptuous. Then again, House Republicans spent eight years perfecting their condemnations of Obamacare while giving little thought to what should replace it; now millions of Americans had lost their health care, and those same Republicans were at pains to explain their negligence to voters. Jayapal was not going to endure a similar fiasco.
  It was the kind of substantive, forward-thinking meeting Jayapal had been craving. No sooner did she leave it, however, than there was yet another fire to put out. The House was set to vote at 1:30 that afternoon on a series of measures under ''closed rule,'' in which no amendments could be offered. Among them was a resolution offered by Kevin McCarthy, the majority leader.
  Like his July countermeasure to support ICE, this new resolution bore all the telltale imprints of an election-year ploy. Taking note of the fact that the City of San Francisco permits undocumented residents to vote in local school board elections, the resolution declared that ''allowing illegal immigrants the right to vote devalues the franchise and diminishes the voting power of United States citizens.'' McCarthy's resolution seemed designed to put Democrats in a corner. Either they would be voting against the liberal policy of a city that happened to be represented by Nancy Pelosi, or they would be voting to let undocumented immigrants cast ballots in an American election.
  Just before the vote, I asked Luis Gutiérrez what he intended to do. ''I'm gonna tell them to kiss my Puerto Rican ass,'' he replied. But, he acknowledged, the bill was a wily strategic move. The Democrats had complained for months about Russia's interference in the 2016 election; now they were ushering illegal immigrants into the polling booths? ''The trap has been sprung,'' he said. ''It's like 'I Love Lucy': We've got some 'splaining to do. Which is what the Republicans want. What's the adage? If you're explaining, you're losing.''
  Gutiérrez is retiring in January after 26 years in the House. Like Jayapal, he entered Congress with a reputation as a rabble-rouser; he will exit it with a reputation as a patient negotiator. Frank Sharry speaks of Jayapal as ''the next Luis.'' But Jayapal didn't share Gutiérrez's belief that Democrats owed anyone an explanation for their votes on McCarthy's resolution. ''They're scared,'' she said of the Republicans. ''We should just make it clear: We support immigrants, this proposition is ludicrous and move on. That's a better approach than trying to hew to the old method of trying to make everyone feel comfortable.''
  At about 11 that evening, she was home in her apartment near the Capitol when her legislative director emailed her the roll-call vote for McCarthy's resolution. The numbers stunned her. Only 70 of her Democratic colleagues, including Gutiérrez, had joined her in voting against it. An additional 69 had voted ''present.'' Fully 49 -- about one-fourth of the Democratic caucus -- had voted for it.
  ''This is crazy,'' Jayapal emailed me shortly after the vote. Maybe 10 or 12 of her compatriots were in districts challenging enough to warrant voting with the Republicans. But 49? There was so much fear inside her caucus -- and outside, so much frustration from her organizer friends. Somehow Jayapal would have to navigate both sides -- agitating and legislating, crossing the border back and forth, somberly aware that when it came to immigration issues, even an easy vote felt to some like a perilous journey, destination unknown.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/10/magazine/the-democrats-have-an-immigration-problem.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); CORRECTIONS (90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (90%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (90%); PRISONERS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (88%); ARRESTS (78%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (66%)

Organization: BUREAU OF PRISONS (57%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); AIRPORTS (76%); AIRCRAFT (74%)

Person: PRAMILA JAYAPAL (79%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (93%); TACOMA, WA, USA (78%); MCALLEN, TX, USA (73%); WASHINGTON, USA (93%); NORTHWEST USA (79%); TEXAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); CENTRAL AMERICA (79%); DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%); GUATEMALA (79%); HONDURAS (79%)

Load-Date: October 28, 2018


End of Document
Building, and Enabling, Relationships
The New York Times
December 26, 2021 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2021 The New York Times Company
Section: Section BU; Column 0; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4; CORNER OFFICE
Length: 1783 words
Byline: By David Gelles
Body


When Texas lawmakers this summer passed a restrictive abortion law, corporate America was largely silent. Asked to comment about one of the most divisive issues imaginable, executives who had spoken up about voting rights, gun control and climate change were conspicuously quiet.
Then there was Shar Dubey. As other C.E.O.s avoided the controversy, Ms. Dubey -- the chief executive of Match Group, which runs online dating sites including Match.com, OKCupid and Tinder -- confronted it head-on. 
  ''As a Texas resident, I am shocked that I now live in a state where women's reproductive laws are more regressive than most of the world, including India,'' she said in an email to employees, while announcing she was creating a fund to support Match employees affected by the new law. ''Surely everyone should see the danger of this highly punitive and unfair law.''
  For Ms. Dubey, who has maintained a relatively low profile even while ascending to the top job at a company worth $37 billion, it was an unusual foray into political activism, and a reminder of the power she wields as one of the few top female executives in the technology industry.
  Ms. Dubey, who was born and raised in India, has reached the top ranks of corporate America quietly. As a young woman, she studied at the Indian Institute of Technology, where the future Google chief executive Sundar Pichai was her classmate and friend. She then got her master's in material science and engineering from Ohio State University, and worked her way up through a series of jobs, including Texas Instruments and the Princeton Review, before joining Match in 2006.
  Hoping to fit in, Ms. Dubey shortened her name from Sharmistha to Shar. And in a quest to understand the United States, she watched countless hours of sitcoms after work.
  Having taken over as C.E.O. of Match last year, Ms. Dubey is presiding over some of the busiest online dating sites at a moment when a pandemic-weary country is still looking for love.
  ''Some of our highest trafficked days are right around Christmas,'' she said. ''Everybody goes home, gets nagged by their family about being single, and makes their New Year's resolutions. Some of our peak activity is a result of that.''
  This interview was condensed and edited for clarity.
  Can you tell me a bit about your childhood and growing up in India?
  I grew up in this little town called Jamshedpur, which is in the northeastern part of India, about four hours from Calcutta. It was the first planned town of the famous Tata steel company. My dad was a professor of mechanical engineering, so we lived on campus of an engineering school. It was a bit of a bubble where everybody knew that your ticket to a better life went through a good education, and that was a big influence.
  Both my parents were very ambitious for me, which was unusual. Growing up in India in the '70s and '80s, it was the boys who had to get educated, and the girls who had to grow up to become good homemakers. But my parents never thought I should be raised differently than my brother. My dad always said: ''The first thing you've got to do is learn to stand on your own two feet. It doesn't matter after that. Everything else is sort of easy.'' So I studied and got exposed to the broader world, mostly through books. I always knew that there was a bigger and more interesting world out there for me to go check out.
  You were one of the only women in your class at I.I.T. Was it a welcoming environment, or did you face discrimination?
  Yes. I happened to become the only girl in my class of some 80 to 100 boys. I almost quit in the first week of landing there. There were these stadium seats where 20 people can sit in a row, and I would go sit on in the middle of the first row, and then everybody would move away from me because nobody wanted to sit next to me. My lab partner wouldn't come do his labs with me.
  I was like, ''How am I going to navigate this? Nobody wants to talk to me. Am I going to survive four years?'' And a girl who was a couple of years senior to me told me, ''If you're going to quit, who else is going to lose out? Grit it up and go figure out how you're going to survive this.'' And I did.
  How did you make your way to Ohio State for grad school?
  After I graduated, I went back to my hometown and got a job with the steel company. It became clear to me that the number of opportunities for me as a woman engineer in India were going to be limited. So I worked for a year, saved up money, and a year later, I saved up $800 and took my first plane ride of my life to Columbus, Ohio, on a very, very cold night. I didn't even know where I was going to sleep that night.
  What was the first kind of job that you got after graduating from Ohio State?
  It was at an aerospace engineer manufacturing company in rural Pennsylvania. I happened to be the first woman engineer they had ever hired, and I was the first foreigner that they ever did an H-1B visa processing for. So that was my introduction to corporate America.
  I was suddenly in charge of a shop floor that was run by people who had been there for decades, and now here's a woman who's supposed to tell them what to do, and she talks funny. They would let me know that I wasn't clear enough in my conversations with them, and there was a particular supervisor who did not relish the idea of me coming in there. So it became the big motivation of my life that I was going to win him over before I was done there.
  How did you go about doing that?
  I realized that when people meet you for the first time they focus on all the things that are different about you. They get so distracted and hung up about all the differences that they don't actually see the substance of what you bring to the conversation. So there were a few things that I realized I had to change.
  So I did shorten my name at that time, so it was easier. And I had to work on my accent, and get up to speed on all the pop culture and references that I had missed. I didn't know anybody in that little town of Reading, Pa., so I watched a lot of TV. I would watch all the old sitcoms from ''Golden Girls'' to ''Cheers,'' and I would get myself familiar with the words and the sayings, and the cultural references that I had no idea about. They became important conversational things that I could use to be accessible and relatable to people.
  Outside of that, I figured I was going to outwork everybody. I will be the first one there and the last one out. And at the end of about a year and a half when I left, the supervisor who I had made a point of winning over cried at my farewell. That was one of the biggest accomplishments of my career.
  ''Taking us backward while much of the world is moving forward? That didn't sit well with me.''
  What was the hardest thing you're dealing with as C.E.O. right now?
  Maintaining the trust equity that comes with building relationships. It was an advantage for me when I became C.E.O., because I had been at the company a long time. But there were a lot more people that I'd never met. And if you don't meet folks over time, the longer you're stuck with not meeting in person, that trust equity gets harder and harder.
  Why did you take a stand when Texas lawmakers passed their restrictive new abortion law this summer?
  The company did not take a stand. I took a stand, and I tried to make that clear. I created the fund personally. I didn't think it was the appropriate place for the company to jump in, given we are a very diverse company. We have headquarters in Texas. But when someone came and asked me specifically, what do you think about this as a woman with the life experience that I've had, it just didn't sit right with me to say ''no comment'' on an issue that I really clearly thought was just wrong. Taking us backward while much of the world is moving forward? That didn't sit well with me.
  Match has been more welcoming of some online regulations than many of the big tech companies. Can you explain where your positions diverge?
  For most of Big Tech, privacy comes first. Apple famously doesn't unlock a phone, even for a terrorist. We've always known that safety was existential for our category, because we're introducing strangers on our platform who eventually go meet in real life. So for us it's not only privacy, or only safety, but a balance, and it's not always easy. If you skew in favor of privacy, you're never going to be able to track and do the kinds of moderation, etc., that you need to do.
  The in-person world, the I.R.L. world, is hundreds and hundreds of years of civilization, where we have figured out a code of conduct and behavior, rules of engagement, laws, law enforcement and all the rest. Now so much of our lives are moving online, onto this world, and we still haven't figured out what is the right level of anonymity versus your real personas online. What is the code of behavior? What is tolerated or not? Let alone laws and law enforcement. There's no law enforcement on these platforms. That's the conversation that's still happening.
  Do you feel like the big tech companies are taking enough responsibility for the real-world consequences of what happens on their platforms?
  It's super challenging, and in the absence of real laws and enforcement, we're all making stuff up. One of the things which is easier for us, as a one-on-one introduction platform, is that we have a much harder stance on bad behavior. A cuss word is enough for us to kick you out of the platform.
  But I'm not sure it is right for Facebook and Twitter to be responsible for defining what is hate speech. It's a complicated problem, which is why I think we need the trifecta of the regulators, the tech platforms and ultimately society. You and me have to decide what is acceptable and what is not acceptable in this online world, in the same way that we have, over centuries, determined what's acceptable and not acceptable in the real world.
  How has dating changed during the pandemic?
  Behavioral change is usually very incremental. But there are points in time when you do see step changes, and I think a few different step changes happened during the pandemic. A lot of people suddenly reprioritized life's priorities and realized, ''I don't want to be locked down alone again.'' They appreciated the value of a partner, and the lack of value of loneliness.
  People became more realistic and honest about themselves and who they were looking for. One of the big things that came back was physical looks were less important. If that sustains, that is a good thing for humanity.David Gelles is the Corner Office columnist and a business reporter. Follow him on LinkedIn and Twitter: @dgelles.

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/12/24/business/shar-dubey-match-texas-abortion-law.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY GUERIN BLASK FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EXECUTIVES (90%); WOMEN (90%); COURTSHIP & DATING (89%); DATING SERVICES (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); ONLINE DATING SERVICES (89%); TECHNOLOGY (89%); ABORTION LAWS (78%); GUN CONTROL (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); WOMEN WORKERS (77%); STUDENT HOUSING (75%); ABORTION (73%); ACTIVISM (73%); POLITICAL ACTIVISM (73%); WEAPONS & ARMS (72%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (68%); MATERIALS SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (66%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (63%); CHRISTMAS (60%)

Company: GOOGLE LLC (82%);  TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC (53%);  TATA STEEL LTD (50%)

Ticker: TXN (NASDAQ) (53%); TTST (LSE) (50%); TATASTEEL (NSE) (50%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (82%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS333318 OTHER COMMERCIAL & SERVICE INDUSTRY MACHINERY MANUFACTURING (53%); SIC3674 SEMICONDUCTORS & RELATED DEVICES (53%); SIC3578 CALCULATING & ACCOUNTING MACHINERY, EXCEPT ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (53%); NAICS331221 ROLLED STEEL SHAPE MANUFACTURING (50%); NAICS331210 IRON & STEEL PIPE & TUBE MANUFACTURING FROM PURCHASED STEEL (50%); NAICS331110 IRON & STEEL MILLS & FERROALLOY MANUFACTURING (50%); DATING SERVICES (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); ONLINE DATING SERVICES (89%); ABORTION LAWS (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (68%); MECHANICAL ENGINEERING (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (63%); TELEVISION COMEDIES (50%)

Person: SUNDAR PICHAI (77%)

Geographic: KOLKATA, WEST BENGAL, INDIA (56%); TEXAS, USA (92%); OHIO, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (90%)

Load-Date: December 26, 2021


End of Document
In India, Obama Elevates the Nation's Self-Esteem
The New York Times
January 27, 2015 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10
Length: 939 words
Byline: By ELLEN BARRY and PETER BAKER
Body


NEW DELHI --  India's military forces marched past President Obama and India's president and prime minister in great waves of color on Monday morning.
Crimson-clad border troops with identical mustaches, astride camels decked out in gold braid and multicolored pompoms. A bagpipe and drum corps in plaid and leopard skin. Sikh regiments in dress turbans, their starched fringes fanning out like gold lamé pie plates. A formation of combat helicopters that thudded past, releasing drifts of marigold petals. 
  On one level, of course, it was just a parade. But it served as a fitting geopolitical metaphor as well. Russian-made Sukhoi-30 fighter jets roared over, so low that the scent of jet fuel settled over the V.I.P. section, and Russian-made T-90 tanks trundled by, a reminder of India's ties to Moscow dating to the Cold War.
  Yet it was Mr. Obama who took the seat of the chief guest, the first American leader to do so. In the 65 previous parades, the chief guest has twice been Soviet, once Russian, twice Yugoslav, three times French, twice British, once Chinese. Even Pakistan has been invited. Mr. Obama's acceptance of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's invitation this year was seen here as a great tribute to India, a sign of the country's arrival on the world stage.
  ''The crowd is getting understandably excited and ecstatic at the arrival of the motorcade of the president of the United States, Barack Obama,'' the parade announcer said when Mr. Obama's Cadillac pulled up. At that point, a military policeman in a red-fringed turban gestured sternly for spectators to remain seated, but they ignored him completely, scrambling atop their chairs for a view. Two men unfolded a banner that read ''I love Obama.''
  Mr. Obama's presence required extensive security preparations, as he has not spent such a long stretch outdoors in public in a foreign country during his six years in office. As is typical for outdoor events, he was seated behind bulletproof glass shields. Indian security was so tight that ballpoint pens were confiscated from reporters covering the parade.
  Republic Day is a major holiday in India, commemorating the day in 1950 when the post-partition democratic Constitution came into force. Seats are provided for 125,000 people, according to the Defense Ministry, which arranges the event. Spectators began streaming through the streets toward the parade ground at dawn, some wrapped in wool blankets against the chilly rain. Though elaborate, snaking barriers had been erected along the routes leading to the site, the crowds quickly spilled over them and surged into the road.
  ''I came because of Obama,'' said Vinay Kumar, 32, who had woken at 4:30 a.m. to catch a bus from his home on the city's outskirts. ''We hope he and Modi together will help grow the economy. And help us to get H-1B visas to visit America.''
  ''I am not looking for a permanent visit,'' he added, ''just one year or two.''
  Many said they came out of pride. Indian crowds adore military spectacle, a fact that British colonial powers recognized in the 19th century, adopting the fabulous displays of the maharajahs who preceded them. George Curzon, the British viceroy, at one point ''issued instructions that European officials were not outshined by the Indian princes who came wearing their jewelry,'' said Rana China, who heads the Center for Armed Forces Military History in New Delhi.
  ''The colonial state was of the view that the Indian people loved a parade, loved pageantry, and they wanted to give it to them,'' he said. ''Pomp, pageantry, all of this -- they are symbols of power.''
  For all his socialist leanings, India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, retained those flourishes when he introduced the Republic Day parade, in addition to a display of heavy weaponry directed toward Pakistan. As members of a Sikh regiment passed on Monday, swinging their arms so vigorously that they seemed in danger of dislocating them, the announcer remarked in a tweedy British accent that ''this regiment has the reputation of creating terror among the enemy.''
  Monday's parade included all-women contingents from the army, navy and air force. Mr. Obama seemed particularly impressed by a display of motorcycle trick-riding, showing a thumbs-up. There were also many reminders that India has been the world's largest consumer of Russia's arms industry, particularly after a series of flyovers by MIG-29 and Su-30 fighter jets.
  Mr. Obama and the American delegation have made it clear they want to compete for India's defense dollars, renewing the defense pact between the two countries on Sunday and agreeing to cooperate on aircraft carrier and jet engine technology. They also agreed to work on joint production of small-scale surveillance drones.
  That did not mean that Russia was about to cede a lucrative, longtime market. Sergei K. Shoigu, the Russian defense minister, made a point of visiting last week, just before Mr. Obama arrived, to discuss joint production of a light utility helicopter and to resolve disagreements about a long-delayed fifth-generation fighter aircraft.
  But as he left the parade on Monday, Sunil Mudgal, 39, an army officer, said he saw India's relationships beginning to shift, in part because the United States' ''outlook toward the neighboring countries, especially Pakistan, has changed.''
  ''Ten years back, we were only reliant on Russia,'' he said. That morning, added his wife, Anuradha, the couple's young son could think of nothing but Mr. Obama, who was seated across the parade route from the family. ''He asked me,'' she said, '''If I wave to him, will he see me?'''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/27/world/asia/obama-makes-the-most-of-indias-republic-day-parade.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: President Obama attended the Republic Day parade celebrating India's Constitution on Monday, the first American president to do so. (PHOTOGRAPH BY STEPHEN CROWLEY/THE NEW YORK TIMES)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); PARADES & MARCHES (89%); ARMED FORCES (78%); COLD WAR (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); SIKHS & SIKHISM (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (60%)

Industry: ARMED FORCES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (73%); JET FUEL (69%); HELICOPTERS (56%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (89%); NARENDRA MODI (79%)

Geographic: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%); MOSCOW, RUSSIA (57%); INDIA (95%); RUSSIA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (79%)

Load-Date: January 27, 2015


End of Document
What Google and Twitter Say About Trump's First 100 Days
The New York Times
April 29, 2017 Saturday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Express; Pg. 
Length: 575 words
Byline: By MATT STEVENS
Body


The rulers of the social media and search worlds have run their high-powered analytics to give us incisive new insight into President Trump's first 100 days in office.
And the results, are ... well, basically what you'd expect. 
  We now have data to support the claim that, yes, our commander in chief posts often on Twitter about the media and making America great; we also now know that people spent his first few months in office searching mostly for information about immigration and other related topics.
  But let's start with Mr. Trump himself.
  In a report released on Friday, Twitter examined how Mr. Trump leveraged his favorite social media platform during this early stage. They said Mr. Trump had posted a total of 486 times as of 1 p.m. on Day 98. (The New York Times has published an interactive feature cataloging  posts from the start of his presidency.)
  A less rigorous analysis by yours truly found that, by comparison, former President Barack Obama sent out a dozen messages on Twitter over that span; Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, however, sent a ton; Beyoncé did not send any.
  Mr. Trump sent Twitter messages containing the word ''great'' most often, followed by ''America/American'' and ''news/media,'' according to Twitter. Other words in the top 10 included: ''jobs,'' ''big'' and ''fake news.''
  Given that so many of his favorite phrases involved the news, it only makes sense that some of the Twitter handles that Mr. Trump mentioned most were media companies. The handle @Whitehouse topped the list, but @CNN and @FoxNews were close behind. The handles @nytimes and @foxandfriends tied for second -- presumably for different reasons.
  In its 100-days report, Twitter said Mr. Trump was mentioned most on Jan. 20 -- his inauguration. Users also mentioned the president frequently on Twitter when he signed controversial executive orders, when he claimed that Mr. Obama had him wiretapped and when one of Mr. Trump's senior advisers urged television viewers to buy fashion products marketed by his daughter.
  Google similarly found in its analysis that search interest in Mr. Trump peaked during his first day in office before beginning a gradual decline.
  Still, if Mr. Trump seeks a ''win'' over Mr. Obama, he can now say that he was searched 140 percent more than the former president during their respective first 100 days, according to the Google Trends analysis released Wednesday.
  Among the questions people asked Google to answer the most in that period:
   ''How many executive orders has Trump signed?''
   ''What countries did Trump ban?
   ''Why did Trump bomb Syria?''
  Unsurprisingly, topics like immigration and Syria also topped the list of topics people searched for frequently during the first 100 days. Terms related to immigration such as H-1B visas, which allow employers to bring in foreign workers for years at a time, and DACA, which refers to a program called Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, also garnered big interest.
  And although many of the issues that divide the country were among those that people searched most, one needs only to turn back to Twitter for a possible sign of unity.
  The president's most reposted message since Jan. 20?
  Peaceful protests are a hallmark of our democracy. Even if I don't always agree, I recognize the rights of people to express their views. -- Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 22, 2017
  Maybe, just maybe, we all can just get along.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/us/politics/trump-twitter-google.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: TRUMP'S FIRST 100 DAYS (91%); DATA ANALYTICS (90%); OBAMA'S FIRST 100 DAYS (90%); SOCIAL MEDIA (90%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (89%); TRENDS (77%); RANKINGS (74%); FAKE NEWS (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); NEGATIVE TECHNOLOGY NEWS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); IMMIGRATION (70%); WIRETAPPING (50%)

Company:  TWITTER INC (92%);  GOOGLE INC (85%)

Ticker: TWTR (NYSE) (92%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (92%); DATA ANALYTICS (90%); SOCIAL MEDIA (90%); MEDIA & TELECOMMUNICATIONS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); BARACK OBAMA (77%); JUSTIN TRUDEAU (70%); BEYONCE KNOWLES (54%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%); SYRIA (92%)

Load-Date: April 29, 2017


End of Document
Infosys Built Its Global Machine With Indian Workers. Can It Adjust to Trump’s ‘Hire American’?
The New York Times 
October 15, 2018 Monday 14:09 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1541 words
Byline: Steve Lohr
Highlight: Doing significantly more work in the United States, as the company is being pressured to do, would require an overhaul of its business model and corporate culture.
Body


When Infosys, a big Indian technology outsourcing company, opened a new office in Indianapolis this year, executives hailed it as a step along a new path.
Infosys built itself into a global giant by running the digital engine rooms of American corporations with armies of engineers in India. But the new technology center — a sprawling open-plan space in a downtown office tower — is in the epicenter of the American Midwest.
And its recruits are people like Keith Smith Jr., a graduate of Indiana University, who previously held a variety of jobs before Infosys trained him as a software engineer.
Ravi Kumar, a president of Infosys, described the office as “a manifestation of what the future is going to look like.”
The company, a shining success story in the Indian economy, is under mounting pressure to hire more Americans and do significantly more work onshore, in what would be a striking overhaul of its corporate culture and its business practices. In the process, Infosys has become a case study of how market forces and immigration changes by the Trump administration are reshaping corporations.
Infosys is staring at two daunting challenges to its long-successful business model, which generated $2.5 billion in profit in its last fiscal year. Companies are increasingly adopting technologies best built bysmall teams working side           by           side with customers, like cloud computing and mobile apps. It is work better situated in the Indianapolis tech center than thousands of miles away in India.
Policy changes from the Trump administration may be even more threatening. As part of his efforts to curb the flow of foreign workers into the United States, President Trump called for tighter controls on skilled worker visas in his “Buy American, Hire American” executive order last year.
Traditionally, Indian outsourcers like Infosys have deftly exploited the skilled-worker visa system. The majority of its employees in the United States hold one of those visas, analysts estimate. The company has also been fined by the government for abusing visa rules in the past, and its practices continue to draw the scrutiny of federal investigators.
All the steps Infosys is now taking “would be a huge change,” said Rod Bourgeois, an expert on the industry and the head of research at Deep Dive Equity Research. “It’s not in their DNA.”
Other big offshore outsourcing companies are also responding to the market and political threats, including Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Cognizant. But Infosys made the biggest, most public commitment to building up its work force in the United States, when the company declared last year that it would hire 10,000 workers in America by sometime in 2019.
Then, Infosys began to announce the creation of tech centers in America. Indianapolis was the first, followed by offices in Raleigh, N.C.; Providence, R.I.; and Hartford. Last month, the company said its next hub would be in Arizona. Infosys says it has hired more than 5,800 American workers.
“We will be looking for talent that is closer to our client clusters,” said Mr. Kumar, who is the point man in the company’s initiative to hire American workers. “And our operating model will evolve.”
For now, though, an estimated 80 percent of the 200,000 Infosys workers are in India, a market that accounts for 3 percent of its worldwide revenue of $11 billion last year. The company garners 60 percent of its revenue in North America, mainly in the United States, where Infosys employs more than 20,000 workers, analysts estimate. About two-thirds of the Infosys workers in America, they say, have been Indians with skilled-worker visas.
The main such visa program, H-1B, was intended to bring in talented foreigners with special skills who would complement the domestic work force and strengthen the United States economy.
But critics say the Indian outsourcers mastered the use of legal loopholes to obtain an outsize share of skilled-worker visas, which, in turn, allowed the companies to hire less costly Indian workers.
In 2013, Infosys paid $34 million in a civil settlement with the Justice Department and other federal agencies, which accused the company of systemic abuse of visa rules, including on B-1 visas meant for short trips for training or attending conferences. In that settlement, Infosys agreed to improve its visa compliance practices.
The government continues to monitor the company. One current and two former Infosys employees, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified, said federal investigators had questioned them in recent months about the company’s visa handling.
The Justice Department and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services did not respond to requests for comment.
Infosys also faces two private, civil lawsuits accusing the company of discrimination in hiring, promotions and firing.
The accounts from testimony and interviews with witnesses tied to those suits vary in detail. But the stories share themes that illustrate how hard it could be for Infosys to change its ways.
The plaintiffs and witnesses were experienced lawyers, human relations managers, salespeople and engineers who joined Infosys as the company expanded rapidly in the United States. Things went smoothly at first, when the newcomers brought in new customers or smoothed the way with government agencies.
But tensions surfaced. Important decisions were all made in India. Questions were unwelcome. Complaints brought retaliation — reassignments, demotions, abrupt firings and belittling remarks.
“It’s basically a corporate caste system, run out of India,” said Erin Green, a former immigration lawyer for Infosys, who filed one of the civil suits against the company in Texas last year. “And people who are not Indian are at the bottom.”
Daniel Kotchen, a lawyer who has a pending suit against the company in Wisconsin on behalf of former workers, said, “Infosys has a business model that is discriminatory — its rigid and explicit preference for a certain kind of person.”
Infosys is fighting the suits, denying discrimination and saying its work force reflects the global labor pool for technology skills.
“Employment at our company,” Infosys said in a statement, “is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit and the needs of our clients.”
Even as Infosys increases hiring in America, its lower-paid engineers back in India still animate the business. Wage rates in India have risen in recent years, but the gap is still sizable — a third or a fourth the rates in the United States.
Programming work done in India, analysts estimate, is twice as profitable as writing code in America. On a typical project, 70 percent or more of the work is done in India.
The Indian employees working at United States companies are often there mainly to understand customer needs and communicate with the large teams back in India. They are vital to the Infosys business, but are a fraction of the company’s engineering work force.
That formula — the so-called global delivery model — has been embraced by non-Indian companies, like IBM and Accenture, for parts of their business. But it has been the prime engine of business for Infosys.
“It may be changing some, but Infosys is certainly not abandoning its cash-cow business model,” said Ronil Hira, an offshore outsourcing expert at Howard University.
In India, Infosys is a hiring and training machine. Its pitch in the United States is that it is transplanting a version of that model here, no matter the higher costs. “We’re going to create pools of talent that do not exist in the United States,” Mr. Kumar said, and “strengthen the American work force.”
The message is appealing to state governors, winning Infosys praise and tax breaks. In Indiana, Infosys says it plans to hire 3,000 workers by 2023, after a recent announcement that it would build a training center on a 70-acre site near the Indianapolis airport.
Gov. Eric Holcomb, a Republican, describes the Infosys presence as an important building block for his state’s economic development — and well worth a generous incentive package of tax credits and training grants.
Governor Holcomb shrugs off critics who claim that Infosys undercuts American workers. “They’re hiring here,” he said.
Mr. Smith, the recent recruit who was hired last October, spent his first two months in an intensive training program, honing his skills in several programming languages and developer tools. Before Infosys, he held jobs in marketing, video production and work-force recruiting, and completed a four-month course at a coding boot camp. His current Infosys assignment is helping a large telecom company on web projects.
Mr. Smith, 35, views his Infosys job as an on-ramp to the digital economy. “I see limitless potential,” he said.
Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr. 
PHOTO: The new Infosys office in Indianapolis has a view of the city skyline. The company, under pressure to hire more Americans, has said it will hire 10,000 workers in the United States by 2019. (PHOTOGRAPH BY A J Mast for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Related Articles
    • What Are H-1B Visas, and Do They Hurt American Workers?
    • Top C.E.O.s Denounce Trump Immigration Policy as Threat to U.S. Economy
    • Companies Say Trump Is Hurting Business by Limiting Legal Immigration
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (92%); CORPORATE CULTURE (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EQUITY RESEARCH (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (77%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (74%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (73%); OFFSHORING (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); CASE STUDIES (72%); NEGATIVE NEWS (69%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (67%); FINES & PENALTIES (64%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (54%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (50%); Infosys Technologies Ltd (%); Foreign Workers (%); Outsourcing (%); Visas (%); Hiring and Promotion (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); India (%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (92%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (51%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (92%); INFY (NYSE) (92%); INFY (NSE) (92%); TCS (NSE) (51%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (51%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (51%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (51%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (51%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EQUITY RESEARCH (88%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (79%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (77%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (77%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (75%); CLOUD COMPUTING (70%); CONSULTING SERVICES (70%); MOBILE APPLICATIONS (70%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (74%); KEITH E SMITH (55%)

Geographic: INDIANAPOLIS, IN, USA (93%); PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (79%); RALEIGH, NC, USA (79%); INDIANA, USA (92%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); MIDWEST USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (97%); INDIA (94%)

Load-Date: October 18, 2018


End of Document
They Grew Up Legally in the U.S., but Can’t Stay After They Turn 21
The New York Times 
April 30, 2022 Saturday 11:43 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 1848 words
Byline: Aishvarya Kavi
Highlight: Children of temporary visa holders who can’t gain permanent residency are one of several groups urging the Biden administration to act on an immigration overhaul.
Body


Children of temporary visa holders who can’t gain permanent residency are one of several groups urging the Biden administration to act on an immigration overhaul.
WASHINGTON — In 2011, after five years of working and living with his family in the United States on a temporary visa, Barathimohan Ganesan submitted green card applications for his wife, his 5-year-old daughter and his 11-year-old son.
Mr. Ganesan, who was born in India and has also lived in Singapore and Australia, was nervous about when his wife and children might gain permanent residency. He knew the waiting list was especially long for Indians on his kind of visa, an H-1B, which allows American companies to employ skilled foreign workers. Because of chronic backlogs, it can take years to process those on work visas who apply for permanent residency.
Last year, a decade after he applied, Mr. Ganesan, his wife and his daughter received their green cards. But his son had turned 21 and missed the cutoff by months, leaving him scrambling for a visa that would allow him to stay in the United States.
Mr. Ganesan’s son is among more than 200,000 children who grew up in the country under the protection of their parents’ temporary visas, which can be renewed indefinitely. But the children risk losing their legal status when they turn 21. Unable to become permanent residents because of the backlogs or because they were never eligible, they must obtain a different visa, remain in the United States without legal status or leave entirely. According to the Cato Institute, more than 10,000 children age out of green card eligibility each year; untold numbers eventually depart, often leaving their families behind.
These young people do not qualify for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. Created by executive action during the Obama administration, the DACA program protects from deportation about 650,000 youths, or Dreamers, who were brought into the United States and have remained without legal status. Because the program requires applicants to be undocumented, it does not offer those with legal status a way to stay.
A comprehensive immigration overhaul is highly unlikely to pass a deadlocked Congress in a midterm election year. The Biden administration has been under increasing pressure as a Trump-era public health order, known as Title 42, is set to be lifted in late May, a move that is expected to create a surge of migration across the southwestern border. A bipartisan group of senators restarted immigration discussions on Thursday to try to identify stand-alone proposals that would have the support of both parties.
When asked on Thursday whether the administration — which is updating DACA — was considering extending protections to documented youths, Alejandro N. Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, told the House Judiciary Committee that the department did not plan to do so. Its focus was “to fortify the existing DACA program” and shift responsibility for documented youths to Congress, he said, adding that their situation spoke to “the imperative to pass immigration reform.”
In interviews, more than a dozen people who lived in the United States on temporary visas from a young age described their struggles with anxiety and the financial burden of navigating how to remain in the country they considered home. They are urging the Biden administration, if it will not provide a path to citizenship, to offer a way for them to legally remain in the country.
Mr. Ganesan’s son, Niranjan Barathimohan, is able to stay in the United States until November only because immigration officials extended his dependent visa. Mr. Barathimohan, a student at the University of Texas at Dallas, will have to go to Singapore, where he was born, to apply for a student visa that will allow him to return and finish his degree.
His application might be rejected; since he previously tried for a green card, he has shown an intent to immigrate to the United States, which is not allowed. Applicants may be asked to show that they intend to leave the country after completing their courses. Mr. Barathimohan faces the prospect of being stuck in Singapore, where he has no family or roots.
“How is he going to manage alone?” Mr. Ganesan said. “I was really devastated that just because of my country of birth, my son’s opportunities are very limited.”
While there are protections to keep families together when parents move to the United States on temporary work visas, those end when children turn 21 because they are no longer considered part of the family unit.
“I don’t think people who originally wrote the laws foresaw a situation where children brought here on visas would be raised and educated here, but not have a clear opportunity to stay and become Americans,” said Dip Patel, the founder of Improve the Dream, an organization that campaigns for a path to citizenship for those children. “Delay in taking action will not only lead to tearing more families apart, but also continue the immense emotional turmoil faced by thousands of families.”
Other families face similar situations. Like Mr. Ganesan, Deva and her husband moved their children to the United States from India when they were young. For more than a decade, the children and Deva, who asked to be identified by a nickname, lived as dependents on her husband’s indefinite work visa.
Deva said her husband’s employer, an American automaker, could decide at any point not to extend his visa, which must be renewed every three years. She said she feared antagonizing the employer if she was identified speaking publicly about her family’s situation.
The family’s hopes of staying together in the United States ended in December, when Deva’s daughter turned 21. Having exhausted appeals for an extension and unable to apply for a different visa, the daughter moved to Canada days later.
The effects on the family were far-reaching. A week before her daughter was set to leave, Deva said, her son, now 17, tried to hurt himself, alarming his sister. She postponed her departure by a week while the family sought counseling for him.
Her son said during counseling that he had struggled with his mental health for months while watching his family navigate their legal status, Deva said. Her daughter, who enrolled in a master’s program in Canada, is less than an hour’s drive from her friends and family, but cannot enter the United States while she waits for a tourist visa.
At a Senate hearing in March, Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, and Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the top Republican on the panel’s immigration subcommittee, vowed to work on legislation to help people who had grown up in the United States without a clear path to citizenship.
In emotional testimony at the hearing, Athulya Rajakumar, 23, spoke of the toll of growing up in Seattle as a dependent of her single mother, who had a temporary work visa. She described how she and her brother struggled with depression and how her family’s status as temporary visa holders hindered him from receiving the treatment he needed. He later took his own life.
“We didn’t know how badly it was going to affect us,” Ms. Rajakumar, who lives in Texas on a work visa, said in an interview.
Muzaffar Chishti, the director of the Migration Policy Institute at the N.Y.U. School of Law, described the issue as one of many in a system that has not been truly updated since the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which established the pathways for legal immigration that are still in place.
“Immigration is not a set of policies — it’s a system,” Mr. Chishti said, adding, “If one part of the system gets problematic, it affects other parts of the system.”
Those who grew up in the United States on certain temporary visas are not eligible to apply for permanent residency. That was the case for Summer Rusher, who was born in Britain and moved to Florida at age 1 with her parents, who arrived on an investor visa, which allows some foreign citizens to reside in the country indefinitely if they invest in an American business. The program does not offer a path to citizenship, meaning that children have no way to become permanent residents.
Ms. Rusher, 23, was able to stay on a student visa after she turned 21. She graduated from Southeastern University at the top of her class in a master’s program for exceptional-student education, a certification in Florida for instructors of students with disabilities.
Now a teacher in Winter Haven, Fla., Ms. Rusher was among a large pool of applicants for a limited number of work visas. But she learned in March that she was not chosen in the randomized process used by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. If she cannot obtain another visa before her work authorization expires in June, she will have to return to Britain, where her qualifications are not recognized.
Short of a legislative overhaul of the system, Improve the Dream, the advocacy group, has worked to increase awareness of the issue and is urging the Biden administration to make changes. But children of nonimmigrant visa holders have criticized the administration for being too slow or unwilling to take action on proposed changes, such as the expansion of DACA to include documented youths.
Among the proposals is one that would modify how U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services determines whether an applicant qualifies for a green card, allowing more minors to remain eligible as they near 21. Another would classify applicants as children beyond their 21st birthday to keep them in line for a green card, which is the policy for those who are refugees or asylum seekers or are sponsored by relatives who are U.S. citizens.
Matthew D. Bourke, a spokesman for the immigration agency, said the Department of Homeland Security was “keenly aware” of the challenges for documented youths and was “exploring legal methods to provide immigration relief to this population where possible.”
As Deva and her husband await their green cards, which they applied for in 2016, she said they were struggling with their finances. She now hopes that her children can build a future in Canada.
Ms. Rusher said she was on the verge of having to leave her family, students and career. Her brother, who was born in the United States, does not face the same restrictions.
“I got to do everything that a typical American kid would dream of,” Ms. Rusher said. “I don’t want that to end just because of where I was born.”
PHOTOS: Mr. Ganesan and his son, Niranjan Barathimohan, who is among over 200,000 children in the U.S. under the protection of their parents’ temporary visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMIL LIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); For over a decade, Deva and the children lived as dependents on her husband’s work visa. Her daughter exhausted appeals for an extension. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARAH RICE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Ms. Rusher stayed in the U.S. on a student visa after she turned 21, but her work authorization expires soon and she may have to return to Britain. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVE EDELHEIT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION (94%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (89%); FAMILY (79%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); BIPARTISANSHIP (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); DEPORTATION (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); ELECTIONS (72%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (60%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Visas (%); Green Cards (US) (%); Foreign Workers (%); Citizenship and Naturalization (%); Deportation (%); Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (%); Citizenship and Immigration Services (US) (%); Homeland Security Department (%); Families and Family Life (%); Children and Childhood (%); Indian-Americans (%); Biden, Joseph R Jr (%); United States Politics and Government (%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); ALEJANDRO MAYORKAS (79%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); Biden, Joseph R Jr

Geographic: UNITED STATES (96%); AUSTRALIA (79%); INDIA (79%); SINGAPORE (79%)

Load-Date: May 1, 2022


End of Document
Rule Change Sought by Tech Firms Will Allow Some Spouses of Immigrants to Work
The New York Times
February 25, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 736 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


The Obama administration said on Tuesday that it will give work permits to some spouses of highly skilled immigrants who are in the United States on temporary visas, a change long sought by technology companies and other businesses that is part of a series of controversial executive actions by the president.
Immigration officials said they had finished a new rule that will allow foreign spouses of immigrants holding a visa known as an H-1B to work if the immigrants are in the process of becoming legal permanent residents. The old rules had created financial and emotional strains for many families of immigrants working in the tech industry and had discouraged foreigners with advanced skills from coming to this country.  
  The White House announced the rule change in the midst of a tense debate on Capitol Hill over President Obama's actions and sought to emphasize what it said were the economic benefits of his initiatives.
  Critics of the president's executive actions accused him of making major alterations to the immigration system without the consent of Congress and bringing in foreign workers who would compete with Americans for jobs.
  ''This latest executive action implements a provision highly sought after by various corporate lobbyists but never enacted by Congress,'' said Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, a Republican who is a staunch opponent of the president on immigration, assailing the new actions Tuesday. ''Every executive action the president takes is another blow to working Americans, reducing their wages and undermining their economic position.''
  The work permits are not affected by a decision by a federal judge in Texas last week to block Mr. Obama's actions to shield millions of immigrants here illegally.
  The change will mainly affect temporary workers from India, China and some other Asian countries who have applied for permanent resident green cards. Many are caught in visa backlogs that mean waiting for a decade or more. Until now their spouses have not been able to work during that wait, even though they often had similar skills.
  Administration officials said the changes would make it easier for foreigners to remain here and help create jobs. On a call with reporters organized by the White House, Jason Furman, the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, cited studies showing that highly skilled immigrants would ''increase the size of the pie because you are coming up with new ideas.'' 
  Mr. Obama mentioned the rule change when he announced sweeping executive actions on immigration on Nov. 20, which included protections for as many as five million immigrants here illegally. Republicans opposed to those protections have tried to block them in a bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security. Debate raged on Capitol Hill on Tuesday over how to resolve an impasse with Democrats on the funding bill. 
  León Rodríguez, the director of Citizenship and Immigration Services, said the visa change was part of the president's effort to modernize a visa system widely acknowledged to be dysfunctional. But officials acknowledged that the rule had been in the works since last May, well before other actions.
  Immigration officials estimated that about 180,000 spouses would be eligible to apply in the first year and about 55,000 annually after that. Applications will begin on May 26. The new rule will not offer work permits to spouses of all H-1B workers, a change that administration officials concluded would need congressional approval. 
  The new regulation was welcomed by technology companies and other business groups. ''These changes can help attract or retain skilled employees in the work force whose spouses are also often educated and offer a unique set of skills and talents,'' said Dean Garfield, president of the Information Technology Industry Council. 
  But he lamented that Congress had not made progress on broader legislation. ''Our immigration system is deeply broken, and it can only be fixed through immigration reform,'' Mr. Garfield said. ''Washington ignoring the problem is not a solution.'' 
  On the conference call, Cecilia Muñoz, director of the White House Domestic Policy Council, said Mr. Obama will travel to Miami on Wednesday for a televised town hall meeting where he will say he ''remains confident that the executive actions are fully within his authority under law and he expects to prevail in the courts.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/25/us/rule-change-sought-by-tech-firms-will-allow-some-spouses-of-immigrants-to-work.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (94%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); LICENSES & PERMITS (89%); US CONGRESS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (87%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ECONOMICS (75%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (75%); JOB CREATION (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); EMOTIONS (70%); LOBBYING (69%); ECONOMIC POLICY (68%); JUDGES (50%); NATIONAL SECURITY (50%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%)

Person: BARACK OBAMA (90%); JEFF SESSIONS (79%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%); ASIA (79%); CHINA (79%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: February 25, 2015


End of Document
Social Insecurity
The New York Times
April 30, 2017 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 39; FEATURE
Length: 5663 words
Byline: By FARHAD MANJOO
Farhad Manjoo is a technology columnist for The New York Times. He is working on a book about what he calls the Frightful Five: Apple, Amazon, Google, Facebook and Microsoft -- the five technology giants that are swallowing up the rest of the economy.
Body


In early January, I went to see Mark Zuckerberg at MPK20, a concrete-and-steel building on the campus of Facebook's headquarters, which sits across a desolate highway from the marshy salt flats of Menlo Park, Calif. The Frank Gehry-designed building has a pristine nine-acre rooftop garden, yet much of the interior -- a meandering open-plan hallway -- appears unfinished. There are exposed air ducts and I-beams scribbled with contractors' marks. Many of the internal walls are unpainted plywood. The space looks less like the headquarters of one of the world's wealthiest companies and more like a Chipotle with standing desks. It's an aesthetic meant to reflect -- and perhaps also inspire employee allegiance to -- one of Facebook's founding ideologies: that things are never quite finished, that nothing is permanent, that you should always look for a chance to take an ax to your surroundings.
The mood in overwhelmingly liberal Silicon Valley at the time, days before Donald Trump's inauguration, was grim. But Zuckerberg, who had recently returned from his 700-acre estate on the Hawaiian island of Kauai, is preternaturally unable to look anything other than excited about the future. ''Hey, guys!'' he beamed, greeting me and Mike Isaac, a Times colleague who covers Facebook. Zuckerberg wore a short-sleeve gray T-shirt, jeans and sneakers, which is his Steve Jobsian daily uniform: Indoor Zuck. 
  Zuckerberg used to be a nervous speaker, but he has become much less so. He speaks quickly but often unloads full paragraphs of thought, and sometimes his arguments are so polished that they sound rehearsed, which happened often that morning. ''2016 was an interesting year for us,'' he said as the three of us, plus a P.R. executive, sat around a couple of couches in the glass-walled conference room where he conducts many of his meetings. (There are many perks to working at Facebook, but no one, not even Zuckerberg, has a private office.) It was an understatement and a nod to the obvious: Facebook, once a mere app on your phone, had become a global political and cultural force, and the full implications of that transformation had begun to come into view last year. ''If you look at the history of Facebook, when we started off, there really wasn't news as part of it,'' Zuckerberg went on. But as Facebook grew and became a bigger part of how people learn about the world, the company had been slow to adjust to its new place in people's lives. The events of 2016, he said, ''set off a number of conversations that we're still in the middle of.''
  Nearly two billion people use Facebook every month, about 1.2 billion of them daily. The company, which Zuckerberg co-founded in his Harvard dorm room 13 years ago, has become the largest and most influential entity in the news business, commanding an audience greater than that of any American or European television news network, any newspaper or magazine in the Western world and any online news outlet. It is also the most powerful mobilizing force in politics, and it is fast replacing television as the most consequential entertainment medium. Just five years after its initial public offering, Facebook is one of the 10 highest market-capitalized public companies in the world.
  As recently as a year ago, Zuckerberg might have proudly rattled off these facts as a testament to Facebook's power. But over the course of 2016, Facebook's gargantuan influence became its biggest liability. During the U.S. election, propagandists -- some working for money, others for potentially state-sponsored lulz -- used the service to turn fake stories into viral sensations, like the one about Pope Francis' endorsing Trump (he hadn't). And fake news was only part of a larger conundrum. With its huge reach, Facebook has begun to act as the great disseminator of the larger cloud of misinformation and half-truths swirling about the rest of media. It sucks up lies from cable news and Twitter, then precisely targets each lie to the partisan bubble most receptive to it.
  After studying how people shared 1.25 million stories during the campaign, a team of researchers at M.I.T. and Harvard implicated Facebook and Twitter in the larger failure of media in 2016. The researchers found that social media created a right-wing echo chamber: a ''media network anchored around Breitbart developed as a distinct and insulated media system, using social media as a backbone to transmit a hyperpartisan perspective to the world.'' The findings partially echoed a long-held worry about social news: that people would use sites like Facebook to cocoon themselves into self-reinforcing bubbles of confirmatory ideas, to the detriment of civility and a shared factual basis from which to make collective, democratic decisions. A week and a half after the election, President Obama bemoaned ''an age where there's so much active misinformation and it's packaged very well and it looks the same when you see it on a Facebook page or you turn on your television.''
  After the election, Zuckerberg offered a few pat defenses of Facebook's role. ''I'm actually quite proud of the impact that we were able to have on civic discourse over all,'' he said when we spoke in January. Misinformation on Facebook was not as big a problem as some believed it was, but Facebook nevertheless would do more to battle it, he pledged. Echo chambers were a concern, but if the source was people's own confirmation bias, was it really Facebook's problem to solve?
  It was hard to tell how seriously Zuckerberg took the criticisms of his service and its increasingly paradoxical role in the world. He had spent much of his life building a magnificent machine to bring people together. By the most literal measures, he'd succeeded spectacularly, but what had that connection wrought? Across the globe, Facebook now seems to benefit actors who want to undermine the global vision at its foundation. Supporters of Trump and the European right-wing nationalists who aim to turn their nations inward and dissolve alliances, trolls sowing cross-border paranoia, even ISIS with its skillful social-media recruiting and propagandizing -- all of them have sought in their own ways to split the Zuckerbergian world apart. And they are using his own machine to do it.
  In Silicon Valley, current events tend to fade into the background. The Sept. 11 attacks, the Iraq war, the financial crisis and every recent presidential election occurred, for the tech industry, on some parallel but distant timeline divorced from the everyday business of digitizing the world. Then Donald Trump won. In the 17 years I've spent covering Silicon Valley, I've never seen anything shake the place like his victory. In the span of a few months, the Valley has been transformed from a politically disengaged company town into a center of anti-Trump resistance and fear. A week after the election, one start-up founder sent me a private message on Twitter: ''I think it's worse than I thought,'' he wrote. ''Originally I thought 18 months. I've cut that in half.'' Until what? ''Apocalypse. End of the world.''
  Trump's campaign rhetoric felt particularly personal for an industry with a proud reliance upon immigrants. Stephen K. Bannon, Trump's campaign chief executive and now chief White House strategist, once suggested that there were too many South Asian chief executives in tech. More than 15 percent of Facebook's employees are in the United States on H-1B visas, a program that Trump has pledged to revamp. But the outcome also revealed the depth of the Valley's disconnection with much of the rest of the country. ''I saw an election that was just different from the way I think,'' says Joshua Reeves, a Bay Area native who is a co-founder of Gusto, a human-resources software start-up. ''I have this engineering brain that wants to go to this analytical, rational, nonemotional way of looking at things, and it was clear in this election that we're trending in a different direction, toward spirited populism.''
  Underneath it all was a nagging feeling of complicity. Trump had benefited from a media environment that is now shaped by Facebook -- and, more to the point, shaped by a single Facebook feature, the same one to which the company owes its remarkable ascent to social-media hegemony: the computationally determined list of updates you see every time you open the app. The list has a formal name, News Feed. But most users are apt to think of it as Facebook itself.
  If it's an exaggeration to say that News Feed has become the most influential source of information in the history of civilization, it is only slightly so. Facebook created News Feed in 2006 to solve a problem: In the social-media age, people suddenly had too many friends to keep up with. At the time, Facebook was just a collection of profiles, lacking any kind of central organization. To figure out what any of your connections were up to, you had to visit each of their profiles to see if anything had changed. News Feed fixed that. Every time you open Facebook, it hunts through the network, collecting every post from every connection -- information that, for most Facebook users, would be too overwhelming to process themselves. Then it weighs the merits of each post before presenting you with a feed sorted in order of importance: a hyperpersonalized front page designed just for you.
  Scholars and critics have been warning of the solipsistic irresistibility of algorithmic news at least since 2001, when the constitutional-law professor Cass R. Sunstein warned, in his book ''Republic.com,'' of the urgent risks posed to democracy ''by any situation in which thousands or perhaps millions or even tens of millions of people are mainly listening to louder echoes of their own voices.'' (In 2008, I piled on with my own book, ''True Enough: Learning to Live in a Post-Fact Society.'') In 2011, the digital activist and entrepreneur Eli Pariser, looking at similar issues, gave this phenomenon a memorable name in the title of his own book: ''The Filter Bubble.''
  Facebook says its own researchers have been studying the filter bubble since 2010. In 2015, they published an in-house study, which was criticized by independent researchers, concluding that Facebook's effect on the diversity of people's information diet was minimal. News Feed's personalization algorithm did filter out some opposing views in your feed, the study claimed, but the bigger effect was users' own choices. When News Feed did show people views contrary to their own, they tended not to click on the stories. For Zuckerberg, the finding let Facebook off the hook. ''It's a good-sounding theory, and I can get why people repeat it, but it's not true,'' he said on a call with analysts last summer.
  Employees got the same message. ''When Facebook cares about something, they spin up teams to address it, and Zuck will come out and talk about it all the time,'' one former executive told me. ''I have never heard of anything close to that on the filter bubble. I never sensed that this was a problem he wanted us to tackle. It was always positioned as an interesting intellectual question but not something that we're going to go focus on.''
  Then, last year, Facebook's domination of the news became a story itself. In May, Gizmodo reported that some editors who had worked on Facebook's Trending Topics section had been suppressing conservative points of view. To smooth things over, Zuckerberg convened a meeting of conservative media figures and eventually significantly reduced the role of human editors. Then in September, Facebook deleted a post by a Norwegian writer that included the photojournalist Nick Ut's iconic photo of a naked 9-year-old girl, Phan Thi Kim Phuc, running in terror after a napalm attack during the Vietnam War, on the grounds that it ran afoul of Facebook's prohibition of child nudity.
  Facebook, under criticism, reinstated the picture, but the photo incident stuck with Zuckerberg. He would bring it up unbidden to staff members and to reporters. It highlighted, for him, the difficulty of building a policy framework for what Facebook was trying to do. Zuckerberg wanted to become a global news distributor that is run by machines, rather than by humans who would try to look at every last bit of content and exercise considered judgment. ''It's something I think we're still figuring out,'' he told me in January. ''There's a lot more to do here than what we've done. And I think we're starting to realize this now as well.''
  It struck me as an unsatisfying answer, and it later became apparent that Zuckerberg seemed to feel the same way. On a Sunday morning about a month after the first meeting, I got a call from a Facebook spokesman. Zuckerberg wanted to chat again. Could Mike and I come back on Monday afternoon?
  We met again in the same conference room. Same Zuck outfit, same P.R. executive. But the Zuckerberg who greeted us seemed markedly different. He was less certain in his pronouncements than he had been the month before, more expansive and questioning. Earlier that day, Zuckerberg's staff had sent me a draft of a 5,700-word manifesto that, I was told, he spent weeks writing. The document, ''Building Global Community,'' argued that until now, Facebook's corporate goal had merely been to connect people. But that was just Step 1. According to the manifesto, Facebook's ''next focus will be developing the social infrastructure for community -- for supporting us, for keeping us safe, for informing us, for civic engagement, and for inclusion of all.'' If it was a nebulous crusade, it was also vast in its ambition.
  The last manifesto that Zuckerberg wrote was in 2012, as part of Facebook's application to sell its stock to the public. It explained Facebook's philosophy -- what he called ''the hacker way'' -- and sketched an unorthodox path for the soon-to-be-public company. ''Facebook was not originally created to be a company,'' he wrote. ''It was built to accomplish a social mission: to make the world more open and connected.''
  What's striking about that 2012 letter, read through the prism of 2017, is its certainty that a more ''open and connected'' world is by definition a better one. ''When I started Facebook, the idea of connecting the world was not controversial,'' Zuckerberg said now. ''The default assumption was that the world was incrementally just moving in that direction. So I thought we can connect some people and do our part in helping move in that direction.'' But now, he said, whether it was wise to connect the world was ''actually a real question.''
  Zuckerberg's new manifesto never quite accepts blame for any of the global ills that have been laid at Facebook's feet. Yet by the standards of a company release, it is remarkable for the way it concedes that the company's chief goal -- wiring the globe -- is controversial. ''There are questions about whether we can make a global community that works for everyone,'' Zuckerberg writes, ''and whether the path ahead is to connect more or reverse course.'' He also confesses misgivings about Facebook's role in the news. ''Giving everyone a voice has historically been a very positive force for public discourse because it increases the diversity of ideas shared,'' he writes. ''But the past year has also shown it may fragment our shared sense of reality.''
  At the time of our second interview, the manifesto was still only a draft, and I was surprised by how unsure Zuckerberg seemed about it in person. He had almost as many questions for us -- about whether we understood what he was trying to say, how we thought it would land in the media -- as we had for him. When I suggested that it might be perceived as an attack on Trump, he looked dismayed. He noted several times that he had been noodling over these ideas since long before November. A few weeks earlier, there was media speculation, fueled by a postelection tour of America by Zuckerberg and his wife, that he was laying the groundwork to run against Trump in 2020, and in this meeting he took pains to shoot down the rumors. When I asked if he had chatted with Obama about the former president's critique of Facebook, Zuckerberg paused for several seconds, nearly to the point of awkwardness, before answering that he had.
  Facebook's spokespeople later called to stress that Obama was only one of many people to whom he had spoken. In other words: Don't read this as a partisan anti-Trump manifesto. But if the company pursues the admittedly airy aims outlined in ''Building Global Community,'' the changes will echo across media and politics, and some are bound to be considered partisan. The risks are especially clear for changes aimed at adding layers of journalistic ethics across News Feed, which could transform the public's perception of Facebook, not to mention shake the foundations of its business.
  The Facebook app, and consequently News Feed, is run by one of Zuckerberg's most influential lieutenants, a 34-year-old named Chris Cox, the company's chief product officer. Ten years ago, Cox dropped out of a graduate program in computer science at Stanford to join Facebook. One of his first assignments was on the team that created News Feed. Since then, he has become an envoy to the media industry. Don Graham, the longtime publisher of The Washington Post who was for years a member of Facebook's board, told me that he felt Cox, among Facebook staff, ''was at the 99.9th percentile of interest in news. He thought it was important to society, and he wanted Facebook to get it right.''
  For the typical user, Cox explained when I met him on a morning in October at MPK20, News Feed is computing the relative merits of about 2,000 potential posts in your network every time you open the app. In sorting these posts, Facebook does not optimize for any single metric: not clicks or reading time or likes. Instead, he said, ''what you really want to get to is whether somebody, at the end of the day, would say, 'Hey, my experience today was meaningful.' '' Personalizing News Feed, in other words, is a very big ''math problem,'' incorporating countless metrics in extraordinarily complicated ways. Zuckerberg calls it ''a modern A.I. problem.''
  Last summer, I sat in on two meetings in another glass-walled MPK20 conference room, in which News Feed's engineers, designers, user-research experts and managers debated several small alterations to how News Feed displays certain kinds of posts. The conversations were far from exciting -- people in jeans on couches looking at PowerPoints, talking quietly about numbers -- and yet I found them mesmerizing, a demonstration of the profound cultural differences between how news companies like The Times work and how Facebook does. The first surprise was how slowly things move, contrary to the freewheeling culture of ''the hacker way.'' In one meeting, the team spent several minutes discussing the merits of bold text in a certain News Feed design. One blessing of making social software is that you can gauge any potential change to your product by seeing how your users react to it. That is also the curse: At Facebook, virtually every change to the app, no matter how small or obviously beneficial, is thoroughly tested on different segments of the audience before it's rolled out to everyone.
  The people who work on News Feed aren't making decisions that turn on fuzzy human ideas like ethics, judgment, intuition or seniority. They are concerned only with quantifiable outcomes about people's actions on the site. That data, at Facebook, is the only real truth. And it is a particular kind of truth: The News Feed team's ultimate mission is to figure out what users want -- what they find ''meaningful,'' to use Cox and Zuckerberg's preferred term -- and to give them more of that.
  This ideal runs so deep that the people who make News Feed often have to put aside their own notions of what's best. ''One of the things we've all learned over the years is that our intuition can be wrong a fair amount of the time,'' John Hegeman, the vice president of product management and a News Feed team member, told me. ''There are things you don't expect will happen. And we learn a lot from that process: Why didn't that happen, and what might that mean?'' But it is precisely this ideal that conflicts with attempts to wrangle the feed in the way press critics have called for. The whole purpose of editorial guidelines and ethics is often to suppress individual instincts in favor of some larger social goal. Facebook finds it very hard to suppress anything that its users' actions say they want. In some cases, it has been easier for the company to seek out evidence that, in fact, users don't want these things at all.
  Facebook's two-year-long battle against ''clickbait'' is a telling example. Early this decade, the internet's headline writers discovered the power of stories that trick you into clicking on them, like those that teasingly withhold information from their headlines: ''Dustin Hoffman Breaks Down Crying Explaining Something That Every Woman Sadly Already Experienced.'' By the fall of 2013, clickbait had overrun News Feed. Upworthy, a progressive activism site co-founded by Pariser, the author of ''The Filter Bubble,'' that relied heavily on teasing headlines, was attracting 90 million readers a month to its feel-good viral posts.
  If a human editor ran News Feed, she would look at the clickbait scourge and make simple, intuitive fixes: Turn down the Upworthy knob. But Facebook approaches the feed as an engineering project rather than an editorial one. When it makes alterations in the code that powers News Feed, it's often only because it has found some clear signal in its data that users are demanding the change. In this sense, clickbait was a riddle. In surveys, people kept telling Facebook that they hated teasing headlines. But if that was true, why were they clicking on them? Was there something Facebook's algorithm was missing, some signal that would show that despite the clicks, clickbait was really sickening users?
  To answer these questions, Cox and his team hired survey panels of more than a thousand paid ''professional raters'' around the world who answer questions about how well News Feed is working. Starting in 2013, Facebook began adding first dozens and then hundreds and then thousands of data points that were meant to teach the artificial-intelligence system that runs News Feed how people were reacting to their feeds. Facebook noticed that people would sometimes click open a clickbaity story but spend very little time on it. In other cases, lots of people would click on a story but few would share or Like it. Headlines on stories that people seemed to reject often contained a set of signature phrases (''you'll never believe,'' ''this one trick,'' etc.) or they came from a set of repeat-offender publishers.
  The more such signals Facebook incorporated into the feed, the more clickbait began to drop out of the feed. Since its 2013 peak, Upworthy's traffic has declined; it now averages 17.5 million visitors a month. The site has since disavowed clickbait. ''We sort of unleashed a monster,'' Peter Koechley, Upworthy's co-founder, told a conference in 2015. ''Sorry for that.''
  Cox suggested that it was not exactly correct to say that Facebook, as a company, decided to fight clickbait. What actually happened was that Facebook found better ways to listen to users, who were themselves rejecting clickbait. ''That comes out of good-quality panels and measurement systems, rather than an individual decision saying, 'Hey, I really want us to care about clickbait,' '' he says.
  This approach -- looking for signs of user dissatisfaction -- could curb stories that constitute the most egregious examples of misinformation. Adam Mosseri, Facebook's vice president in charge of News Feed, says that Facebook has begun testing an algorithm change that would look at whether people share an article after reading it. If few of the people who click on a story decide to share it, that might suggest people feel misled by it and it would get lower billing in the feed.
  But the solution to the broader misinformation dilemma -- the pervasive climate of rumor, propaganda and conspiracy theories that Facebook has inadvertently incubated -- may require something that Facebook has never done: ignoring the likes and dislikes of its users. Facebook believes the pope-endorses-Trump type of made-up news stories are only a tiny minority of pieces that appear in News Feed; they account for a fraction of 1 percent of the posts, according to Mosseri. The question the company faces now is whether the misinformation problem resembles clickbait at all, and whether its solutions will align as neatly with Facebook's worldview. Facebook's entire project, when it comes to news, rests on the assumption that people's individual preferences ultimately coincide with the public good, and that if it doesn't appear that way at first, you're not delving deeply enough into the data. By contrast, decades of social-science research shows that most of us simply prefer stuff that feels true to our worldview even if it isn't true at all and that the mining of all those preference signals is likely to lead us deeper into bubbles rather than out of them.
  After the election, Margaret Sullivan, the Washington Post columnist and a former public editor of The Times, called on Facebook to hire an executive editor who would monitor News Feed with an eye to fact-checking, balance and editorial integrity. Jonah Peretti, the founder of BuzzFeed, told me that he wanted Facebook to use its data to create a kind of reputational score for online news, as well as explore ways of strengthening reporting through monetary partnerships.
  ''At some point, if they really want to address this, they have to say, 'This is good information' and 'This is bad information,' '' says Emily Bell, the director for the Tow Center for Digital Journalism at Columbia Journalism School. ''They have to say, 'These are the kinds of information sources that we want to privilege, and these others are not going to be banned from the platform, but they are not going to thrive.' In other words, they have to create a hierarchy, and they're going to have to decide how they're going to transfer wealth into the publishing market.''
  There aren't many technical reasons Facebook could not implement such plans. The hurdles are institutional and philosophical, and ultimately financial too. Late last year, Facebook outlined a modest effort to curb misinformation. News Feed would now carry warning labels: If a friend shares a viral story that has been flagged and shot down by one of Facebook's fact-checking partners (including Snopes and PolitiFact), you'll be cautioned that the piece has been ''disputed.'' But even that slight change has been met with fury on the right, with Breitbart and The Daily Caller fuming that Facebook had teamed up with liberal hacks motivated by partisanship. If Facebook were to take more significant action, like hiring human editors, creating a reputational system or paying journalists, the company would instantly become something it has long resisted: a media company rather than a neutral tech platform.
  In many ways, the worry over how Facebook changes the news is really a manifestation of a grander problem with News Feed, which is simply dominance itself. News Feed's aggressive personalization wouldn't be much of an issue if it weren't crowding out every other source. ''To some degree I feel like the Pottery Barn Rule applies,'' says Pariser, the Upworthy chief executive. ''They play a critical role in our information circulatory system, and so -- lucky them -- all of the problems therein are significantly on their shoulders.''
  During our first meeting in January, I posed this question to Zuckerberg: ''When you see various problems in the media, do you say to yourself, 'I run Facebook, I can solve that?' ''
  ''Um,'' he started, and then paused, weighing his words as carefully as American presidents once did. ''Not usually.'' He argued that some of Facebook's critics' proposed fixes for news on the service, such as hiring editors, were impractical due to Facebook's scale and global diversity. Personalization, he said, remained a central tenet. ''It really gets back to, like, what do people want at a deep level,'' he said. ''There's this oversimplified narrative that a company can get very successful by just scratching a very superficial itch, and I don't really think that's right over the long term.''
  Yet by our second meeting, Zuckerberg's position seemed to have evolved. Facebook had by then announced plans for the Facebook Journalism Project, in which the company would collaborate with news companies on new products. Facebook also created a project to promote ''news literacy'' among its users, and it hired the former CNN news anchor Campbell Brown to manage the partnership between it and news companies. Zuckerberg's tone toward critics of Facebook's approach to news had also grown far more conciliatory. ''I think it's really important to get to the core of the actual problem,'' he said. ''I also really think that the core social thing that needs to happen is that a common understanding needs to exist. And misinformation I view as one of the things that can possibly erode common understanding. But sensationalism and polarization and other things, I actually think, are probably even stronger and more prolific effects. And we have to work on all these things. I think we need to listen to all the feedback on this.''
  Still, in both our conversation and his new manifesto, Zuckerberg remained preoccupied with the kind of problems that could be solved by the kind of hyperconnectivity he believed in, not the ones caused by it. ''There's a social infrastructure that needs to get built for modern problems in order for humanity to get to the next level,'' he said. ''Having more people oriented not just toward short-term things but toward building the long-term social infrastructure that needs to get built across all these things in order to enable people to come together is going to be a really important thing over the next decades.'' By way of example, he pointed to Safety Check, Facebook's system for letting people tell their friends that they've survived some kind of dangerous event, like a natural disaster or terrorist attack.
  ''We're getting to a point where the biggest opportunities I think in the world ... problems like preventing pandemics from spreading or ending terrorism, all these things, they require a level of coordination and connection that I don't think can only be solved by the current systems that we have,'' Zuckerberg told me. What's needed, he argues, is some global superstructure to advance humanity.
  This is not an especially controversial idea; Zuckerberg is arguing for a kind of digital-era version of the global institution-building that the Western world engaged in after World War II. But because he is a chief executive and not an elected president, there is something frightening about his project. He is positioning Facebook -- and, considering that he commands absolute voting control of the company, he is positioning himself -- as a critical enabler of the next generation of human society. A minor problem with his mission is that it drips with megalomania, albeit of a particularly sincere sort. With his wife, Priscilla Chan, Zuckerberg has pledged to give away nearly all of his wealth to a variety of charitable causes, including a long-term medical-research project to cure all disease. His desire to take on global social problems through digital connectivity, and specifically through Facebook, feels like part of the same impulse.
  Yet Zuckerberg is often blasé about the messiness of the transition between the world we're in and the one he wants to create through software. Building new ''social infrastructure'' usually involves tearing older infrastructure down. If you manage the demolition poorly, you might undermine what comes next. In the case of the shattering media landscape, Zuckerberg seems finally to have at least noticed this problem and may yet come up with fixes for it. But in the meantime, Facebook rushes headlong into murky new areas, uncovering new dystopian possibilities at every turn.
  A few months after I spoke with Zuckerberg, Facebook held its annual developer conference in San Jose, Calif. At last year's show, Zuckerberg introduced an expanded version of Facebook's live streaming service which had been promised to revolutionize how we communicate. In the year since, Live had generated iconic scenes of protest, but it was also used to broadcast a terrorist attack in Munich and at least one suicide. Hours before Zuckerberg's appearance at the conference, police announced that a Cleveland man who had killed a stranger and posted a video on Facebook had shot himself after a manhunt.
  But as he took the stage in San Jose, Zuckerberg was ebullient. He started with a few dad jokes and threatened to read his long manifesto on stage. For a brief moment, there was a shift in tone: Statesman Zuck. ''In all seriousness, this is an important time to work on building community,'' he said. He offered Facebook's condolences to the victim in Cleveland; the incident, he said, reminded Facebook that ''we have a lot more to do.''
  Just as quickly, though, Zuckerberg then pivoted to Facebook's next marvel, a system for digitally augmenting your pictures and videos. The technical term for this is ''augmented reality.'' The name bursts with dystopian possibilities -- fake news on video rather than just text -- but Zuckerberg never mentioned them. The statesman had left the stage; before us stood an engineer.
  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/25/magazine/can-facebook-fix-its-own-worst-bug.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: The News Feed team at Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Calif. (MM40-MM41)
 Mark Zuckerberg at his desk. No one at the company has a private office. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SPENCER LOWELL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM42) DRAWING (DRAWING BY MIKE MCQUADE) (MM38-MM39)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%); TRUMP'S FIRST 100 DAYS (52%)

Company:  FACEBOOK INC (90%)

Ticker: FB (NASDAQ) (90%)

Industry: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (90%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (89%)

Person: MARK ZUCKERBERG (89%); FRANK GEHRY (72%); DONALD TRUMP (51%)

Geographic: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (90%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (78%); HAWAII, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

Load-Date: April 30, 2017


End of Document
Can Infosys Adapt to 'Hire American' Policy?
The New York Times
October 17, 2018 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1473 words
Byline: By STEVE LOHR
Follow Steve Lohr on Twitter: @SteveLohr.
Body


When Infosys, a big Indian technology outsourcing company, opened a new office in Indianapolis this year, executives hailed it as a step along a new path.
Infosys built itself into a global giant by running the digital engine rooms of American corporations with armies of engineers in India. But the new technology center -- a sprawling open-plan space in a downtown office tower -- is in the epicenter of the American Midwest. 
  And its recruits are people like Keith Smith Jr., a graduate of Indiana University, who previously held a variety of jobs before Infosys trained him as a software engineer.
  Ravi Kumar, a president of Infosys, described the office as ''a manifestation of what the future is going to look like.''
  The company, a shining success story in the Indian economy, is under mounting pressure to hire more Americans and do significantly more work onshore, in what would be a striking overhaul of its corporate culture and its business practices. In the process, Infosys has become a case study of how market forces and immigration changes by the Trump administration are reshaping corporations.
  Infosys is staring at two daunting challenges to its long-successful business model, which generated $2.5 billion in profit in its last fiscal year. Companies are increasingly adopting technologies best built by small teams working side by side with customers, like cloud computing and mobile apps. It is work better situated in the Indianapolis tech center than thousands of miles away in India.
  Policy changes from the Trump administration may be even more threatening. As part of his efforts to curb the flow of foreign workers into the United States, President Trump called for tighter controls on skilled worker visas in his ''Buy American, Hire American'' executive order last year.
  Traditionally, Indian outsourcers like Infosys have deftly exploited the skilled-worker visa system. The majority of its employees in the United States hold one of those visas, analysts estimate. The company has also been fined by the government for abusing visa rules in the past, and its practices continue to draw the scrutiny of federal investigators.
  All the steps Infosys is now taking ''would be a huge change,'' said Rod Bourgeois, an expert on the industry and the head of research at Deep Dive Equity Research. ''It's not in their DNA.''
  Other big offshore outsourcing companies are also responding to the market and political threats, including Tata Consultancy Services, Wipro and Cognizant. But Infosys made the biggest, most public commitment to building up its work force in the United States, when the company declared last year that it would hire 10,000 workers in America by sometime in 2019.
  Then, Infosys began to announce the creation of tech centers in America. Indianapolis was the first, followed by offices in Raleigh, N.C.; Providence, R.I.; and Hartford. Last month, the company said its next hub would be in Arizona. Infosys says it has hired more than 5,800 American workers.
  ''We will be looking for talent that is closer to our client clusters,'' said Mr. Kumar, who is the point man in the company's initiative to hire American workers. ''And our operating model will evolve.''
  For now, though, an estimated 80 percent of the 200,000 Infosys workers are in India, a market that accounts for 3 percent of its worldwide revenue of $11 billion last year. The company garners 60 percent of its revenue in North America, mainly in the United States, where Infosys employs more than 20,000 workers, analysts estimate. About two-thirds of the Infosys workers in America, they say, have been Indians with skilled-worker visas.
  The main such visa program, H-1B, was intended to bring in talented foreigners with special skills who would complement the domestic work force and strengthen the United States economy.
  But critics say the Indian outsourcers mastered the use of legal loopholes to obtain an outsize share of skilled-worker visas, which, in turn, allowed the companies to hire less costly Indian workers.
  In 2013, Infosys paid $34 million in a civil settlement with the Justice Department and other federal agencies, which accused the company of systemic abuse of visa rules, including on B-1 visas meant for short trips for training or attending conferences. In that settlement, Infosys agreed to improve its visa compliance practices.
  The government continues to monitor the company. One current and two former Infosys employees, who spoke on the condition that they not be identified, said federal investigators had questioned them in recent months about the company's visa handling.
  The Justice Department and United States Citizenship and Immigration Services did not respond to requests for comment.
  Infosys also faces two private, civil lawsuits accusing the company of discrimination in hiring, promotions and firing.
  The accounts from testimony and interviews with witnesses tied to those suits vary in detail. But the stories share themes that illustrate how hard it could be for Infosys to change its ways.
  The plaintiffs and witnesses were experienced lawyers, human relations managers, salespeople and engineers who joined Infosys as the company expanded rapidly in the United States. Things went smoothly at first, when the newcomers brought in new customers or smoothed the way with government agencies.
  But tensions surfaced. Important decisions were all made in India. Questions were unwelcome. Complaints brought retaliation -- reassignments, demotions, abrupt firings and belittling remarks.
  ''It's basically a corporate caste system, run out of India,'' said Erin Green, a former immigration lawyer for Infosys, who filed one of the civil suits against the company in Texas last year. ''And people who are not Indian are at the bottom.''
  Daniel Kotchen, a lawyer who has a pending suit against the company in Wisconsin on behalf of former workers, said, ''Infosys has a business model that is discriminatory -- its rigid and explicit preference for a certain kind of person.''
  Infosys is fighting the suits, denying discrimination and saying its work force reflects the global labor pool for technology skills.
  ''Employment at our company,'' Infosys said in a statement, ''is decided on the basis of qualifications, merit and the needs of our clients.''
  Even as Infosys increases hiring in America, its lower-paid engineers back in India still animate the business. Wage rates in India have risen in recent years, but the gap is still sizable -- a third or a fourth the rates in the United States.
  Programming work done in India, analysts estimate, is twice as profitable as writing code in America. On a typical project, 70 percent or more of the work is done in India.
  The Indian employees working at United States companies are often there mainly to understand customer needs and communicate with the large teams back in India. They are vital to the Infosys business, but are a fraction of the company's engineering work force.
  That formula -- the so-called global delivery model -- has been embraced by non-Indian companies, like IBM and Accenture, for parts of their business. But it has been the prime engine of business for Infosys.
  ''It may be changing some, but Infosys is certainly not abandoning its cash-cow business model,'' said Ronil Hira, an offshore outsourcing expert at Howard University.
  In India, Infosys is a hiring and training machine. Its pitch in the United States is that it is transplanting a version of that model here, no matter the higher costs. ''We're going to create pools of talent that do not exist in the United States,'' Mr. Kumar said, and ''strengthen the American work force.''
  The message is appealing to state governors, winning Infosys praise and tax breaks. In Indiana, Infosys says it plans to hire 3,000 workers by 2023, after a recent announcement that it would build a training center on a 70-acre site near the Indianapolis airport.
  Gov. Eric Holcomb, a Republican, describes the Infosys presence as an important building block for his state's economic development -- and well worth a generous incentive package of tax credits and training grants.
  Governor Holcomb shrugs off critics who claim that Infosys undercuts American workers. ''They're hiring here,'' he said.
  Mr. Smith, the recent recruit who was hired last October, spent his first two months in an intensive training program, honing his skills in several programming languages and developer tools. Before Infosys, he held jobs in marketing, video production and work-force recruiting, and completed a four-month course at a coding boot camp. His current Infosys assignment is helping a large telecom company on web projects.
  Mr. Smith, 35, views his Infosys job as an on-ramp to the digital economy. ''I see limitless potential,'' he said.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/15/technology/infosys-trump-visas-american-workers.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: An employee meeting at the new Infosys offices in Indianapolis. (B1)
A view of Indianapolis from the new Infosys offices. Of the company's roughly 20,000 U.S.-based workers, about two-thirds are estimated to have come from India through skilled-worker visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY A J MAST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Keith Smith Jr., left, a recent hire, said he viewed his job as an on-ramp to the digital economy. Erin Greene, right, who has filed a civil suit, said Infosys is ''a corporate caste system, run out of India.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY A J MAST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 BRANDON THIBODEAUX FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B2)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); EQUITY RESEARCH (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); CORPORATE CULTURE (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (77%); LABOR FORCE (75%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (74%); FINES & PENALTIES (73%); OFFSHORING (73%); CASE STUDIES (72%); IMMIGRATION (72%); NEGATIVE NEWS (68%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (67%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (67%); CRAFT & TRADE WORKERS (63%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (54%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (50%)

Company:  INFOSYS LTD (92%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (51%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (92%); INFY (NYSE) (92%); INFY (NSE) (92%); TCS (NSE) (51%)

Industry: NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (92%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (51%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (51%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (51%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (51%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (88%); EQUITY RESEARCH (88%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (78%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (78%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (77%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (77%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (75%); CLOUD COMPUTING (70%); CONSULTING SERVICES (70%); MOBILE APPLICATIONS (70%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (74%); KEITH E SMITH (55%)

Geographic: INDIANAPOLIS, IN, USA (93%); PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (79%); RALEIGH, NC, USA (79%); INDIANA, USA (92%); MIDWEST USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (99%); INDIA (93%)

Load-Date: October 17, 2018


End of Document
They Grew Up in the U.S., but Can't Stay After They Turn 21
The New York Times
May 1, 2022 Sunday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16
Length: 1764 words
Byline: By Aishvarya Kavi
Body


Children of temporary visa holders who can't gain permanent residency are one of several groups urging the Biden administration to act on an immigration overhaul.
WASHINGTON -- In 2011, after five years of working and living with his family in the United States on a temporary visa, Barathimohan Ganesan submitted green card applications for his wife, his 5-year-old daughter and his 11-year-old son. 
  Mr. Ganesan, who was born in India and has also lived in Singapore and Australia, was nervous about when his wife and children might gain permanent residency. He knew the waiting list was especially long for Indians on his kind of visa, an H-1B, which allows American companies to employ skilled foreign workers. Because of chronic backlogs, it can take years to process those on work visas who apply for permanent residency.
  Last year, a decade after he applied, Mr. Ganesan, his wife and his daughter received their green cards. But his son had turned 21 and missed the cutoff by months, leaving him scrambling for a visa that would allow him to stay in the United States.
  Mr. Ganesan's son is among more than 200,000 children who grew up in the country under the protection of their parents' temporary visas, which can be renewed indefinitely. But the children risk losing their legal status when they turn 21. Unable to become permanent residents because of the backlogs or because they were never eligible, they must obtain a different visa, remain in the United States without legal status or leave entirely. According to the Cato Institute, more than 10,000 children age out of green card eligibility each year; untold numbers eventually depart, often leaving their families behind.
  These young people do not qualify for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. Created by executive action during the Obama administration, the DACA program protects from deportation about 650,000 youths, or Dreamers, who were brought into the United States and have remained without legal status. Because the program requires applicants to be undocumented, it does not offer those with legal status a way to stay.
  A comprehensive immigration overhaul is highly unlikely to pass a deadlocked Congress in a midterm election year. The Biden administration has been under increasing pressure as a Trump-era public health order, known as Title 42, is set to be lifted in late May, a move that is expected to create a surge of migration across the southwestern border. A bipartisan group of senators restarted immigration discussions on Thursday to try to identify stand-alone proposals that would have the support of both parties.
  When asked on Thursday whether the administration -- which is updating DACA -- was considering extending protections to documented youths, Alejandro N. Mayorkas, the homeland security secretary, told the House Judiciary Committee that the department did not plan to do so. Its focus was ''to fortify the existing DACA program'' and shift responsibility for documented youths to Congress, he said, adding that their situation spoke to ''the imperative to pass immigration reform.''
  In interviews, more than a dozen people who lived in the United States on temporary visas from a young age described their struggles with anxiety and the financial burden of navigating how to remain in the country they considered home. They are urging the Biden administration, if it will not provide a path to citizenship, to offer a way for them to legally remain in the country.
  Mr. Ganesan's son, Niranjan Barathimohan, is able to stay in the United States until November only because immigration officials extended his dependent visa. Mr. Barathimohan, a student at the University of Texas at Dallas, will have to go to Singapore, where he was born, to apply for a student visa that will allow him to return and finish his degree.
  His application might be rejected; since he previously tried for a green card, he has shown an intent to immigrate to the United States, which is not allowed. Applicants may be asked to show that they intend to leave the country after completing their courses. Mr. Barathimohan faces the prospect of being stuck in Singapore, where he has no family or roots.
  ''How is he going to manage alone?'' Mr. Ganesan said. ''I was really devastated that just because of my country of birth, my son's opportunities are very limited.''
  While there are protections to keep families together when parents move to the United States on temporary work visas, those end when children turn 21 because they are no longer considered part of the family unit.
  ''I don't think people who originally wrote the laws foresaw a situation where children brought here on visas would be raised and educated here, but not have a clear opportunity to stay and become Americans,'' said Dip Patel, the founder of Improve the Dream, an organization that campaigns for a path to citizenship for those children. ''Delay in taking action will not only lead to tearing more families apart, but also continue the immense emotional turmoil faced by thousands of families.''
  Other families face similar situations. Like Mr. Ganesan, Deva and her husband moved their children to the United States from India when they were young. For more than a decade, the children and Deva, who asked to be identified by a nickname, lived as dependents on her husband's indefinite work visa.
  Deva said her husband's employer, an American automaker, could decide at any point not to extend his visa, which must be renewed every three years. She said she feared antagonizing the employer if she was identified speaking publicly about her family's situation.
  The family's hopes of staying together in the United States ended in December, when Deva's daughter turned 21. Having exhausted appeals for an extension and unable to apply for a different visa, the daughter moved to Canada days later.
  The effects on the family were far-reaching. A week before her daughter was set to leave, Deva said, her son, now 17, tried to hurt himself, alarming his sister. She postponed her departure by a week while the family sought counseling for him.
  Her son said during counseling that he had struggled with his mental health for months while watching his family navigate their legal status, Deva said. Her daughter, who enrolled in a master's program in Canada, is less than an hour's drive from her friends and family, but cannot enter the United States while she waits for a tourist visa.
  At a Senate hearing in March, Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, and Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the top Republican on the panel's immigration subcommittee, vowed to work on legislation to help people who had grown up in the United States without a clear path to citizenship.
  In emotional testimony at the hearing, Athulya Rajakumar, 23, spoke of the toll of growing up in Seattle as a dependent of her single mother, who had a temporary work visa. She described how she and her brother struggled with depression and how her family's status as temporary visa holders hindered him from receiving the treatment he needed. He later took his own life.
  ''We didn't know how badly it was going to affect us,'' Ms. Rajakumar, who lives in Texas on a work visa, said in an interview.
  Muzaffar Chishti, the director of the Migration Policy Institute at the N.Y.U. School of Law, described the issue as one of many in a system that has not been truly updated since the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, which established the pathways for legal immigration that are still in place.
  ''Immigration is not a set of policies -- it's a system,'' Mr. Chishti said, adding, ''If one part of the system gets problematic, it affects other parts of the system.''
  Those who grew up in the United States on certain temporary visas are not eligible to apply for permanent residency. That was the case for Summer Rusher, who was born in Britain and moved to Florida at age 1 with her parents, who arrived on an investor visa, which allows some foreign citizens to reside in the country indefinitely if they invest in an American business. The program does not offer a path to citizenship, meaning that children have no way to become permanent residents.
  Ms. Rusher, 23, was able to stay on a student visa after she turned 21. She graduated from Southeastern University at the top of her class in a master's program for exceptional-student education, a certification in Florida for instructors of students with disabilities.
  Now a teacher in Winter Haven, Fla., Ms. Rusher was among a large pool of applicants for a limited number of work visas. But she learned in March that she was not chosen in the randomized process used by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. If she cannot obtain another visa before her work authorization expires in June, she will have to return to Britain, where her qualifications are not recognized.
  Short of a legislative overhaul of the system, Improve the Dream, the advocacy group, has worked to increase awareness of the issue and is urging the Biden administration to make changes. But children of nonimmigrant visa holders have criticized the administration for being too slow or unwilling to take action on proposed changes, such as the expansion of DACA to include documented youths.
  Among the proposals is one that would modify how U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services determines whether an applicant qualifies for a green card, allowing more minors to remain eligible as they near 21. Another would classify applicants as children beyond their 21st birthday to keep them in line for a green card, which is the policy for those who are refugees or asylum seekers or are sponsored by relatives who are U.S. citizens.
  Matthew D. Bourke, a spokesman for the immigration agency, said the Department of Homeland Security was ''keenly aware'' of the challenges for documented youths and was ''exploring legal methods to provide immigration relief to this population where possible.''
  As Deva and her husband await their green cards, which they applied for in 2016, she said they were struggling with their finances. She now hopes that her children can build a future in Canada.
  Ms. Rusher said she was on the verge of having to leave her family, students and career. Her brother, who was born in the United States, does not face the same restrictions.
  ''I got to do everything that a typical American kid would dream of,'' Ms. Rusher said. ''I don't want that to end just because of where I was born.''

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Mr. Ganesan and his son, Niranjan Barathimohan, who is among over 200,000 children in the U.S. under the protection of their parents' temporary visas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EMIL LIPPE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
For over a decade, Deva and the children lived as dependents on her husband's work visa. Her daughter exhausted appeals for an extension. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SARAH RICE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Ms. Rusher stayed in the U.S. on a student visa after she turned 21, but her work authorization expires soon and she may have to return to Britain. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EVE EDELHEIT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Correction

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); IMMIGRATION (92%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); FAMILY (79%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (78%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); DEPORTATION (73%); ELECTIONS (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (65%); BIPARTISANSHIP (64%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (60%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (60%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (60%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (96%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%)

Person: JOE BIDEN (89%); BARACK OBAMA (79%); ALEJANDRO MAYORKAS (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%); AUSTRALIA (79%); INDIA (79%); SINGAPORE (79%)

Load-Date: May 3, 2022


End of Document
How Liberalism and Racism Are Wed
The New York Times Blogs 
(Opinionator)
February 27, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 3186 words
Byline: GEORGE YANCY and FALGUNI A. SHETH
Highlight: Racism, racial exclusion and racial violence aren&#8217;t antithetical to liberalism. They are an essential part of it. 
Body


This is the seventh in a series of interviews with philosophers on race that I am conducting for The Stone. This week's conversation is with Falguni A. Sheth, an associate professor of philosophy and political theory at Hampshire College. She is the author of "           Toward a Political Philosophy of Race." - George Yancy 
*
 George Yancy: Can you discuss your own view of your "racial" identity and how that identity is linked to your critical explorations into the philosophical and political significance of race?
 Falguni A. Sheth: Until 2001, I thought of my identity in terms of ethnicity rather than race. I was an immigrant, and in the American imaginary, immigrants were rarely discussed in terms of race. After September 11, 2001, I tried to reconcile what I saw as the profound racist treatment of people (often Arabs and South Asians) who were perceived as Muslim, with a politically neutral understanding of "racial identity," but it didn't work. That's when I began to explore race as a critical category of political philosophy, and as a product of political institutions. The biggest surprise was my coming to understand that "liberalism" and systematic racism were not antithetical, but inherently compatible, and that systemic racism was even necessary to liberalism. Soon after, I read Charles Mills's "The Racial Contract," which supported that view.
 G.Y.: In what ways do you see liberalism and systemic racism as complementary?
 F.A.S.: There isn't a simple link. I am seen as a brown woman, but also as racially ambiguous, which has its own set of problems, as Linda Alcoff discusses. Gender is a key component of racial identity. I suppose that if I were less racially ambiguous, I might have been affected by the Asian "model minority" myth, which identifies Asian women as "good" or "docile," or "smart." But to both whites and nonwhites (including South Asians), my visible, physical self doesn't easily lend itself to that stereotype.
Racial identity is also complicated by class: I went to a public high school in a mostly Irish- and Polish-American working-class town with a large emerging population of brown and black kids: Puerto Ricans, migrant kids of Mexican, Colombian, Salvadoran, Nicaraguan, Brazilian and Portuguese descent. I felt more comfortable there with the brown kids than I did in my middle-class grammar school composed almost entirely of white kids, many of whom, as I realized only as an adult, were racial bullies. To this day, I exhibit personality traits which are stereotypically "Jersey working class," which make it rather awkward to fit into the "genteel academic" circles in which I often find myself these days.
Aside from the cultural hostilities that are foisted upon brown people, my non-ambiguous brownness sensitizes me to the vulnerabilities - the lack of rights, security, safety, legal protection - of being nonwhite in a polity that understands "good" and "deserving" members as being white and upper- or at least middle-class men and women. I remember my mother being treated roughly by police when she was in a traffic accident and again, their indifference when she was targeted by the "Dotbusters," a self-appointed gang of racial nationalists that was assaulting Asian Indians in northern New Jersey in the late 1980s.
When I was finally granted an interview for U.S. citizenship in December 2000, I asked a relative to accompany me in the event that there was trouble. The interview was demanded by the government during the American Philosophical Association meetings in December 2000 (it was virtually impossible to renegotiate the appointment without a long, punishing, delay). Despite a heavy snowfall, we arrived an hour early. The I.N.S. interviewer was over an hour late in opening up the office, and cheerfully told me that I was lucky he had decided to show up. Conversationally and with a broad smile, he told me a series of stories about the various applicants he had had deported, even if they - like myself - had been in the United States since they were toddlers or infants, even if they knew no one from their countries of birth, and even if they stood to be in danger there. He emphasized how few protections immigrants had, and his message was: The United States will deport without a second thought, and hey, it's the immigrant's problem, not theirs.
Through such experiences, I have come to understand identity not as racial, but racialized, through populations' relations, and vulnerability, to the state, which also is the basis of my book. The political framework of liberalism, which promises equality and universal protection for "all," depends on people to believe those promises, so that racial discrimination, brutality, violence, dehumanization, can be written off as accidental, incidental, a problem with the application of liberal theory rather than part of the deep structure of liberalism.
My book attempts to show that racism, racial exclusion, racial violence, is part and parcel of liberalism. For example, we see the exclusions in early liberal writings: In John Locke's "Second Treatise of Government," he discusses the social contract and the equal opportunity to "earn" property for everyone, except the "lunatics and idiots," women, and "savages." The treatise also offers a "just war" theory of slavery. Locke helped write the "Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina," which afforded slave owners complete control over their slaves, alongside representative government. These key ideas are both, "compatibly," in that document.
 G.Y.: When you mention vulnerability to the state, I'm reminded of the American eugenics movement in the early 20th century. Is there a connection here? I'm also reminded of Michel Foucault's concept of bio-power and its relevance within the American eugenics context. How does your work speak to this sort of policing of certain bodies?
 F.A.S.: Certainly, that's one example. Political vulnerability is intrinsic to any society, but the rhetoric of universal and equal protection conceals the systematic impulse to exclude certain populations at any given time. The groups who are vulnerable are subject to change, depending upon how threatening they are, and/or how useful it would be to those in power to discard them, In the early 1990s, the legal scholar Dorothy Roberts drew attention to how the bodies of American black women were policed. For example, if they were using drugs while pregnant, they were subject to being charged with crimes and thrown in prison. Vulnerability goes beyond bio-power.
Other examples include the internment of Americans, Peruvians and other Latin Americans of Japanese origin during the Second World War, or the deportation of Chinese migrants from the United States in the 1880s, and the disfranchisement of Asians from their United States-purchased land in the early 1900s. And needless to say, the wide-scale disfranchising of Muslims in the post-9/11 United States is but another recent example. In each of these cases, they are deprived of protections because they are perceived as threats in some way, and so they become - explicitly or not so explicitly - subject to laws intended to constrain, dehumanize, criminalize them. It is a gradual process, but they are increasingly vilified, demonized, dehumanized, which then rationalizes the move to strip them of protections under the mantle of "legality." That is what my work explores.
 G.Y.: Given the continuing racial tensions across the nation, how do you see these events as deep problems endemic to liberalism? Or, are such events just a "misapplication" of liberal theory?
 F.A.S.: The charge of "misapplication" of liberal theory is, I think, a desire to see selectively - to see only the best possible articulation of liberalism. But liberal frameworks are fundamentally predicated on violence or on rationalizing its effects, such as the conquest of "terra nullius," of justifying enslavement, or the privation of rights to "idiots," "savages," "women." And it's not just Locke's theory that is a problem. Rousseau's very beautiful "Social Contract" must be read alongside his novel, "Émile," in which Sophie is raised to support Émile's political existence as a true citizen. It is a remarkably sexist, if not misogynistic, understanding of women. But even more to the point, for Rousseau, these are not contradictory; they are rather compatible ideas.
While we can make corrections to "ideal" liberal theory, these corrections are at base additive. They don't fundamentally restructure the foundation of liberal society - namely the promise of universal and equal protections alongside a systematic impulse to violence in the name of "civilizing" the heathens, or for the purposes of maintaining "law and order." At base, this is what the killing of Michael Brown, and the ensuing encounters between the police and protesters in Ferguson, Mo., have exposed: peace, safety, recognition of one's humanity, law, order, rights will be doled out - or withheld - only in terms that allow those in authority, those with wealth, to remain comfortable. Consider the recent Supreme Court decision to allow restrictive voter ID requirements in Texas - which hurts the poorest citizens. But - and here's the kicker - until we confront the repeated incidents of dehumanization as systematic, and not just a proliferation of accidental violations of humanity, we won't be able to address or challenge the fundamental flaw of liberalism: the "compatibility" between the promise of universal protections for some groups, and violence for others.
 G.Y.: The discourse of a "post-racial" and a "colorblind" America has been invoked since the election of President Obama. How do you see white power and white privilege as continuing to operate as sites of white sovereign authority?
 F.A.S.: The idea of a "post-racial" United States is quite bizarre, but it seems to reflect a narrative of distraction: Electing one, two, or even 50 politicians or hiring multiple bureaucrats of color doesn't end systemic racial inequality or discrimination, although it does provide a convenient (if superficial) defense against charges of racism. It also assumes that those politicians or functionaries are actively interested and focused - let alone "authorized" or empowered - to change racially problematic policies. In itself, that is a problematic assumption to make, since racism is systemic and deeply embedded in cultural outlooks, laws, ways of life, traditions.
The political philosopher Charles Mills's understanding of white supremacy is useful here. Mills uses the term to note that the social contract is predicated on a racial hierarchy where whites are at the top, and blacks and nonwhites below. I want to clarify that, in terms of political institutions, "whiteness" is a category of power based on a general, but not universal, correlation between those in power and general racial identity. In my work, "whiteness" is not about any individual specifically but about groups in power, and it is negotiated and contoured by factors of gender, class, ethnic identity, and institutional and historical factors - such as how certain groups are understood at various moments.
In "post-racial" America, white supremacy continues by ensuring that those in bureaucratic, lawmaking, executive, policy-making functions continue to do what those in the top 5 percent - and others who benefit from white supremacy - need to remain on top: ensure that bankers are not punished; pretend that minorities weren't duped into taking on subprime loans or balloon-payment mortgages; justify rampant invasive surveillance and warmongering in the name of national security; and arrest and detain immigrants - not just adults, but children! Laws and policies that support these events enable at least two things: the siphoning of money away from poorer, darker, vulnerable, vilified populations who have been subject to racism, violence, police brutality and a distraction from the real, everyday problems that affect those populations.
Even in "post-racial" America, the U.S. government has continued to wage war on Muslims and Arab populations: detainees still remain in Guantánamo Bay without charges. Some of them are still being force-fed, but the United States military deliberately no longer offers updates on their status; the current administration has created the "disposition matrix," and expanded the drone program, which has killed hundreds, if not thousands of Yemeni, Somali and Pakistani civilians. And there is a noticeable absence of a reprimand for the most recent Israeli attacks on Gaza. There is vocal, visible support for these policies, not through invocations of racism but through appeals to national security or "helping bring democracy" to "backwards" regions, through justifications about saving "women and children" or innocent "civilians." The institutional effect is that Muslims and Arabs and South Asians are still systematically suffering at a greatly disproportionate rate to any possible "transgressions." It seems that "post-racial" America continues to racialize and dehumanize.
 G.Y.: How does an epistemology of ignorance work within this context - in, for instance, the comparison between the experience of black Americans and Asian-Americans?
 F.A.S.:As Mills has argued (and as many feminist philosophers and philosophers of race argue), pervasive racial inequality - understood within the frames of legal, social, political systems - persists because "whites themselves are unable to understand the world that they themselves have made." Here's what that looks like: "Slavery's over. Why are we still discussing it? What does this have to do with poverty? After all, look at all those Asian immigrants: They're not asking for handouts. They're doing very well for themselves."
But such a comparison ignores history and context: Asians who migrated post-1965 to 1985 were a different class of migrants. They were migrating as professionals, or for graduate study, and did not have a history of slavery in the United States, nor a vivid history of racism (ironically, because they were almost entirely prevented from migrating to the United States for 40 years, and therefore were largely invisible). They were not migrating on H1B-visas, as many South Asians do today (which restrict access to the full complement of economic and legal protections that permanent residents are eligible to receive). Such a comparison also doesn't acknowledge that white wealth was built not only on the backs of black slaves, but on the backs of their "free" and mightily persecuted descendants, nor that whites as a group benefit from not being recipients of racist treatment. And of course, it neglects the very pointed goal of redlining, which was to block the entry of blacks into white neighborhoods, and thereby access to better schools for their children, among other benefits. It neglects the specific history of targeted harassment toward blacks, whether in the South, or after they migrated North, as Ta-Nehisi Coates details in his excellent Atlantic article about reparations.
And perhaps most importantly, such a comparison falsely focuses on poverty and wealth as a consequence of individual character, rather than as the result of policies that benefit those who already have, while hurting those who have little. This is why I think discussing racism as a "matter of the heart," or individual cultural attitudes is useful but limiting. It inhibits us from considering systemic analyses, and thereby systemic solutions to systemic problems.
 G.Y.: There are some theorists who continue to want to reduce race to class. My sense is that W.E.B. Du Bois was correct regarding his claim that even poor whites possess whiteness. Do you think that such a distinction has any relevance in our contemporary moment in American history?
 F.A.S.: In "Black Reconstruction in America" (1935), Du Bois discussed the wages of whiteness paid to white workers by the Southern white bourgeoisie - through the vehicle of racial apartheid - in order to divide and conquer the working class, and get white and black workers to hate and fear each other, despite, as he says, "their practically identical interests." There is certainly truth in the claim for today, but it also depends on context, geography, historical moment, and situation-and the racial perspectives of those in power.
Poor whites won't be racially profiled by white police, or store clerks, or white or nonwhite landlords to the same degree as darker men across economic classes will be. Yet, thinking institutionally, because economic policies adversely impact those who are already disadvantaged, poor blacks and poor whites will both suffer that impact. However, those in power and positions of authority will most often blame working-class and poor blacks for various moral character flaws. We have seen it countless times: from Daniel Moynihan's infamous 1965 report which traces poverty to character flaws of African-Americans to Ronald Reagan's vilification of poor black women who then came to be referred to as "welfare queens," to President Obama's multiple admonitions to black men to be more responsible fathers. This is despite the fact that we have ample evidence illustrating that black men are incarcerated six times as often as white men, and that they suffer from racial profiling and discrimination and unfair laws like "stop and frisk," which collectively inhibit them from finding employment, housing or economic success.
Presumably, if poor blacks suffer from "character flaws," then so do poor whites and other populations of color, but we rarely hear the same moral admonitions directed towards them.
 G.Y.: Lastly, from what you've argued, engaging in a critical overthrow of white supremacy as a system will certainly involve a systemic approach. Yet, people of color must deal with virulent manifestations of white racism on an everyday basis, even enacted by "well-intentioned" whites.
 F.A.S.: Certainly. Those, it seems to me, are but symptoms of institutional aggressions, manifestations of virulent racism that are expressed through the larger structures of our society. How can those aggressions disappear without the simultaneous coextensive reform of our larger juridical, legal institutions, federal laws and policies that, at some level, endorse and approve those micro-aggressions? While it is important to note those micro-aggressions, I think, reform, redress, has to occur at the macro-level, with policies that address socio-economic, political change. Many people take their cues from the laws under which they live; if the laws reflect respect and dignity, then...
 This interview was conducted by email and edited. Previous interviews in this series (with Linda Martin Alcoff, Judith Butler, Joy James, Charles Mills, Shannon Sullivan and Naomi Zack) can be found here.  
 George Yancy is a professor of philosophy at Duquesne University. He has written, edited and co-edited numerous books, including "Black Bodies, White Gazes," "Look, a White!" and "Pursuing Trayvon Martin," co-edited with Janine Jones. 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (95%); RACE & ETHNICITY (93%); PHILOSOPHY (91%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (91%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (90%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (90%); SOCIAL SCIENCE EDUCATION (90%); SYSTEMIC RACISM (90%); CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (79%); MINORITY GROUPS (79%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (79%); IMMIGRATION (78%); WOMEN (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (72%); HIGH SCHOOLS (60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); Asian-Americans (%); Discrimination (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Liberalism (US Politics) (%); Muslim Americans (%); philosophers on race (%); Philosophy (%); Race and Ethnicity (%); The Stone (%)

Industry: COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (77%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (72%); HIGH SCHOOLS (60%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (94%)

Load-Date: February 27, 2015


End of Document
Visas for Foreign Workers
The New York Times
May 1, 2017 Monday
The New York Times on the Web


Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company
Section: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. ; LETTER
Length: 165 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''How 'Hire American' Could Affect a World of Tech Workers'' (news article, April 19): 
  The problem with the H-1B visa program is that it depresses the price of tech jobs, which in turn lowers the desirability for tech jobs and the incentive for American students to seek math and science education.
  This would be true to some extent even if the system weren't abused, but The New York Times and other outlets have shown that employment companies are gaming the lottery system and being used not just to fill a critical opening but also to replace entire departments of citizens who are already working.
  The invisible hand is supposed to respond to a shortage by raising the price. Bringing in substitute labor from foreign countries lowers the price. I don't know what President Trump has in mind, but if companies are allowed to lower the price of tech jobs, the American work force will continue its decline as a leader in math and science.
  JOHN MCGLOIN, STATEN ISLAND

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/01/opinion/visas-for-foreign-workers.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (76%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (73%); PRICE CUTTING (72%); PRICE INCREASES (72%); PRICE CHANGES (68%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES (78%); EMPLOYMENT SERVICES (73%); PRICE CUTTING (72%); PRICE INCREASES (72%); PRICE CHANGES (68%)

Load-Date: May 1, 2017


End of Document
Chase for Talent Pushes Tech Giants Far Beyond West Coast
The New York Times 
December 13, 2018 Thursday 12:21 EST


Copyright 2018 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: TECHNOLOGY
Length: 1428 words
Byline: Jack Nicas and Karen Weise
Highlight: Amazon and Google are aggressively opening offices outside of their Silicon Valley and Seattle hometowns. On Thursday, Apple said it would invest $1 billion in Austin, Tex.
Body


SAN FRANCISCO — This generation’s biggest technology companies — including Apple, Amazon and Google — have long been tied to their hometowns. Now these giants are increasingly outgrowing their West Coast roots.
Driven by a limited pool of skilled workers and the ballooning cost of living in their home bases of Silicon Valley and Seattle, as well as President Trump’s shifting immigration policies, the companies are aggressively taking their talent hunt across the United States and elsewhere. And they are coalescing particularly around a handful of urban areas that are already winners in the new knowledge-based economy, including New York City, Washington, Boston and Austin, Tex.
This eastward expansion accelerated on Thursday when Apple said it would build a $1 billion campus in Austin, expanding its presence there to over 11,000 workers and becoming the area’s largest private employer. The decision followed Amazon’s highly publicized selection of Queens and Arlington, Va., last month for new offices that would house at least 50,000 employees. Google, too, is shopping for more real estate in New York that could enable it to more than double its work force of 7,000 in the city.
“They’re expanding out,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics. “Tech talent is in very short supply. So if these tech companies want to grow and flourish, they need to find talent in other parts of the country.”
The chase for tech talent has been global for decades, and Silicon Valley’s older companies have had big offices all over the world for years. Intel, for example, has far more employees in Oregon than it does in California. Hewlett-Packard, which split into two companies three years ago, has had large outposts in Idaho and Oregon.
Amazon, Apple and Google are now increasingly adopting the same strategy as they hire for growth and pursue the brightest minds in new technologies, in an effort to outmuscle one another. Over the past two years, Amazon’s work force has doubled to 613,300 employees; Google’s parent, Alphabet, has increased its head count by 35 percent, to 94,300; and Apple has grown nearly 14 percent, to 132,000 workers.
Many of the companies are trying to cozy up to top engineering schools in cities like Pittsburgh, where Google recently opened an office and where Uber has had a center, or Zurich as they search for hard-to-find talent in artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. Cambridge, England, now hosts several A.I. research outposts for American tech companies, including Amazon, Microsoft and Apple.
Like Cambridge, England, some cities in the United States have also become known for a particular area of tech expertise, in what has become a modern remake of the country’s industrial era, when cities came to specialize in the production of cars, steel and coal.
The Seattle area, home to Amazon and Microsoft, is known for experts in cloud-computing services thanks to Amazon’s leadership in that field. Pittsburgh is known for A.I. because of Carnegie Mellon University’s computer science program. Cambridge, Mass., is associated with robotics, thanks to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. And New York is often where cutting-edge work on financial services technology is done.
The search for talent outside Silicon Valley and Seattle has also been prompted by issues in the companies’ hometowns, which have not built enough housing to keep up with their growing work forces. San Francisco, San Jose, Oakland and Seattle are the four most expensive major cities in the country based on home values, according to data from Zillow. The median home in San Francisco is valued at almost $1.4 million and more than $733,000 in Seattle. Questions also abound over the quality and funding of the areas’ public school systems.
“Every day as a C.E.O., you have employees coming to you saying, ‘I don’t make enough to buy a house for my family,’ and you already feel like you are paying through the nose,” said Glenn Kelman, chief executive of Redfin, the real estate site based in Seattle. “Almost everyone is looking at other affordable places where you can open an office.”
Some economists said the Trump administration’s tougher immigration policies could also restrict the tech giants from importing skilled workers from abroad to their West Coast headquarters. The Trump administration has increased the red tape in applying for H-1B visas for highly skilled workers and has denied petitions more often. Over a five-day window this April, employers submitted petitions for more than 190,000 specialized work visas, but only 85,000 can be granted annually.
That has helped push some tech companies into building major outposts in Canada, particularly in Toronto and Vancouver. Edward Glaeser, a Harvard economics professor, said that even if H-1B workers were to come through in abundance, it would still make sense to put them in cheaper cities, like Austin. He said, “$100,000 goes a lot further in Austin than in Silicon Valley.”
Yet even as the tech companies move beyond the West Coast, their choices to converge on cities or towns that are already highly educated, wealthy and well employed do not spread the wealth.
More than 44 percent of all digital-service jobs in the United States were located in just 10 metro areas last year, including Seattle, San Francisco and San Jose, as well as New York, Washington, Los Angeles and Boston, according to research by Mark Muro, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. From 2015 to 2017, only nine metro areas increased their share of the nation’s tech work force, including the West Coast tech hubs, as well as Austin and Denver.
“The tech industry concentrates in very few markets,” said Amy Liu, director of the Metropolitan Policy Program at the Brookings Institution. “Our biggest concern is how do we make sure more cities, particularly midsized cities in the middle of the country, can be players in the tech economy?”
Amazon, which has about 45,000 people at its Seattle headquarters, has also opened 16 tech hubs in the United States. About 85 percent of those satellite employees are in six booming, highly educated urban areas — the Bay Area, Washington region, New York, Boston, Los Angeles and Austin. Each has at least 1,000 workers.
(The bulk of Amazon’s North American work force is made up of the more than 250,000 people who are dispersed in the company’s roughly 110 warehouses around Canada and the United States and who make less money than their white-collar colleagues.)
Apple, which has been criticized by President Trump for not creating more domestic jobs, said on Thursday that its plans for Austin included a new 133-acre campus that will initially have 5,000 workers in engineering, research and development, operations and other functions. It will ultimately be able to accommodate up to 15,000 workers.
Apple already has about 6,000 workers in Austin. The company said it applied for a $25 million grant from Texas, payable over 15 years, as well as property-tax rebates from Williamson County.
A person familiar with Apple’s decision to expand outside Cupertino, Calif., where it just opened a new $5 billion headquarters, said the move into Austin was partly driven by the extreme housing prices in the Bay Area, as well as its aim to find more talent and add more diversity and military veterans to its work force.
The company added that it also planned to open 1,000-worker operations in Seattle, San Diego, and Culver City, Calif., and to add hundreds of employees in Pittsburgh, Boston, New York and Boulder, Colo., over the next three years.
Some economists said what was most remarkable was that it took the tech giants this long to aggressively expand beyond the West Coast.
“In a sense, what we’re seeing is tech becoming a normal industry,” Mr. Glaeser said, “an industry that’s not located in one incredibly expensive place.”
Follow Jack Nicas and Karen Weise on Twitter: @jacknicas and @KYWeise. Jack Nicas reported from San Francisco and Karen Weise from Seattle. Steve Lohr contributed reporting from New York. 
PHOTO: The current Apple campus in Austin, Tex. The company is planning a new $1 billion, 133-acre campus there, expanding its presence to over 11,000 workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TAMIR KALIFA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A22)
Related Articles
    • Apple to Add $1 Billion Campus in Austin, Tex., in Broad U.S. Hiring Push
    • Before a Deal, Amazon Had to Know: Could Cuomo and De Blasio Get Along?
    • Google Is Said to Be Shopping for More Real Estate in New York
    • Silicon Valley’s Giants Take Their Talent Hunt to Cambridge
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (89%); LABOR FORCE (89%); EMERGING TECHNOLOGY (79%); ENGINEERING (79%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); CITIES (77%); COST OF LIVING (77%); DATA ANALYTICS (75%); ECONOMICS (75%); NEW ECONOMY (74%); URBAN SCHOOLS (72%); PUBLIC POLICY (71%); IMMIGRATION (58%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (56%); Computers and the Internet (%); Foreign Workers (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Relocation of Business (%); Alphabet Inc (%); Amazon.com Inc (%); Apple Inc (%); Google Inc (%); Austin (Tex) (%); Boston (Mass) (%); Washington (DC) (%); New York City (%); United States (%)

Company:  APPLE INC (85%);  GOOGLE LLC (85%);  INTEL CORP (58%);  HP INC (53%)

Organization: NEW YORK GIANTS (84%); SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS (84%)

Ticker: AAPL (NASDAQ) (85%); INTC (NASDAQ) (58%); HPQ (NYSE) (53%)

Industry: NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS423430 COMPUTER & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE MERCHANT WHOLESALERS (85%); NAICS334112 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICE MANUFACTURING (85%); NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (85%); SIC5045 COMPUTERS & COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT & SOFTWARE (85%); SIC3674 SEMICONDUCTORS & RELATED DEVICES (85%); SIC3577 COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT, NEC (85%); SIC3572 COMPUTER STORAGE DEVICES (85%); SIC3571 ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (85%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (85%); NAICS334118 COMPUTER TERMINAL & OTHER COMPUTER PERIPHERAL EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING (53%); BIG TECH (90%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); ENGINEERING (79%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%); REAL ESTATE (77%); DATA ANALYTICS (75%); EDUCATIONAL SERVICES (74%); URBAN SCHOOLS (72%); CLOUD COMPUTING (59%); AUTOMOTIVE MFG (50%)

Geographic: AUSTIN, TX, USA (94%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (93%); BOSTON, MA, USA (92%); CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); PITTSBURGH, PA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SILICON VALLEY, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (93%); WASHINGTON, USA (93%); TEXAS, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); IDAHO, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON DC, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); ENGLAND (87%)

Load-Date: October 5, 2022


End of Document
In Ohio Senate Fight, G.O.P. Shows Strains of Its Identity Crisis
The New York Times 
May 2, 2022 Monday 10:28 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1536 words
Byline: Jazmine Ulloa and Jonathan Weisman
Highlight: Republicans agree that values they view as traditional are at risk, but they’re wrestling with whether isolationism is the answer to their misgivings about global interconnectedness.
Body


Republicans agree that values they view as traditional are at risk, but they’re wrestling with whether isolationism is the answer to their misgivings about global interconnectedness.
Follow our live coverage of Tuesday’s primaries in Ohio and Indiana.
CLEVELAND — The homestretch of Ohio’s contentious Republican Senate primary has revealed a party united in its conviction that American values, indeed the nation’s way of life, are under attack, but divided on whether to embrace a strict isolationism to address its mounting misgivings about global interconnectedness and American leadership abroad.
That divide has played out in policy differences — some subtle, others glaring — in the candidates’ approach to the economy, immigration and foreign policy. The strains reflect the broader splits in a party undergoing something of an identity crisis, with ideological conservatives, the old Republican establishment of big business, and the Trump-inspired newer rank and file all pulling in different directions.
At the same time, Republicans have been searching for ways to relate to former President Donald J. Trump himself: a few by taking tentative steps away from him, others by falling in line with him wholeheartedly.
All of the candidates competing in the primary on Tuesday appear united in their fierce opposition to the Biden administration, as they have sought to paint a nation grappling with rising food and energy prices, a “radical” Democratic Party overreaching on issues of race and gender, and what they describe as apocalyptic conditions at the U.S.-Mexico border.
But the world beyond Mexico may be the brightest dividing line in the Republican Party, with conservatives split on what to do about Russian aggression, how far to distance the United States from its traditional alliances, and above all what to do about China, at once the nation’s biggest competitor and one of its largest economic partners.
Over the past weeks, Josh Mandel, Ohio’s former treasurer and the onetime front-runner in the Senate primary, attacked a rival, Mike Gibbons, for making money off investments in China. J.D. Vance, the author and venture capital executive, attacked Mr. Mandel for accepting the help of the Club for Growth, the business-backed political group which he said supported business relations with China. And the sole woman in the race, Jane Timken, shares her last name with a company that is synonymous with Ohio manufacturing might — and that includes vast operations out of Shanghai.
Whoever wins Tuesday will have to deal with those divisions in the coming general election campaign, especially since the presumed Democratic candidate, Representative Tim Ryan, has no qualms about blasting China while backing U.S. involvement elsewhere.
“Voters don’t always have long memories here, especially after a primary campaign, but certainly the anti-China feelings are going to resonate for a long time,” said Paul Beck, a professor emeritus of political science at Ohio State University and a longtime Ohio politics watcher. “They are hard-wired.”
Divisions over the border are not so stark. Anger at Mexican criminal organizations that are distributing fentanyl to the north has become particularly salient in a state that has been ground zero for the national opioid crisis and experienced some of the country’s highest overdose rates over the past three years.
Mr. Vance, who won Mr. Trump’s coveted endorsement, has even suggested, with a straight face but no evidence, that President Biden was intentionally allowing fentanyl into the country because of its potential to kill Republican voters, bringing the issue back to his mother, who as a nurse became addicted to pain medication. Fentanyl deaths did rise sharply in 2021, butthey rose sharply in 2020 as well.
“My family was very affected and is still very affected by the fentanyl that comes across the U.S. southern border into Ohio and into all parts of our country,” he told an audience in Newark, Ohio, on Saturday. “I believe that if the poison coming across the Mexican border today had been coming across 10 years ago, I would have lost my mother.”
Much of the debate and bluster on the border has been lacking in substance and filled with conjecture, with candidates proposing few policy solutions, conflating immigration and crime and resorting to language that dehumanizes unauthorized immigrants.
But beneath the hard-right rhetoric, subtle differences can be seen between the pro-business, establishment Republicans of the past and the ascendant hard right.
In stump speeches and a much-criticized campaign ad, Mr. Vance has falsely declared that people are entering the countryto vote for Democrats. He has said he is in favor of an immigration process that creates legal paths to entering the country based on merit, rather than on familial ties, long a key feature of the nation’s immigration system. And he opposes H-1B visas that allow employers to temporarily hire immigrant workers in various industries.
At the other end of the issue is Matt Dolan, an Ohio state senator who has sought to put some distance between himself and the former president. Mr. Dolan, too, talks tough on immigration and the need to stop the flow of fentanyl. But he is just as concerned about economic development, supporting tax cuts, training for workers and reduced regulations for small businesses. And he favors the immigrant work visas, saying businesses rely on them.
“We have to secure the border first — that has to be number one,” Mr. Dolan said in an interview last week. “And then improve our legal immigration.”
Perhaps the most glaring examples in Ohio of the forces warring within the Republican Party have unfolded over competition with China, the war in Ukraine and American leadership abroad. Again setting himself apart, Mr. Vance has argued against deepening American involvement on Ukraine’s behalf — despite what many see as the gravest threat to world order in decades.
Mr. Vance opposed the establishment of a European-led no-fly zone over Ukraine, and has drawn criticism for a statement he made in February in which he said he did not “really care what happens to Ukraine one way or another.” He has since sought to assure audiences he feels Ukrainians’ pain, but has doubled down on his stance against U.S. intervention.
“At the end of the day, however tragic we find these images of what is going on in Ukraine, this is not our fight,” Mr. Vance said in a debate last month.
The distinctions could also be seen in the surrogates the Ohio candidates brought in to campaign with them in the final stretch.
Mr. Mandel chose as his wingman for the final weekend Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, who in 2016 was Mr. Trump’s biggest threat and remains fiercely conservative in ways the former president never was. Mr. Cruz has consistently attacked Mr. Biden as weak on foreign policy, going so far as to blame him for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. And Mr. Cruz, like Republican congressional leaders, has shied away from some of Mr. Trump’s broader attacks on corporate America — especially the pharmaceutical industry — which often echoed Democratic talking points.
Mr. Vance, by contrast, stumped over the weekend with two of the most polarizing figures of the far right: Representatives Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia and Matt Gaetz of Florida. Ms. Greene railed against the “forever wars” started under George W. Bush and talked up what she called “the civil war in the G.O.P.,” while Mr. Gaetz blasted the leaders of his own party and said he and Ms. Greene needed backup in Washington — backup that Mr. Vance would provide.
Mr. Gibbons, for his part, campaigned with Senator Rand Paul, the Kentuckian who espouses small government, low taxes and the avoidance of foreign entanglements at all cost. And Mr. Gibbons embraced a fringe movement to hold a constitutional convention aimed at curbing federal power, and mocked the Department of Homeland Security’s new effort to counter disinformation as an Orwellian Ministry of Truth.
One area in which there is broad agreement among the party’s Senate candidates is on the conservative values many Ohio Republicans say they hold dear, from old standbys like support for gun rights and opposition to abortion, to current causes like preventing transgender women from playing women’s sports and giving parents greater control over how race and gender are taught in schools.
On those issues, consensus among the candidates was so fully realized that voters at events in Cleveland seemed widely split over whom to support, and many were still undecided.
In Port Clinton, where Ms. Timken, Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Dolan all worked the crowd at a Knights of Columbus chicken barbecue lunch, Lisa Slobodzian said she was still sifting through her direct mail and studying the candidates’ positions.
“I want power back to the people,” said Ms. Slobodzian, 57, a retired national parks ranger and law enforcement specialist, digging into her plate. “They should decide what their kids are taught in schools, and not some government agency.”
PHOTO: Voters casting early ballots for the primary election last month in Columbus, Ohio. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gaelen Morse/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); CONSERVATISM (89%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (79%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (79%); PRICES (78%); VENTURE CAPITAL (78%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (75%); IMMIGRATION (74%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (73%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); ENERGY PRICES (51%); FOOD PRICES (51%); Elections, Senate (%); Primaries and Caucuses (%); Conservatism (US Politics) (%); United States Politics and Government (%); Republican Party (%); Ohio (%); Gibbons, Mike (1952- ) (%); Mandel, Joshua A (%); Timken, Jane (%); Vance, J D (%); Dolan, Matthew J (1965- ) (%)

Industry: MANUFACTURING (78%); VENTURE CAPITAL (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); ENERGY PRICES (51%); FOOD PRICES (51%)

Person: J D VANCE (93%); DONALD TRUMP (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); Gibbons, Mike (1952- ); Mandel, Joshua A; Timken, Jane; Vance, J D; Dolan, Matthew J (1965- )

Geographic: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (79%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (53%); OHIO, USA (95%); EAST CHINA (79%); INDIANA, USA (79%); CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (92%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: May 4, 2022


End of Document
Pink Slips at Disney. But First, Training Foreign Replacements.
The New York Times
June 4, 2015 Thursday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1
Length: 1714 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


ORLANDO, Fla. --  The employees who kept the data systems humming in the vast Walt Disney fantasy fief did not suspect trouble when they were suddenly summoned to meetings with their boss.
While families rode the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train and searched for Nemo on clamobiles in the theme parks, these workers monitored computers in industrial buildings nearby, making sure millions of Walt Disney World ticket sales, store purchases and hotel reservations went through without a hitch. Some were performing so well that they thought they had been called in for bonuses. 
  Instead, about 250 Disney employees were told in late October that they would be laid off. Many of their jobs were transferred to immigrants on temporary visas for highly skilled technical workers, who were brought in by an outsourcing firm based in India. Over the next three months, some Disney employees were required to train their replacements to do the jobs they had lost.
  ''I just couldn't believe they could fly people in to sit at our desks and take over our jobs exactly,'' said one former worker, an American in his 40s who remains unemployed since his last day at Disney on Jan. 30. ''It was so humiliating to train somebody else to take over your job. I still can't grasp it.''
  Disney executives said that the layoffs were part of a reorganization, and that the company opened more positions than it eliminated.
  But the layoffs at Disney and at other companies, including the Southern California Edison power utility, are raising new questions about how businesses and outsourcing companies are using the temporary visas, known as H-1B, to place immigrants in technology jobs in the United States. These visas are at the center of a fierce debate in Congress over whether they complement American workers or displace them.
  According to federal guidelines, the visas are intended for foreigners with advanced science or computer skills to fill discrete positions when American workers with those skills cannot be found. Their use, the guidelines say, should not ''adversely affect the wages and working conditions'' of Americans. Because of legal loopholes, however, in practice, companies do not have to recruit American workers first or guarantee that Americans will not be displaced.
  Too often, critics say, the visas are being used to bring in immigrants to do the work of Americans for less money, with laid-off American workers having to train their replacements.
  ''The program has created a highly lucrative business model of bringing in cheaper H-1B workers to substitute for Americans,'' said Ronil Hira, a professor of public policy at Howard University who studies visa programs and has testified before Congress about H-1B visas.
  A limited number of the visas, 85,000, are granted each year, and they are in high demand. Technology giants like Microsoft, Facebook and Google repeatedly press for increases in the annual quotas, saying there are not enough Americans with the skills they need.
  Many American companies use H-1B visas to bring in small numbers of foreigners for openings demanding specialized skills, according to official reports. But for years, most top recipients of the visas have been outsourcing or consulting firms based in India, or their American subsidiaries, which import workers for large contracts to take over entire in-house technology units -- and to cut costs. The immigrants are employees of the outsourcing companies.
  In 2013, those firms -- including Infosys, Tata Consultancy Services and HCL America, the company hired by Disney -- were six of the top 10 companies granted H-1Bs, with each one receiving more than 1,000 visas.
  H-1B immigrants work for less than American tech workers, Professor Hira said at a hearing in March of the Senate Judiciary Committee, because of weaknesses in wage regulations. The savings have been 25 percent to 49 percent in recent cases, he told lawmakers.
  In a letter in April to top federal authorities in charge of immigration, a bipartisan group of senators called for an investigation of recent ''H-1B-driven layoffs,'' saying, ''Their frequency seems to have increased dramatically in the past year alone.''
  Last year, Southern California Edison began 540 technology layoffs while hiring two Indian outsourcing firms for much of the work. Three Americans who had lost jobs told Senate lawmakers that many of those being laid off had to teach immigrants to perform their functions.
  In a statement, the utility said the layoffs were ''a difficult business decision,'' part of a plan ''to focus on making significant, strategic changes that can benefit our customers.'' It noted that some workers hired by the outsourcing firms were Americans.
  Fossil, a fashion watchmaker, said it would lay off more than 100 technology employees in Texas this year, transferring the work to Infosys. The company is planning ''knowledge sharing'' between the laid-off employees and about 25 new Infosys workers, including immigrants, who will take jobs in Dallas. Fossil is outsourcing tech services ''to be more current and nimble'' and ''reduce costs when possible,'' it said in a statement.
  Among 350 tech workers laid off in 2013 after a merger at Northeast Utilities, an East Coast power company, many had trained H-1B immigrants to do their jobs, several of those workers reported confidentially to lawmakers. They said that as part of their severance packages, they had to sign agreements not to criticize the company publicly.
  In Orlando, Disney executives said the reorganization resulting in the layoffs was meant to allow technology operations to focus on producing more innovations. They said that over all, the company had a net gain of 70 tech jobs.
  ''Disney has created almost 30,000 new jobs in the U.S. over the past decade,'' said Kim Prunty, a Disney spokeswoman, adding that the company expected its contractors to comply with all immigration laws.
  The tech workers laid off were a tiny fraction of Disney's ''cast members,'' as the entertainment conglomerate calls its theme park workers, who number 74,000 in the Orlando area. Employees who lost jobs were allowed a three-month transition with résumé coaching to help them seek other positions in the company, Disney executives said. Of those laid off, 120 took new jobs at Disney, and about 40 retired or left the company before the end of the transition period, while about 90 did not find new Disney jobs, executives said.
  Living in a company town, former Disney workers were reluctant to be identified, saying they feared they could jeopardize their chances of finding new jobs with the few other local tech employers. Several workers agreed to interviews, but only on the condition of anonymity.
  They said only a handful of those laid off were moved directly by Disney to other company jobs. The rest were left to compete for positions through Disney job websites. Despite the company's figures, few people they knew had been hired, they said, and then often at a lower pay level. No one was offered retraining, they said. One former worker, a 57-year-old man with more than 10 years at Disney, displayed a list of 18 jobs in the company he had applied for. He had not had more than an initial conversation on any one, he said.
  Disney ''made the difficult decision to eliminate certain positions, including yours,'' as a result of ''the transition of your work to a managed service provider,'' said a contract presented to employees on the day the layoffs were announced. It offered a ''stay bonus'' of 10 percent of severance pay if they remained for 90 days. But the bonus was contingent on ''the continued satisfactory performance of your job duties.'' For many, that involved training a replacement. Young immigrants from India took the seats at their computer stations.
  ''The first 30 days was all capturing what I did,'' said the American in his 40s, who worked 10 years at Disney. ''The next 30 days, they worked side by side with me, and the last 30 days, they took over my job completely.'' To receive his severance bonus, he said, ''I had to make sure they were doing my job correctly.''
  In late November, this former employee received his annual performance review, which he provided to The New York Times. His supervisor, who was not aware the man was scheduled for layoff, wrote that because of his superior skills and ''outstanding'' work, he had saved the company thousands of dollars. The supervisor added that he was looking forward to another highly productive year of having the employee on the team.
  The employee got a raise. His severance pay had to be recalculated to include it.
  The former Disney employee who is 57 worked in project management and software development. His résumé lists a top-level skill certification and command of seven operating systems, 15 program languages and more than two dozen other applications and media.
  ''I was forced into early retirement,'' he said. The timing was ''horrible,'' he said, because his wife recently had a medical emergency with expensive bills. Shut out of Disney, he is looking for a new job elsewhere.
  Former employees said many immigrants who arrived were younger technicians with limited data skills who did not speak English fluently and had to be instructed in the basics of the work.
  HCL America, a branch of a global company based in Noida, India, won a contract with Disney in 2012. In a statement, the company said details of the agreement were confidential. ''As a company, we work very closely with the U.S. Department of Labor and strictly adhere to all visa guidelines and requirements to be complied with,'' it said.
  The chairman of the Walt Disney Company, Robert A. Iger, is a co-chairman with Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, and Rupert Murdoch, the executive chairman of News Corporation, in the Partnership for a New American Economy, which pushes for an overhaul of immigration laws, including an increase in H-1B visas.
  But Disney directly employs fewer than 10 H-1B workers, executives said, and has not been prominent in visa lobbying. Mr. Iger supports the partnership's broader goals, including increased border security and a pathway to legal status for immigrants here illegally, officials of the organization said.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/04/us/last-task-after-layoff-at-disney-train-foreign-replacements.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: The Team Disney building in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., which houses most of the company's technology operations. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN BLANCO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A15)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: LAYOFFS (93%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); COMPANY ACTIVITIES & MANAGEMENT (78%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (78%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (72%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (71%); TICKET SALES (71%); PUBLIC POLICY (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (60%)

Company:  WALT DISNEY CO (90%);  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (57%);  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (54%);  FACEBOOK INC (50%);  MICROSOFT CORP (50%)

Ticker: DIS (NYSE) (90%); FB (NASDAQ) (50%); MSFT (NASDAQ) (50%)

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (90%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (90%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (90%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (90%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (57%); NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (54%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (54%); NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS (50%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (50%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (50%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); BIG TECH (78%); AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (73%); PARKS & PLAYGROUNDS (72%); TICKET SALES (71%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (60%); HOTELS & MOTELS (56%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: June 4, 2015


End of Document
In Ohio Senate Primary, Republicans Feel Strain Of Party's Identity Crisis
The New York Times
May 3, 2022 Tuesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17
Length: 1514 words
Byline: By Jazmine Ulloa and Jonathan Weisman
Body


Republicans agree that values they view as traditional are at risk, but they're wrestling with whether isolationism is the answer to their misgivings about global interconnectedness.
CLEVELAND -- The homestretch of Ohio's contentious Republican Senate primary has revealed a party united in its conviction that American values, indeed the nation's way of life, are under attack, but divided on whether to embrace a strict isolationism to address its mounting misgivings about global interconnectedness and American leadership abroad. 
  That divide has played out in policy differences -- some subtle, others glaring -- in the candidates' approach to the economy, immigration and foreign policy. The strains reflect the broader splits in a party undergoing something of an identity crisis, with ideological conservatives, the old Republican establishment of big business, and the Trump-inspired newer rank and file all pulling in different directions.
  At the same time, Republicans have been searching for ways to relate to former President Donald J. Trump himself: a few by taking tentative steps away from him, others by falling in line with him wholeheartedly.
  All of the candidates competing in the primary on Tuesday appear united in their fierce opposition to the Biden administration, as they have sought to paint a nation grappling with rising food and energy prices, a ''radical'' Democratic Party overreaching on issues of race and gender, and what they describe as apocalyptic conditions at the U.S.-Mexico border.
  But the world beyond Mexico may be the brightest dividing line in the Republican Party, with conservatives split on what to do about Russian aggression, how far to distance the United States from its traditional alliances, and above all what to do about China, at once the nation's biggest competitor and one of its largest economic partners.
  Over the past weeks, Josh Mandel, Ohio's former treasurer and the onetime front-runner in the Senate primary, attacked a rival, Mike Gibbons, for making money off investments in China. J.D. Vance, the author and venture capital executive, attacked Mr. Mandel for accepting the help of the Club for Growth, the business-backed political group which he said supported business relations with China. And the sole woman in the race, Jane Timken, shares her last name with a company that is synonymous with Ohio manufacturing might -- and that includes vast operations out of Shanghai.
  Whoever wins Tuesday will have to deal with those divisions in the coming general election campaign, especially since the presumed Democratic candidate, Representative Tim Ryan, has no qualms about blasting China while backing U.S. involvement elsewhere.
  ''Voters don't always have long memories here, especially after a primary campaign, but certainly the anti-China feelings are going to resonate for a long time,'' said Paul Beck, a professor emeritus of political science at Ohio State University and a longtime Ohio politics watcher. ''They are hard-wired.''
  Divisions over the border are not so stark. Anger at Mexican criminal organizations that are distributing fentanyl to the north has become particularly salient in a state that has been ground zero for the national opioid crisis and experienced some of the country's highest overdose rates over the past three years.
  Mr. Vance, who won Mr. Trump's coveted endorsement, has even suggested, with a straight face but no evidence, that President Biden was intentionally allowing fentanyl into the country because of its potential to kill Republican voters, bringing the issue back to his mother, who as a nurse became addicted to pain medication. Fentanyl deaths did rise sharply in 2021, but they rose sharply in 2020 as well.
  ''My family was very affected and is still very affected by the fentanyl that comes across the U.S. southern border into Ohio and into all parts of our country,'' he told an audience in Newark, Ohio, on Saturday. ''I believe that if the poison coming across the Mexican border today had been coming across 10 years ago, I would have lost my mother.''
  Much of the debate and bluster on the border has been lacking in substance and filled with conjecture, with candidates proposing few policy solutions, conflating immigration and crime and resorting to language that dehumanizes unauthorized immigrants.
  But beneath the hard-right rhetoric, subtle differences can be seen between the pro-business, establishment Republicans of the past and the ascendant hard right.
  In stump speeches and a much-criticized campaign ad, Mr. Vance has falsely declared that people are entering the country to vote for Democrats. He has said he is in favor of an immigration process that creates legal paths to entering the country based on merit, rather than on familial ties, long a key feature of the nation's immigration system. And he opposes H-1B visas that allow employers to temporarily hire immigrant workers in various industries.
  At the other end of the issue is Matt Dolan, an Ohio state senator who has sought to put some distance between himself and the former president. Mr. Dolan, too, talks tough on immigration and the need to stop the flow of fentanyl. But he is just as concerned about economic development, supporting tax cuts, training for workers and reduced regulations for small businesses. And he favors the immigrant work visas, saying businesses rely on them.
  ''We have to secure the border first -- that has to be number one,'' Mr. Dolan said in an interview last week. ''And then improve our legal immigration.''
  Perhaps the most glaring examples in Ohio of the forces warring within the Republican Party have unfolded over competition with China, the war in Ukraine and American leadership abroad. Again setting himself apart, Mr. Vance has argued against deepening American involvement on Ukraine's behalf -- despite what many see as the gravest threat to world order in decades.
  Mr. Vance opposed the establishment of a European-led no-fly zone over Ukraine, and has drawn criticism for a statement he made in February in which he said he did not ''really care what happens to Ukraine one way or another.'' He has since sought to assure audiences he feels Ukrainians' pain, but has doubled down on his stance against U.S. intervention.
  ''At the end of the day, however tragic we find these images of what is going on in Ukraine, this is not our fight,'' Mr. Vance said in a debate last month.
  The distinctions could also be seen in the surrogates the Ohio candidates brought in to campaign with them in the final stretch.
  Mr. Mandel chose as his wingman for the final weekend Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, who in 2016 was Mr. Trump's biggest threat and remains fiercely conservative in ways the former president never was. Mr. Cruz has consistently attacked Mr. Biden as weak on foreign policy, going so far as to blame him for Russia's invasion of Ukraine. And Mr. Cruz, like Republican congressional leaders, has shied away from some of Mr. Trump's broader attacks on corporate America -- especially the pharmaceutical industry -- which often echoed Democratic talking points.
  Mr. Vance, by contrast, stumped over the weekend with two of the most polarizing figures of the far right: Representatives Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia and Matt Gaetz of Florida. Ms. Greene railed against the ''forever wars'' started under George W. Bush and talked up what she called ''the civil war in the G.O.P.,'' while Mr. Gaetz blasted the leaders of his own party and said he and Ms. Greene needed backup in Washington -- backup that Mr. Vance would provide.
  Mr. Gibbons, for his part, campaigned with Senator Rand Paul, the Kentuckian who espouses small government, low taxes and the avoidance of foreign entanglements at all cost. And Mr. Gibbons embraced a fringe movement to hold a constitutional convention aimed at curbing federal power, and mocked the Department of Homeland Security's new effort to counter disinformation as an Orwellian Ministry of Truth.
  One area in which there is broad agreement among the party's Senate candidates is on the conservative values many Ohio Republicans say they hold dear, from old standbys like support for gun rights and opposition to abortion, to current causes like preventing transgender women from playing women's sports and giving parents greater control over how race and gender are taught in schools.
  On those issues, consensus among the candidates was so fully realized that voters at events in Cleveland seemed widely split over whom to support, and many were still undecided.
  In Port Clinton, where Ms. Timken, Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Dolan all worked the crowd at a Knights of Columbus chicken barbecue lunch, Lisa Slobodzian said she was still sifting through her direct mail and studying the candidates' positions.
  ''I want power back to the people,'' said Ms. Slobodzian, 57, a retired national parks ranger and law enforcement specialist, digging into her plate. ''They should decide what their kids are taught in schools, and not some government agency.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/02/us/ohio-senate-republican-primary.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Voters casting early ballots for the primary election last month in Columbus, Ohio. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Gaelen Morse/Getty Images FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (94%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (79%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (79%); PRICES (78%); VENTURE CAPITAL (78%); SEX & GENDER ISSUES (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (75%); IMMIGRATION (74%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (72%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); ENERGY PRICES (51%); FOOD PRICES (51%)

Industry: MANUFACTURING (78%); VENTURE CAPITAL (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%); ENERGY PRICES (51%); FOOD PRICES (51%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%); J D VANCE (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%)

Geographic: CLEVELAND, OH, USA (78%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (53%); OHIO, USA (95%); EAST CHINA (68%); CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (92%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: May 3, 2022


End of Document
Senator Seeks Inquiry Into Visa Program Used at Disney
The New York Times
June 5, 2015 Friday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 395 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


Senator Bill Nelson of Florida, a Democrat, called on Thursday for the Department of Homeland Security to investigate a temporary visa program for highly skilled immigrants after a report in The New York Times that technology employees at Walt Disney World in Orlando and other companies lost their jobs to immigrants and had to train their replacements.
In a letter to Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson, Mr. Nelson asked him to examine ''potential misuses'' of a visa program known as H-1B. 
  The Times reported Wednesday that about 250 Disney workers were laid off last year and many were replaced by immigrants hired by an outsourcing company based in India.
  Before leaving, some of the laid-off workers had to train immigrants on H-1B visas to do their jobs.
  ''This program was created to help fill jobs when there were labor shortages, not to take jobs away from anyone,'' Mr. Nelson wrote.
  A Disney spokesman said the company had no comment on the senator's request.
  The H-1B program provides a limited number of temporary visas -- a total of 85,000 a year -- for foreigners with computer, engineering or other advanced skills to fill jobs in American companies when American workers are not available.
  The article drew an unusually strong response from readers, who posted more than 2,000 comments online. Former Disney workers said on Thursday that they were struggling to find new jobs in Orlando, where Disney is by far the biggest employer.
  Several workers said they had been told by local companies contracting to Disney that they could not hire recently laid-off Disney employees until one year after their termination. The workers asked to speak anonymously, saying they could jeopardize their chances to find new jobs if they criticized Disney publicly.
  When advised of the former workers' experience with local contractors, a Disney spokesman said, ''There is no policy related to not hiring former employees for a year.'' He said some employees laid off in January had taken jobs with contractors.
  Last year, Southern California Edison, a power utility, started layoffs of 540 workers, replacing them with immigrants brought in by a different Indian-based outsourcing company. Senators including Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Richard Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, have asked the Labor Department to investigate those layoffs.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/05/us/politics/senator-bill-nelson-seeks-inquiry-into-disney-world-immigrant-hiring.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); LAYOFFS (93%); IMMIGRATION (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (79%); BUSINESS INVESTIGATIONS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); DISMISSALS (77%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (77%); ENGINEERING (72%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (72%); LABOR SHORTAGES (72%)

Company:  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (58%);  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (52%)

Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (91%)

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (58%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (58%); NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (52%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (52%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (94%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); ENGINEERING (72%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (68%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (61%)

Person: BILL NELSON (79%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); JEH JOHNSON (58%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (93%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: June 5, 2015


End of Document
Don’t Mess With Texas; DealBook Newsletter
The New York Times 
June 7, 2022 Tuesday 10:47 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; dealbook
Length: 1945 words
Byline: Andrew Ross Sorkin, Vivian Giang, Stephen Gandel, Lauren Hirsch, Ephrat Livni and Jenny Gross
Highlight: The Lone Star State enters the Musk-Twitter fray, highlighting Texas’ willingness, and Republicans in general, to break with traditional free market thinking.
Body


The Lone Star State enters the Musk-Twitter fray, highlighting Texas’ willingness, and Republicans in general, to break with traditional free market thinking.
Target announced this morning that it had misjudged consumer demand and over-ordered goods, which will hurt profits. U.S. stock markets headed lower on the news, which has renewed fears that the economy will slow as consumers shut their wallets despite the strong job market. More here. 
Texas enters the Twitter deal 
Texas’ Republican attorney general, Ken Paxton, is investigating whether Twitter has misled users by underreporting the number of bots on its platform. He announced the investigation yesterday, on the same day Elon Musk said in a regulatory filing that he had the right to pull out his $44 billion acquisition of Twitter due to concerns about the same issue. Musk, who moved Tesla’s headquarter to Texas last year, has increasingly been aligning himself with the Republican Party.
Spam accounts have become a contentious issue in Musk’s acquisition of Twitter. Around the same time that shares of Twitter and Tesla plummeted, Musk began publicly questioning Twitter’s disclosures that 5 percent of users are bots, indicating he may be fashioning a way to get out of or renegotiate the Twitter deal. Yesterday, Paxton similarly questioned that figure, arguing that Twitter might be in violation of Texas’ Deceptive Trade Practices Act.
Musk and Paxton are kicking it up a notch. Musk said in a letter, drafted by his lawyers at Skadden Arps, that if Twitter did not provide him with more information about how it accounted for its number of bots, it was in breach of its obligation to share information vital to the deal. Twitter, for its part, has concerns about sharing such confidential information with a man who has said he was considering launching a rival social media service, among other things.
It’s not clear that Musk’s demands are anything more than a fishing expedition, nor that the information is actually vital to closing the deal. The same goes for Paxton’s requests: “Consumer laws exist to protect consumers from real harm,” James Tierney, a lecturer at Harvard Law School and a former Maine state attorney general, told DealBook. “They do not exist to allow a government official to meddle in ongoing corporate transactions on behalf of a constituent.”
It’s the latest headache for Twitter in Texas. In September, Texas passed a law banning Twitter from removing users from its platform based on their viewpoints. Removing an account that appeared to be a bot spreading political misinformation, but was actually run by a real individual, would open Twitter up to litigation under that same law. Last week, the Supreme Court blocked the law from taking effect.
And it represents a new course for the Republican Party, which has traditionally espoused the value of free markets and deregulation. As with other hot-button issues, like vaccine mandates, gun controland energy, the party is increasingly embracing laws that target companies as part of the free marketplace, if those laws target policies embraced by liberals. “Cynical opportunistic state officials in Texas and Florida have abused their public duties,” Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a top management professor at Yale University, told DealBook. He warns that politicians who “weaponize private commerce” endanger foundations that “businesses require to thrive.”
HERE’S WHAT’S HAPPENING 
Wells Fargo is pausing a hiring policy that led to fake job interviews. The bank instituted the policy to increase diversity, but it instead led some managers to conduct sham interviews of nonwhite and female candidates for positions that had already been filled, The Times reported last month.  C.E.O. Charles W. Scharf said the bank will study what needed to change about its “diverse slate” requirement before restarting the process.
Peloton has another high-level departure. The at-home fitness company said its chief financial officer, Jill Woodworth, is leaving the company and will be replaced by Liz Coddington, who comes from Amazon Web Services. Peloton’s new C.E.O., Barry McCarthy, has cut the cost of its high-end connected exercise bikes and treadmills and increased monthly subscription fees, but that has yet to stabilize the company, which overexpanded during the pandemic.
Kohl’s is in advanced talks to be sold. The department store chain could be sold for about $8 billion to the retail holding company Franchise Group Inc., which owns the Vitamin Shoppe and other brands, The Wall Street Journal reported. Franchise Group reportedly offered about $60 a share for Kohl’s.
The S.E.C. is expected to outline ideas for improving markets. Chairman Gary Gensler plans to detail potential changes in a speech tomorrow that the S.E.C. believes will make markets more efficient for small investors and public companies, according to The Wall Street Journal. Meanwhile, pension funds have been pushing the agency to proceed with a proposed rule that would require private-equity funds to provide more disclosures to investors.
C.E.O.-worker wage gap widens during pandemic
Although a hot job market pushed up pay for low-wage workers, the average pay gap between those workers and their C.E.O.s widened even more last year.
The median pay for workers at companies that tend to pay low wages last year was up by 17 percent, to $24,000, a jump that more than doubled the rate of inflation, according to a study out this morning from the Institute for Policy Studies, a left-leaning think tank.
Still, those rising wages did not outpace C.E.O. pay gains, which rose by 31 percent at those same companies, to an average of $10.6 million. “We do have to acknowledge there was some good news last year,” Sarah Anderson, the lead author of the “Executive Excess” study, told DealBook. “But this could have been a time when companies used rising profits to level the pay playing field. Instead, we haven’t seen a very big shift in pay equity.”
C.E.O.s did even better at companies where salaries did not keep pace with inflation. Median workers’ wages at about a third of the firms in the I.P.S. study did not keep pace with inflation. At those companies, the average C.E.O. pay was up by 65 percent, or more than double the increase at all of the firms in the study. Among the companies highlighted in the report were Best Buy, where median pay fell 2 percent last year to $29,999, while the C.E.O., Corie Barry, received a 30 percent pay increase to $15.6 million.
S.E.C. urged to require more transparency on labor spending 
A group of former regulators will ask the S.E.C. to issue new rules, illuminating the cost and payoffs of work force investments. The petition, which DealBook is first to report, contends that investors need more information about what companies pay workers and urges the S.E.C. to propose several new rules, including requiring companies to disclose how much they are investing in their workforces.
The group includes Joseph Grundfest of Stanford and Robert Jackson of N.Y.U., two former S.E.C. commissioners who have often had opposing views. “We differ in our views about the regulation of firms’ relationships with their employees generally,” they wrote. “But we all share the view that investors need additional information.”
The current accounting and tax rules make investing in machines more attractive than spending on humans, the group says. A million dollars’ worth of robots are an asset on balance sheets, whereas the same amount spent on job skills is an cost that needs to be expensed immediately, according to one of the petitioners, Colleen Honigsberg of Stanford Law School. Currently, only about 15 percent of public companies disclose labor costs.
The proposed rules would require companies to disclose labor costs, rather than aggregating them with other expenses. They would also require companies to provide detailed work force compensation data, including information on the breakdown of contract, part-time and full-time employees. 
“No one can credibly argue that this type of disclosure wouldn’t be valuable or material to investors in a highly competitive 21st century, global economy,” Senator Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia, who supports the petition, said in a statement to DealBook.
“Equal voting rights is not enough if you have very unequal funding of political campaigns.” 
— Thomas Picketty, the economist and chronicler of inequality, makes his case for universal inheritance, worker ownership and “participatory socialism” on “The Ezra Klein Show.” His new book is titled, “A Brief History of Equality.”
The talent pool that the U.S. needs to maintain its ‘world leader status’
A group of business leaders is pushing Congress to change an immigration policy that they say is harming the U.S. economy. In a letter sent today to Alejandro Mayorkas, secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, the group, which is made up of about 15 associations and companies including Google, Amazon, IBM, Salesforce and the Chamber of Commerce, said the policy leaves highly skilled immigrants and American companies in a lose-lose situation.
About 200,000 children of highly skilled foreign-born workers, often H-1B visa holders, are affected by the policy. Those young people, known as documented Dreamers, are unlike Dreamers who grow up in the U.S. without legal status. Dreamers have some legal relief from policymakers, but young people raised in the U.S. under a parent’s visa must leave by age 21 if their family’s application for permanent residence is pending.
Fixing the age-out policy is needed if the U.S. wants to “maintain its world leader status,” the letter says. American companies need to fill millions of job openings, but there just aren’t enough workers in the U.S., the letter says, and the job vacancies that need to be filled are “especially critical” to the country’s progress in “innovation and ingenuity.” Karam Bhatia, the global head of policy at Google, told DealBook that documented Dreamers represent a critical new talent pool, like their parents.
The policy also creates obstacles to recruiting. Because of current backlogs, those seeking green cards could end up waiting years, or even decades. Potential recruits, including skilled workers most in demand, don’t want jobs that could lead to their families being separated later on, he said. “Policy needs to be competitive in the immigration space to attract the kind of talent that is going to allow the U.S. to remain at the cutting edge of technological innovation around the world,” he said.
THE SPEED READ 
Deals
    • African payments company MFS Africa acquires a U.S. fintech company, Global Technology Partners. (FT)
    • With the value of tech companies plunging, Tiger Global is down 52 percent this year. (WSJ)
Policy
    • China is offering free Covid vaccine insurance packages to encourage skeptics to get vaccinated. (FT)
    • “In Britain, a New Test of an Old Dream: The 4-Day Workweek” (NYT)
    • Ukrainians look to ‘decolonize’ their streets, removing names that evoke the history of the Russian Empire or the Soviet Union. (NYT)
Best of the rest
    • Tweeting complaints at airlinesmay be less effective than it was last summer. (WSJ)
    • A new book discovery app, Tertulia, is distilling online chatter about books to point readers to those that are driving discussions. (NYT)
    • “Don’t Believe Everything You Read About the Man in This Photo” (NYT)
    • After two years of remote work, being “fashionably late” is falling out of fashion. (NYT)
We’d like your feedback! Please email thoughts and suggestions to dealbook@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Twitter’s latest headache is in Texas. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Eric Gay/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: CONSUMERS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); OUTPUT & DEMAND (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); DEREGULATION (89%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (89%); BUSINESS TORTS (79%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (79%); CONSUMER PROTECTION (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); PUBLIC OFFICIALS (78%); SOCIETAL ISSUES (78%); STOCK EXCHANGES (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); CONSUMER LAW (77%); UNFAIR COMPETITION (77%); DISINFORMATION & MISINFORMATION (75%); LAWYERS (75%); LITIGATION (75%); REGULATORY ACTIONS (75%); ENERGY & UTILITY DEREGULATION (74%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (73%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (73%); LABOR MARKET (73%); SOCIAL MEDIA (73%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (71%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%); LEGISLATION (70%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (70%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); ACQUISITIONS (69%); GUN CONTROL (69%); TRADE PRACTICES & UNFAIR COMPETITION LAW (69%); MANDATORY VACCINATIONS (63%); WEAPONS & ARMS (50%); Texas (%); Twitter (%); Musk, Elon (%); Paxton, Ken (%); Institute for Policy Studies (%); Securities and Exchange Commission (%)

Company:  SKADDEN ARPS SLATE MEAGHER & FLOM LLP (84%)

Organization: INSTITUTE FOR POLICY STUDIES (59%); SECURITIES & EXCHANGE COMMISSION (59%)

Industry: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (84%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (84%); CONSUMER PRODUCTS (90%); SPAMMING (78%); STOCK EXCHANGES (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); LAWYERS (75%); ENERGY & UTILITY DEREGULATION (74%); HEALTH CARE REGULATION & POLICY (73%); SOCIAL MEDIA (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (70%); MANDATORY VACCINATIONS (63%)

Person: ELON MUSK (93%); Musk, Elon; Paxton, Ken

Geographic: MAINE, USA (79%)

Load-Date: June 7, 2022


End of Document
Disney Layoffs and Immigrant Replacements Draw Deluge of Comments
The New York Times Blogs 
(Times Insider)
June 5, 2015 Friday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 783 words
Byline: LELA MOORE
Highlight: A Times article about Disney employees who claim they were fired and then asked to train their foreign replacements struck a chord with readers and received more than 2,700 comments. 
Body


An article in The Times, about American employees of Disney who said they lost their jobs to immigrants from an Indian outsourcing firm and had to train their replacements attracted a torrent of online reaction. The singer and actress            Bette Midler reposted the article on Twitter and            exhorted her followers, "But be sure to read the comments. Whew."
Readers posted nearly 2,800 comments in response to the article, many expressing deep suspicion of the H-1B visa program, which aims to place immigrants in high-skill jobs that cannot be filled by Americans.
The story began with a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on March 17 examining whether employers were displacing American tech workers by hiring immigrants at lower wages on H-1B visas. After the hearing, former employees from several companies, including Disney, were prompted to contact Julia Preston, who has covered immigration for The Times since 2006.
"The hearing created a focal point for the debate about these visas," Ms. Preston said of the workers who reached out to her and who asked to remain anonymous because they feared jeopardizing their chances to find new jobs if they spoke publicly. "I think this has touched a nerve. Not only among tech workers, who have come forward and said this is what's happening to our industry, but also because of the larger issues in the country in terms of people feeling uncertain about their middle-class security."
Ms. Preston focused on Disney because it was one of the most recent cases in which tech workers had been laid off and forced to train replacements. "Disney is the ultimate American company," she said. "This is a company that inhabits our childhoods."
Readers echoed this sentiment.
Calling Disney "the most American of companies," Cindy from Baltimore said: "Disney? The fairytale is over."
Kathy from Virginia, who referred to Disney as an "iconic American" company, said, "Americans ... are truly suffering - both economically and psychologically, as well as losing technical skills."
"We speak a lot in this country about teamwork, esprit de corps, patriotism, group identity, all in the context of American exceptionalism. But what we're really good at is ignoring those lofty ideals and chasing the dollar," said George Peng of New York.
Many readers questioned the reliance on foreign workers at the expense of Americans. Cyndy of Los Angeles, who identified as a former Disney employee who was laid off in 2013, said "What is disheartening is that the stock and earnings are at a record high. Disney is an example of profits over people."
Cynico213 of Texas said the problem lay within the tech industry: "The sole objective is to get minions to design and make widgets for less money. THIS is the true immigration crisis."
J.D. of New York said, "Instead of having immigrants that are entrepreneurial and eager to earn citizenship, this system seems to bring in indentured workers."
Corporate America came under fire from many readers. "Layoffs, outsourcing, offshoring and automation are passed off as ways for companies to be nimbler and advanced. ... But let's call it what it is: being too cheap to invest in workers, value their skills or pay them a living wage," said AD of New York.
A few readers disagreed, and sought to explain the corporate motivations behind the layoffs. "Companies have to take care of the health of the organization first, or no one will have a job," said CCC of Indianapolis.
Many readers called for a boycott of Disney. "Don't buy tickets to their movies or theme parks, and don't watch their ABC/ESPN content on TV. Who's with me?" said Jeff from Washington, D.C.
Joe Smith from Chicago said, in a comment recommended by more than 2,400 readers, "As soon as I log off here I am selling my stock."            Andrew from Pennsylvania questioned his strategy: "Although I understand your desire to divest, you might have more impact holding onto your stock, attending shareholder meetings and voicing your opinions." 
Other readers urged concern for those affected by layoffs. Orlando, where the laid-off Disney workers were based, is essentially what Ms. Preston called a Disney "company town," with few other opportunities for tech workers who have made the city home. "They have families and mortgages and kids in school, and so the harm in this situation is really to them," Ms. Preston said.
Sun from Ohio said: "My heart goes out for the laid-off Disney employees. My career in the US at one point was dependent on whether I would be able to secure an H-1B visa, which run out in a matter of days because of bulk misuse by foreign tech companies. The immigration system is a mess and increasing the H-1B visas is definitely NOT a solution to this mess." 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: LAYOFFS (93%); IMMIGRATION (92%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (90%); DISMISSALS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%); MIGRATION ISSUES (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); Midler, Bette (%); Preston, Julia (%); Senate Committee on the Judiciary (%); Twitter (%); Visas (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Walt Disney Company (%); Twitter|TWTR|NYSE (%); Walt Disney Company|DIS|NYSE (%)

Organization: Senate Committee on the Judiciary; Twitter; Walt Disney Company

Ticker: Twitter; TWTR; NYSE; Twitter; TWTR; NYSE; Walt Disney Company; DIS; NYSE

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (78%)

Person: BETTE MIDLER (79%); Midler, Bette; Preston, Julia

Geographic: UNITED STATES (97%)

Load-Date: June 5, 2015


End of Document
Tech Layoffs in U.S. Send Foreign Workers Scrambling to Find New Jobs
The New York Times 
December 9, 2022 Friday 16:54 EST


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US
Length: 1510 words
Byline: Miriam Jordan
Highlight: Workers on visas, many of them waiting years for green cards, now face having to leave the country unless they get hired within 60 days.
Body


Workers on visas, many of them waiting years for green cards, now face having to leave the country unless they get hired within 60 days.
Since Microsoft brought him to the United States 14 years ago, Abhishikt Jain has excelled professionally, raised a family and settled into a four-bedroom house with a garage “full of unnecessary stuff,” he said.
“You could say I achieved the American dream,” said the software engineer, now 43, who is from India and lives in Bellevue, Wash.
But in October, Mr. Jain fell victim to layoffs battering the tech industry, and suddenly his family’s future was thrust into uncertainty. On the cusp of securing permanent U.S. residency after a 12-year wait, Mr. Jain instead faced the prospect of packing up and leaving the United States unless he quickly found another job or finally received his green card.
After years of galloping growth, the U.S. tech sector has slammed on the brakes amid rising inflation and worries about a recession. A hiring bonanza has given way to drastic head count reductions to slash costs.
Getting sacked during the holiday season is a blow to any worker. But for foreigners on temporary work visas, the challenges go far beyond managing without paychecks. They must find jobs within 60 days at another company willing to sponsor them for a visa, or they must leave the country. And many stand to lose their shot at U.S. permanent residency after spending years in a green-card backlog.
So far this year, more than 146,000 tech workers have been laid off, according to Layoffs.fyi, which tracks them, including 51,000 in November alone. A substantial share of those terminated were foreigners, even though employers have not disclosed how many workers on temporary visas have been let go.
The cutbacks have sent anxious foreign workers scrambling to find new jobs, and as the clock ticks, looking for possible workarounds, such as transferring to temporary visitor status to buy a little more time to job hunt.
“The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before. There is chaos and confusion,” said Tahmina Watson, an immigration lawyer in Seattle who has been barraged with queries from laid-off foreign workers.
“Not only are tech companies laying people off in unprecedented numbers, but they are also implementing hiring freezes,” she said, “and thus, there are likely few alternative jobs for immigrant workers.”
Mr. Jain, who lost his job at Microsoft in October, is among tens of thousands of Indian engineers who for years have been creating software at information technology companies like Cisco, social-media platforms like Meta and online retailers like Amazon. Because of their crucial role, and a dearth of American STEM graduates, many foreign workers are being sponsored by their employers for U.S. permanent residency.
While parked in the backlog waiting for approval, the immigrants have built lives in the United States: They have had American children, taken out mortgages and become rooted in their communities.
Most are on high-skilled worker visas known as H-1Bs. More than 500,000 people are in the United States under the visas, the largest number hailing from India, followed by China, with the majority in science and technology fields.
Demand for such talent has soared as the U.S. economy has become increasingly reliant on technology. Between 2000 and 2019, the number of tech workers in the United States jumped by 44 percent, to 10.8 million from 7.5 million. For their programming, coding and other skills, many receive six-figure salaries.
As of 2019, foreign-born workers made up almost a quarter of all STEM workers in the country, up from about 16 percent in the year 2000, according to an analysis of census data by the American Immigration Council.
The visa holders are concentrated in California, home to Twitter, Meta and Apple, and in Washington State, home to Amazon, Microsoft, Zillow and Expedia. But they are also in states like Arkansas, toiling at the headquarters of Tyson, the poultry processor, to improve production efficiencies, and at Walmart, to design systems for self-checkouts.
This year, U.S. employers filed more than 480,000 petitions for the 85,000 H-1B visas available, and as in previous years, the government turned to a lottery to allocate them because of the large volume of applications.
But recent layoffs in the tech industry have abruptly upended the lives of workers already here.
After completing his acquisition of Twitter, Elon Musk slashed half the staff, or 3,700 employees, leaving many foreign workers on visas in urgent need of new employment.
“I am on an H-1B visa and have only 60 days to start a new job,” Yiwei Zhuang, a Chinese software engineer, wrote on LinkedIn.
After losing her job at Twitter, Sujatha Krishnaswamy, an Indian national, took to the platform to voice her angst at her precarious situation.
This year, while pregnant, “I worked day and night to successfully deliver a critical user-facing privacy feature to meet Twitter’s regulatory obligations,” she wrote. “I gave my heart and soul every day to meet Twitter’s Security and Privacy promises to users and regulators.”
Her H-1B status, she noted, was “exacerbating my situation.”
(Reached by phone recently, Ms. Krishnaswamy declined to answer any questions, saying she was focused on her job search.)
If H-1B workers and their families return to their country of origin after being laid off, their employer is obligated to pay for their airfare home.
To stay in the United States, they must find a company willing to shoulder the costs of renewing their H-1B visa, and to pay fees associated with their green-card applications, if they are in process, which are employment-based.
“A new employer has to agree to spend up to $20,000 extra for an H-1B worker,” said Jonathan Grode, a lawyer in Philadelphia who specializes in employment-based immigration.
“It makes you less attractive for an employer” than workers who are U.S. citizens or green-card holders, who also may have been laid off and are looking for work, he said. “That’s the conundrum.”
An informal database set up by two Indian tech workers on LinkedIn to help fellow H-1B visa holders find jobs has attracted more than 500 people, who have shared their information with hopes of being connected to prospective employers.
“We expected 40 to 50 people. But as soon as we created the database, it exploded,” said Shruti Anand, who launched the effort last month with a friend, Vidhi Agrawal.
The women quickly realized that the reach of the layoffs extended beyond the software industry. “It’s all over, anywhere that tech touches,” said Ms. Anand, “people in health care, food industry are losing their jobs.”
After introducing hiring freezes, many companies have moved to shrink their staffs as they brace for the impact of supply-chain issues, as well as rising interest rates and costs on their bottom lines.
Layoffs have occurred steadily at tech titans and midsize firms but also at smaller companies and start-ups.
Many companies that boomed during the coronavirus pandemic, such as Amazon, DoorDash and Netflix, have seen lower demand as consumer behavior returns to pre-pandemic patterns.
After The Times reported that Amazon planned to lay off 10,000 workers, its chief executive, Andy Jassy, confirmed in a message to employees last month that the job cuts were happening, but he did not specify how many. Computerworld reported last week that 20,000 workers could get pink slips in coming months.
Last month, Mark Zuckerberg announced that Meta, the parent of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, was laying off more than 11,000 employees to reduce its work force by 13 percent, and the company extended a hiring freeze through the first quarter of next year.
Some employers have offered generous severance packages. DoorDash, for example, which announced on Nov. 30 that it was laying off about 1,250 workers, has set the termination date of workers for March 1, to give people on visas more time to find a new job if they choose to remain in the United States.
Back in Washington State, Microsoft gave Mr. Jain severance that provides him a cushion, and he took pains to emphasize that the company had been a good employer for 17 years, three of them while he worked in India.
Yet even with his deep experience, finding a new job has been challenging, he said, because the wave of layoffs coupled with hiring freezes has created stiff competition.
This week he won a major reprieve: After more than a decade of waiting, his green card suddenly arrived in the mail. His ability to live in the United States no longer depended on his employment. 
“Now the stress is much less,” said Mr. Jain, who is married and has two sons. “I just have to find a job.”
PHOTOS: Abhishikt Jain, originally from India, worked at Microsoft for 14 years until he was laid off this fall.; “The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before,” said Tahmina Watson, a Seattle immigration lawyer. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOVELLE TAMAYO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) This article appeared in print on page A15.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: LAYOFFS (93%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (90%); TECHNOLOGY (90%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); DISMISSALS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (79%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (79%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (77%); ENGINEERING (76%); RECESSION (75%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (73%); INTERNET RETAILING (73%); SOCIAL MEDIA (73%); STEM EDUCATION (71%); INFLATION (67%); LAWYERS (50%); Computers and the Internet (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); Foreign Workers (%); Visas (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); United States (%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (58%)

Industry: NAICS513210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (79%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (79%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (79%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (79%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (79%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (78%); ENGINEERING (76%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (76%); INTERNET RETAILING (73%); SOCIAL MEDIA (73%); LAWYERS (50%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: December 10, 2022


End of Document
Workers Betrayed by Visa Loopholes
The New York Times
June 15, 2015 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18; EDITORIAL
Length: 612 words
Byline: By THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Body


It hardly needs saying that immigration policy should not undermine Americans' jobs, wages or working conditions. The problem is that what some companies want -- cheap, exploitable, disposable labor -- is exactly what the system can be twisted into giving them.
Former workers at Walt Disney World in Orlando or at Southern California Edison, the power utility, can tell the story. Those two companies recently laid off hundreds of tech employees, who were replaced by temporary workers recruited by outsourcing firms based in India. 
  These are only two of many troubling episodes involving the H-1B program, which provides up to 85,000 visas a year to foreigners, mainly highly skilled technical workers. The program was created to allow companies to fill gaps in their work force with specialized employees they cannot find in the United States. But the law has loopholes, and companies here and overseas ruthlessly exploit them. A huge industry has risen to meet labor demand in the information-technology sector, with the imported workers being employees of the outsourcing firms.
  On Thursday the Labor Department announced it was investigating two of the largest companies that supply H-1B workers, Infosys and Tata Consultancy Services, based in India. Senators including Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, and Dick Durbin, an Illinois Democrat, asked for the inquiry after reports that Southern California Edison turned to Infosys and Tata for H-1B workers even as it was laying off 540 workers, many of whom said they had to train their replacements. The Times recently reported a similar story at Disney, which contracted with HCL America, a branch of an Indian outsourcer, and laid off 250 workers. Some workers said they were asked to stay on to train the newcomers who took over their jobs.
  A mass influx of foreigners doing the jobs of the workers they displace is clearly not what the law intended. Congress surely did not want to give companies a more efficient means of slashing payroll costs while pushing more people to the curb. But despite common perceptions about the H-1B law, it does not require companies to recruit American workers before looking overseas.
  The program badly needs reforming, which even members of Congress who are otherwise far apart on immigration issues agree on. Senators Durbin and Charles Grassley of Iowa have proposed tightening the rules to require companies to work harder to find people in this country to fill jobs, to post job openings on the Labor Department website and to pay fairer wages. They would also give the government more authority to investigate fraud, and added protections for H-1B workers, who themselves are vulnerable to exploitation because of their dependency on their employers.
  Many of these good ideas were contained in a Senate bill to overhaul the immigration system. That bill died, killed by hard-liners in the House who objected to its provisions for unauthorized immigrants.
  That was a tragedy, because worker protection has always been a core ideal of comprehensive immigration reform, which would include allowing 11 million unauthorized immigrants to seek legal status and work without fear. With no immediate possibility of such an immigration overhaul, opportunistic tech companies are pursuing their own narrow agenda, pushing for vast increases in H-1B visas. That might help their recruiting problems, but leave much of the system as dysfunctional as ever. Better to fix immigration with the right goals in mind: a fair deal for all workers and their families.
  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/15/opinion/workers-betrayed-by-visa-loopholes.html

Graphic

 
DRAWING (DRAWING BY JING WEI)       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Editorial

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (90%); LAYOFFS (90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); EMPLOYMENT LISTINGS & SITES (78%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (78%); LABOR FORCE (78%); LABOR MARKET (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WORKFORCE DEMAND (78%); IMPORT TRADE (77%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (73%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); LEGISLATION (73%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (73%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (73%); DEATH & DYING (68%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (66%)

Company:  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (58%);  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (58%);  INFOSYS LTD (57%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (55%)

Ticker: INFY (PAR) (57%); INFY (NYSE) (57%); INFY (NSE) (57%); TCS (NSE) (55%)

Industry: NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (58%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (58%); NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (58%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (58%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (57%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (57%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (55%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (55%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (55%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (55%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (73%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (73%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (71%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (71%); CONSULTING SERVICES (66%)

Person: CHUCK GRASSLEY (58%); JEFF SESSIONS (58%); RICHARD DURBIN (58%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (92%)

Load-Date: June 15, 2015


End of Document
Suddenly Hunting for Work, and a Chance to Stay in the U.S.
The New York Times
December 10, 2022 Saturday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15
Length: 1473 words
Byline: By Miriam Jordan
Body


Workers on visas, many of them waiting years for green cards, now face having to leave the country unless they get hired within 60 days.
Since Microsoft brought him to the United States 14 years ago, Abhishikt Jain has excelled professionally, raised a family and settled into a four-bedroom house with a garage ''full of unnecessary stuff,'' he said. 
  ''You could say I achieved the American dream,'' said the software engineer, now 43, who is from India and lives in Bellevue, Wash.
  But in October, Mr. Jain fell victim to layoffs battering the tech industry, and suddenly his family's future was thrust into uncertainty. On the cusp of securing permanent U.S. residency after a 12-year wait, Mr. Jain instead faced the prospect of packing up and leaving the United States unless he quickly found another job or finally received his green card.
  After years of galloping growth, the U.S. tech sector has slammed on the brakes amid rising inflation and worries about a recession. A hiring bonanza has given way to drastic head count reductions to slash costs.
  Getting sacked during the holiday season is a blow to any worker. But for foreigners on temporary work visas, the challenges go far beyond managing without paychecks. They must find jobs within 60 days at another company willing to sponsor them for a visa, or they must leave the country. And many stand to lose their shot at U.S. permanent residency after spending years in a green-card backlog.
  So far this year, more than 146,000 tech workers have been laid off, according to Layoffs.fyi, which tracks them, including 51,000 in November alone. A substantial share of those terminated were foreigners, even though employers have not disclosed how many workers on temporary visas have been let go.
  The cutbacks have sent anxious foreign workers scrambling to find new jobs, and as the clock ticks, looking for possible workarounds, such as transferring to temporary visitor status to buy a little more time to job hunt.
  ''The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before. There is chaos and confusion,'' said Tahmina Watson, an immigration lawyer in Seattle who has been barraged with queries from laid-off foreign workers.
  ''Not only are tech companies laying people off in unprecedented numbers, but they are also implementing hiring freezes,'' she said, ''and thus, there are likely few alternative jobs for immigrant workers.''
  Mr. Jain, who lost his job at Microsoft in October, is among tens of thousands of Indian engineers who for years have been creating software at information technology companies like Cisco, social-media platforms like Meta and online retailers like Amazon. Because of their crucial role, and a dearth of American STEM graduates, many foreign workers are being sponsored by their employers for U.S. permanent residency.
  While parked in the backlog waiting for approval, the immigrants have built lives in the United States: They have had American children, taken out mortgages and become rooted in their communities.
  Most are on high-skilled worker visas known as H-1Bs. More than 500,000 people are in the United States under the visas, the largest number hailing from India, followed by China, with the majority in science and technology fields.
  Demand for such talent has soared as the U.S. economy has become increasingly reliant on technology. Between 2000 and 2019, the number of tech workers in the United States jumped by 44 percent, to 10.8 million from 7.5 million. For their programming, coding and other skills, many receive six-figure salaries.
  As of 2019, foreign-born workers made up almost a quarter of all STEM workers in the country, up from about 16 percent in the year 2000, according to an analysis of census data by the American Immigration Council.
  The visa holders are concentrated in California, home to Twitter, Meta and Apple, and in Washington State, home to Amazon, Microsoft, Zillow and Expedia. But they are also in states like Arkansas, toiling at the headquarters of Tyson, the poultry processor, to improve production efficiencies, and at Walmart, to design systems for self-checkouts.
  This year, U.S. employers filed more than 480,000 petitions for the 85,000 H-1B visas available, and as in previous years, the government turned to a lottery to allocate them because of the large volume of applications.
  But recent layoffs in the tech industry have abruptly upended the lives of workers already here.
  After completing his acquisition of Twitter, Elon Musk slashed half the staff, or 3,700 employees, leaving many foreign workers on visas in urgent need of new employment.
  ''I am on an H-1B visa and have only 60 days to start a new job,'' Yiwei Zhuang, a Chinese software engineer, wrote on LinkedIn.
  After losing her job at Twitter, Sujatha Krishnaswamy, an Indian national, took to the platform to voice her angst at her precarious situation.
  This year, while pregnant, ''I worked day and night to successfully deliver a critical user-facing privacy feature to meet Twitter's regulatory obligations,'' she wrote. ''I gave my heart and soul every day to meet Twitter's Security and Privacy promises to users and regulators.''
  Her H-1B status, she noted, was ''exacerbating my situation.''
  (Reached by phone recently, Ms. Krishnaswamy declined to answer any questions, saying she was focused on her job search.)
  If H-1B workers and their families return to their country of origin after being laid off, their employer is obligated to pay for their airfare home.
  To stay in the United States, they must find a company willing to shoulder the costs of renewing their H-1B visa, and to pay fees associated with their green-card applications, if they are in process, which are employment-based.
  ''A new employer has to agree to spend up to $20,000 extra for an H-1B worker,'' said Jonathan Grode, a lawyer in Philadelphia who specializes in employment-based immigration.
  ''It makes you less attractive for an employer'' than workers who are U.S. citizens or green-card holders, who also may have been laid off and are looking for work, he said. ''That's the conundrum.''
  An informal database set up by two Indian tech workers on LinkedIn to help fellow H-1B visa holders find jobs has attracted more than 500 people, who have shared their information with hopes of being connected to prospective employers.
  ''We expected 40 to 50 people. But as soon as we created the database, it exploded,'' said Shruti Anand, who launched the effort last month with a friend, Vidhi Agrawal.
  The women quickly realized that the reach of the layoffs extended beyond the software industry. ''It's all over, anywhere that tech touches,'' said Ms. Anand, ''people in health care, food industry are losing their jobs.''
  After introducing hiring freezes, many companies have moved to shrink their staffs as they brace for the impact of supply-chain issues, as well as rising interest rates and costs on their bottom lines.
  Layoffs have occurred steadily at tech titans and midsize firms but also at smaller companies and start-ups.
  Many companies that boomed during the coronavirus pandemic, such as Amazon, DoorDash and Netflix, have seen lower demand as consumer behavior returns to pre-pandemic patterns.
  After The Times reported that Amazon planned to lay off 10,000 workers, its chief executive, Andy Jassy, confirmed in a message to employees last month that the job cuts were happening, but he did not specify how many. Computerworld reported last week that 20,000 workers could get pink slips in coming months.
  Last month, Mark Zuckerberg announced that Meta, the parent of Facebook, Instagram and WhatsApp, was laying off more than 11,000 employees to reduce its work force by 13 percent, and the company extended a hiring freeze through the first quarter of next year.
  Some employers have offered generous severance packages. DoorDash, for example, which announced on Nov. 30 that it was laying off about 1,250 workers, has set the termination date of workers for March 1, to give people on visas more time to find a new job if they choose to remain in the United States.
  Back in Washington State, Microsoft gave Mr. Jain severance that provides him a cushion, and he took pains to emphasize that the company had been a good employer for 17 years, three of them while he worked in India.
  Yet even with his deep experience, finding a new job has been challenging, he said, because the wave of layoffs coupled with hiring freezes has created stiff competition.
  This week he won a major reprieve: After more than a decade of waiting, his green card suddenly arrived in the mail. His ability to live in the United States no longer depended on his employment. 
  ''Now the stress is much less,'' said Mr. Jain, who is married and has two sons. ''I just have to find a job.''

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/12/09/us/tech-immigrant-workers-visas.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Abhishikt Jain, originally from India, worked at Microsoft for 14 years until he was laid off this fall.
 ''The magnitude of the layoffs is of the likes I have never seen before,'' said Tahmina Watson, a Seattle immigration lawyer. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOVELLE TAMAYO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) This article appeared in print on page A15.               
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); TECHNOLOGY (90%); BUSINESS IMMIGRATION (89%); DISMISSALS (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (89%); LAYOFFS (89%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (79%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (79%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); PROFESSIONAL WORKERS (77%); ENGINEERING (76%); RECESSION (75%); STEM EDUCATION (70%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (68%); INFLATION (67%); INTERNET RETAILING (60%); SOCIAL MEDIA (60%); LAWYERS (50%)

Company:  MICROSOFT CORP (58%)

Industry: NAICS513210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE (58%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (92%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (79%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPERS (79%); COMPUTER ENGINEERING (78%); COMPUTER SOFTWARE (78%); COMPUTING & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (78%); RETAIL & WHOLESALE TRADE (78%); ENGINEERING (76%); SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING (76%); SOFTWARE SERVICES & APPLICATIONS (76%); INTERNET RETAILING (60%); SOCIAL MEDIA (60%); LAWYERS (50%)

Geographic: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%)

Load-Date: December 10, 2022


End of Document
Readers Respond: On 'Workers Betrayed by Visa Loopholes'
The New York Times Blogs 
(Taking Note)
June 16, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: OPINION
Length: 702 words
Byline: MARIE TESSIER
Highlight: Workers, entrepreneurs, and others illustrated the complexity of the immigration reform debate with their responses to an editorial. 
Body


American workers, entrepreneurs, immigrants and a few readers supporting big employers illustrated the complexity of the immigration reform debate with their responses to an editorial about abuses in a high-tech visa program.
"Immigration policy should not undermine Americans' jobs, wages or working conditions," the editorial board wrote. "The problem is that what some companies want - cheap, exploitable, disposable labor - is exactly what the system can be twisted into giving them."
The editorial addressed two recent major instances, at Walt Disney World in Orlando and at Southern California Edison, in which companies laid off hundreds of technology workers and replaced them with lower-paid foreign workers via outsourcing firms in India. These workers entered the country under the H-1B visa program that was meant to allow companies to recruit abroad for jobs they were not able to fill with American workers.
"Americans have known about H-1B visa abuses for years," wrote Jeffrey in Massachusetts, who said he had lost his own job. "The administration and Congress both have been aware of the problems, but the issue has been buried under the mounds of money coming from the tech industry."
Many readers argued that the United States has plenty of highly educated workers.
"I know too many underemployed U.S. students in STEM fields and laid off older workers in computer science and engineering to believe that we don't have good workers here," Nancy Darling in Oberlin, Ohio, wrote.
Large companies like Disney and Southern California Edison should respect the market forces that place a premium on high-tech wage rates, some readers said.
"That we need to import foreign workers to fill a skills shortage is absurd because it defies the basic underpinnings of American capitalism," John Coffey in Georgia wrote. "Send the H-1B workers home and you will see a flood of highly qualified, home-grown Americans going back to work."
Several high-technology visa holders wrote to say the immigration system ill serves both the United States economy and highly skilled would-be immigrants.
"I am an Indian and spent close to 10 years spinning through the H-1B and immigration circus," V in Philadelphia wrote. "The fact is that when I left India to pursue a master's degree, I had full intentions to pursue a long career in the U.S.
"We need to a solution that separates candidates who want to immigrate and will add value to the country from candidates who are intended to be used for temporary staff."
A bipartisan effort in Congress would tighten eligibility rules, give workers more access to job openings, require better pay and give federal investigators more power to investigate abuses, the editorial board wrote.
A number of readers endorsed reforms that would bring the program back in line with its creators' intentions.
"As an educator and an entrepreneur, I may be in the minority defending H-1B, but that visa proved crucial in starting two tech companies, which hired more U.S. Citizens than H-1B visa holders, but needed both to survive," J. Carbonell in Pittsburgh wrote. "The right policy is to reform, not to reduce or eliminate."
Some readers said American technology workers should face facts about global wages.
"American programmers routinely demand compensation which exceeds five digits. Foreign specialists are more realistic, more flexible, and typically work harder," Vizitei Yuri in Columbia, Mo., wrote. "In a world of global, integrated commerce, artificial barriers to the tendency for economic disparities to equalize will simply not work."
Some said solutions need to address such a global market.
"A casual look at all the 'business process outsourcing' jobs posted around the world shows that a very large number of these jobs are being off-shored," Ben P. in Austin, Texas, wrote. "To blame the H-1B program for these job losses entirely misses the broader picture."
And in a theme that is familiar across comments on the United States economy, many readers remarked on the intersection between power and money in Washington, D.C.
"Our H-1B program is allowing Congress to disempower educated, hard-working Americans," Springtime in Boston wrote. "This is not a democracy, it's an auction."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); IMMIGRATION LAW (92%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (92%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); LAYOFFS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); COMPENSATION & BENEFITS (79%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT (79%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (79%); OUTSOURCING (79%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (79%); BIPARTISANSHIP (78%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CERTIFICATES, DEGREES & DIPLOMAS (75%); STEM EDUCATION (75%); EMPLOYMENT OPENINGS (74%); LABOR SHORTAGES (74%); OLDER WORKERS (74%); TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT (74%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (71%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (50%); Disney, Walt, World (Lake Buena Vista, Fla) (%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); Orlando (Fla) (%); Outsourcing (%); Southern California Edison (SCE) (%); Unemployment (%); United States Economy (%); Visas (%); Wages and Salaries (%); Walt Disney Company (%); Walt Disney Company|DIS|NYSE (%); Readers Respond (%)

Company:  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (57%);  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (57%)

Organization: Disney, Walt, World (Lake Buena Vista, Fla); Southern California Edison (SCE); Walt Disney Company

Ticker: Walt Disney Company; DIS; NYSE

Industry: NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (57%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (57%); NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (57%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (57%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY (78%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (50%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); FLORIDA, USA (94%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); OHIO, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (92%); Orlando (Fla)

Load-Date: June 16, 2015


End of Document
In Turnabout, Disney Cancels Tech Worker Layoffs
The New York Times
June 17, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 18
Length: 766 words
Byline: By JULIA PRESTON
Body


In late May, about 35 technology employees at Disney/ABC Television in New York and Burbank, Calif., received jarring news. Managers told them that they would all be laid off, and that during their final weeks they would have to train immigrants brought in by an outsourcing company to do their jobs.
The training began, but after a few days it was suspended with no explanation. In New York, the immigrants suddenly stopped coming to the offices. Then on June 11, managers summoned the Disney employees with different news: Their layoffs had been canceled.  
  ''We were read a precisely worded statement,'' said one of the employees, who was relieved but reluctant to be named because he remains at the company. ''We were told our jobs were continuing and we should consider it as if nothing had happened until further notice.'' 
  Although the number of layoffs planned was small, the cancellation, which was first reported by Computerworld, a website covering the technology business, set off a hopeful buzz among tech employees in Disney's empire. It came in the midst of a furor over layoffs in January of 250 tech workers at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla. People who lost jobs there said they had to sit with immigrants from India, some on temporary work visas known as H-1B, and teach them to perform their jobs as a condition for receiving severance. 
  But it remained unclear on Tuesday who had initiated the change of strategy at Disney/ABC or whether it was part of a larger change in direction, because Disney executives declined to discuss it. 
  Emails and calls over several days to Kevin Brockman, a senior spokesman for Disney/ABC Television Group, were not returned. Cognizant, the global outsourcing company based in New Jersey that was bringing immigrants to the television group, also did not respond to calls or emails. 
  About 15 of the television group's tech employees were in New York and the rest were based in Burbank. 
  The layoffs at Walt Disney World and at other companies have added fuel to a debate about temporary visas, including H-1B's, that outsourcing firms use to bring immigrants, mainly from India, for technology work. The visas are meant for foreigners with specialized skills to fill discrete positions when Americans with those skills are not available. In the applications large companies must file for the visas, they have to confirm that no American workers will be displaced.
  The Labor Department said last week that it had opened an investigation into two outsourcing companies, Tata Consultancy Services and Infosys, for work they did for Southern California Edison, a power utility. It also referred complaints to the Justice Department for a separate inquiry. Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, has called for an investigation of the H-1B visa program.
  Tech workers who lost jobs in Orlando said Cognizant was one of the firms importing Indian immigrants to replace them.
  Current and former Disney tech workers have previously not spoken publicly about the layoffs. But on Saturday, one former Disney employee in Orlando, Keith Barrett, 57, posted a personal account on Google Plus. After working at Disney for more than 10 years, he wrote, he was forced in January to take a retirement that ''was not planned and was seven years before we were financially ready.'' He said his family was ''dealing with medical challenges.''
  His time at Disney was ''filled with numerous awesome moments,'' wrote Mr. Barrett, who runs a blog about information technology and was managing development projects when he was laid off.
  The tech employees he knew who had been required to train foreign replacements had ''routinely sacrificed personal time and freedoms to help make your experience what it was'' in the theme parks, he wrote. Their skills were adequate for the broad reorganization of its technology operations Disney had announced, he said. ''Any skill situation could have been addressed by repositioning and/or training existing staff,'' Mr. Barrett wrote. 
  In New York and Burbank, the layoffs announced on May 28 would have affected employees in charge of developing and maintaining internal systems. Since the layoffs were rescinded, employees have not received any new information from managers, several of them said.
  Disney executives have said the reorganization that led to the Orlando layoffs had resulted in an overall increase of 70 technology jobs and the rehiring of some people who were laid off. Kim Prunty, a Disney spokeswoman, said outside contractors ''are required to comply with all applicable employment laws.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/17/us/in-turnabout-disney-cancels-tech-worker-layoffs.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO       
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: LAYOFFS (99%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (91%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); OUTSOURCING (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); BUSINESS INVESTIGATIONS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (60%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (60%)

Company:  DISNEY-ABC TELEVISION GROUP (86%);  WALT DISNEY CO (58%);  INFOSYS LTD (58%);  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (55%);  SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON CO (50%);  TATA CONSULTANCY SERVICES LTD (50%)

Ticker: DIS (NYSE) (58%); INFY (PAR) (58%); INFY (NYSE) (58%); INFY (NSE) (58%); TCS (NSE) (50%)

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (58%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (58%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (58%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (58%); NAICS541511 CUSTOM COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (58%); SIC7371 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING SERVICES (58%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (55%); NAICS221111 HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (50%); SIC4911 ELECTRIC SERVICES (50%); NAICS541513 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (50%); NAICS541512 COMPUTER SYSTEMS DESIGN SERVICES (50%); SIC7376 COMPUTER FACILITIES MANAGEMENT SERVICES (50%); SIC7373 COMPUTER INTEGRATED SYSTEMS DESIGN (50%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (90%); NETWORK TELEVISION (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); CONSULTING SERVICES (72%); ENERGY & UTILITIES (60%)

Person: BILL NELSON (50%)

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (92%); NEW YORK, USA (93%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (91%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (92%); INDIA (91%)

Load-Date: June 17, 2015


End of Document
Disney Has No Comment on the Recent Reversal of Layoffs
The New York Times Blogs 
(Times Insider)
June 23, 2015 Tuesday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 573 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Julia Preston tells of the hearing that got her started on her widely read article about Disney laying off 250 people this year. Days after the article appeared, a more recent round of layoffs scheduled by the company was reversed. 
Body


 I have been covering the immigration beat for The New York Times for nine years, so I sensed that my recent story about layoffs of technology employees at Walt Disney World would draw our readers' interest. The employees had been replaced by temporary immigrants, mainly from India, brought in by an outsourcing company, and the laid-off workers had to train the new ones in order to receive a severance.
      But the raw nerve this article touched surprised me. Millions of people read it, and more than 3,000 commented on the article and a related blog post.
      The story started in March with a Senate hearing on the type of visas - known as H-1B - that were used for some of the foreign workers. Several witnesses mentioned the Disney layoffs, which had not been widely reported. Ronil Hira, a public policy professor at Howard University who has done careful research on temporary visas, provided a factual panorama of their uses and abuses. 
      The story took off after I was able to contact several former Disney employees who had been laid off or "forced into retirement," as one put it. I flew to Orlando, and found it revealing to see Disney's kingdom of fun through the eyes of Americans who had been expelled from it. Most had worked a decade or more with the company. 
Disney had also instructed its many contractors in the area to not hire the workers that had been laid off for one year. There are few tech jobs nearby not connected to Disney.   
      Many of the workers said they felt they had to hide in their own hometown. Those I reached insisted on speaking anonymously and arranged to meet in out-of-the-way places. But they spoke powerfully about the humiliation they said they felt spending three months training replacements. They expressed no hard feelings toward the immigrants; they felt ill-treated by Disney.
       Disney executives pointed to more than 30,000 jobs they said the company had created in the United States in the last decade- far more than the 250 technology layoffs. 
Readers were very interested. According to the comments many middle-class Americans said the story captured an experience they have seen all too often: companies outsourcing their work, saying their employees' skills were not up-to-date even after many years on a job.  Our readers saw it as a story about Disney, an American company, making profits at the expense of Americans. 
        After the article ran, Disney provided another number in an email sent to people who wrote the company in protest. The message said the reorganization that led to the layoffs had produced a net gain of 70 technology jobs nationwide.
        But there was one number Disney did not want to discuss. At Disney/ABC television, about 35 tech employees had been told in late May they would be laid-off and would have to train foreign replacements. Days after my story about the Orlando layoffs was published, the new layoffs were canceled. Again, several employees contacted me, but insisted on speaking anonymously. They were greatly relieved their livelihoods had been saved, at least for the moment. But Disney declined to acknowledge those events and wouldn't return my phone calls or emails.
Going forward, I will be keeping an eye out to see if Disney takes other actions indicating a change of course with its tech workers, while looking deeper at other companies that have used H-1B and other temporary visas to displace Americans.   
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: LAYOFFS (99%); IMMIGRATION (91%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (90%); LAYOFFS & DISMISSALS (90%); OUTSOURCING (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); EMOTIONS (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (69%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (53%); Disney, Walt, World (Lake Buena Vista, Fla) (%); Foreign Workers (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Labor and Jobs (%); Layoffs and Job Reductions (%); New York Times (%); Preston, Julia (%); United States (%); Visas (%); Walt Disney Company (%); Walt Disney Company|DIS|NYSE (%)

Company:  WALT DISNEY CO (58%);  WALT DISNEY WORLD CO (58%);  DISNEY-ABC TELEVISION GROUP (50%)

Organization: HOWARD UNIVERSITY (56%); Disney, Walt, World (Lake Buena Vista, Fla); New York Times; Walt Disney Company

Ticker: DIS (NYSE) (58%); Walt Disney Company; DIS; NYSE

Industry: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (58%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS (58%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (58%); NAICS453220 GIFT, NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (58%); SIC7996 AMUSEMENT PARKS (58%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (68%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (53%)

Person: Preston, Julia

Geographic: ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (96%); INDIA (79%); United States

Load-Date: June 23, 2015


End of Document
Visas for Foreign Workers
The New York Times
July 1, 2015 Wednesday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 28; LETTER
Length: 222 words
Body


To the Editor:
Re ''Workers Betrayed by Visa Loopholes'' (editorial, June 15): 
  For years, we, along with a broad coalition of advocates, have pushed for comprehensive immigration reform that would spur economic growth and benefit American workers.
  What we are seeing today is what happens when Congress defers action on a critical issue and leaves a broken system in place. The real culprits are the immigration reform opponents who have blocked efforts to fix our visa system at every turn.
  There are many companies that use H-1B visas to innovate, grow and create more American jobs. Buried in your newspaper's original article on this very topic, you reported that one of our members, Disney, actually added 70 tech jobs in the United States in its recent restructuring criticized by your editorial, on top of 30,000 American jobs it created in the last decade.
  Growing jobs and our economy are the reasons, as a coalition, we supported three bills in Congress in the last few years alone that would ensure that the H-1B visa system works as it's supposed to work -- enabling companies to fill skills gaps and grow, while also adding numerous layers of protection for American workers. However, these bills were defeated by immigration reform opponents. 
  JOHN FEINBLATT
  Chairman, Partnership for a New American Economy
  New York

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/01/opinion/visas-for-foreign-workers.html
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: Letter

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (92%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); FOREIGN LABOR (91%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (91%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION REGULATION & POLICY (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); JOB CREATION (78%); WORKFORCE DEMAND (78%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (77%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (72%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (72%)

Industry: EMPLOYMENT VISAS (91%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: July 1, 2015


End of Document
Donald Trump's Claims on Immigration: A Reality Check
The New York Times Blogs 
(First Draft)
August 17, 2015 Monday


Copyright 2015 The News York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: US; politics
Length: 642 words
Byline: JULIA PRESTON
Highlight: Donald J. Trump went further than his Republican rivals to offer a hard-line plan to crack down on illegal immigration and to reduce immigration in general. 
Body


With the immigration plan he revealed over the weekend, Donald J. Trump returned once again to the strategy that has worked so well for him in his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination: mixing a little policy with a lot of fiery bombast.
In the blueprint and comments he made on the news shows, Mr. Trump went farther than his Republican rivals to compile the ideal roster of measures for those who want a lot fewer immigrants in general. He said all illegal immigrants should be deported, including young people who came to this country as children and have received protections though executive action by President Obama. He implied he would deport American citizens if their parents were here illegally.
"We have to keep the families together, but they have to go," Mr. Trump said.
Some of his proposals are based on assertions that have been broadly debunked. He portrayed undocumented Mexican immigrants as uneducated criminals who have been living off "hundreds of billions" of American taxpayer dollars for their health care and education. But scholarly research has shown that undocumented immigrants are much more reluctant to use public health care than Americans. And billions of dollars of Social Security taxes they have paid for benefits they cannot collect have shored up the dwindling funds of that system.
Mr. Trump accused Mexico of exporting its crime and poverty to the United States. But while a bloody drug war has raged in Mexico in the last five years, notably little violence has spilled over into the United States, with several border cities being among the safest in the nation. Mr. Trump would build a wall across the length of the southwest border, a proposal Border Patrol officials have long rejected as immensely costly and inefficient.
But Mr. Trump's blueprint is a problem for his Republican rivals who have tried to take less hard line positions on immigration in an effort to attract Latino voters, like former Gov. Jeb Bush and Senator Marco Rubio, both of Florida. The plan crystallizes a hostile approach to Mexico and Mexican immigrants that is likely to stick in the minds of many Latino voters as reflective of the overall Republican view of immigration.
To force Mexico to pay for the border wall, Mr. Trump says he would "impound all remittance payments derived from illegal wages." A curb on remittances would attack longstanding lifelines between Mexican and other Latino immigrant communities in the United States and families back home - often elderly parents or young children - who rely on regular payments from workers here. Mr. Trump also favors raising fees on visas and border-crossing documents for Mexicans, making it even harder and more expensive for them to come legally.
About 35 million people in this country were born in Mexico or claim Mexican ancestry, according to Census figures, and Mexican-Americans are the fastest growing group of new voters. About half of Mexican immigrants are undocumented, so their communities follow the immigration debate closely.
Mr. Trump also called for an end to birthright citizenship, a proposal other Republicans have avoided because it is hard to achieve and risks alienating not only Latinos but also African-Americans. It involves changing the Constitution's 14th amendment, which allowed freed African slaves to become citizens after the Civil War.
Yet among Mr. Trump's populist proposals are some that could attract support from Americans in the beleaguered middle class. He went further than his rivals calling for changes to the temporary work visas known as H-1B, to raise the wages paid to immigrants and tighten requirements for employers to search first for Americans to fill jobs.
 Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via            Facebook,            Twitter and            the First Draft newsletter. 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: News

Publication-Type: Web Blog

Subject: IMMIGRATION (95%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (91%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (90%); NEGATIVE NEWS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); CHILDREN, ADOLESCENTS & TEENS (89%); FAMILY (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); DEPORTATION (78%); DRUG POLICY (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); NEGATIVE SOCIETAL NEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SOCIAL SECURITY (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); TAXES & TAXATION (78%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (73%); TAX LAW (73%); PUBLIC HEALTH (69%); SENIOR CITIZENS (66%); CENSUS (50%); Bush, Jeb (%); Foreign Workers (%); Illegal Immigration (%); Immigration and Emigration (%); Mexico (%); Presidential Election of 2016 (%); Republican Party (%); Rubio, Marco (%); Trump, Donald J (%)

Organization: Republican Party

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (94%); JEB BUSH (91%); MARCO RUBIO (78%); BARACK OBAMA (58%); Bush, Jeb; Rubio, Marco; Trump, Donald J

Geographic: FLORIDA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); Mexico

Load-Date: August 17, 2015


End of Document
Trump Releases Plan on Illegal Immigration, Calling for Stricter Enforcement
The New York Times
August 17, 2015 Monday
Late Edition - Final


Copyright 2015 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14
Length: 815 words
Byline: By NICK CORASANITI
Body


After staking his early campaign on caustic and contentious remarks about undocumented immigrants, Donald J. Trump on Sunday outlined his plan to fix the country's immigration system and deal with people who are in the country illegally.
The position paper, published on Mr. Trump's website, centered on three principles. The first stated that ''a nation without borders is not a nation'' -- a theme Mr. Trump has made a constant in his stump speeches -- and called for a wall to be built along the southern border. 
  He also repeated his promise to make Mexico pay for the wall and laid out how he would do it: largely through increasing fees on border movement between the United States and Mexico.
  ''We will not be taken advantage of anymore,'' the plan states.
  Mr. Trump's proposal also calls for strengthening the ''enforcement arm'' of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement office, to be paid for by ''eliminating tax credit payments to illegal immigrants.'' 
  The third principle says that ''any immigration plan must improve jobs, wages and security for all Americans.''
  Mr. Trump's campaign released the plan moments after the candidate appeared in a wide-ranging interview on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' during which he spoke broadly about his plans to deport undocumented immigrants.
  ''We have to keep the families together, but they have to go,'' Mr. Trump said. 
  When asked how he might accomplish this, especially given the cost, Mr. Trump responded with a question of his own.
  ''Do you think there's tremendous cost for the illegals that are in here right now?'' Mr. Trump asked. ''Do you think there's tremendous crime being committed by illegals?''
  He promised to ''expedite it so people can come back in'' after the deportation. ''The good people can come back,'' he said.
  The crimes committed by undocumented immigrants have been a focus of Mr. Trump's early campaign. He has accused Mexico of sending criminals and rapists to the United States, and has often infuriated Latinos with his remarks.
  In his formal policy, as he has many times before, Mr. Trump maintains that ''Mexico's leaders have been taking advantage of the United States by using illegal immigration to export the crime and poverty in their own country.''
  Other parts of the plan are similar to the proposals of his rivals in the Republican race. He proposed enforcing the nationwide e-verify system, ending birthright citizenship for the children of illegal immigrants and increasing the prevailing wage for the temporary H-1B visas.
  While Mr. Trump spent much of the interview reaffirming his stance on illegal immigrants, at times he struggled to answer questions on other issues.
  On foreign policy, Mr. Trump indicated that he was staking out most of his early positions without much outside counsel.
  ''I watch the shows,'' Mr. Trump said when asked whom he talked to for military advice. ''I mean, I really see a lot of great -- you know, when you watch your show and all of the other shows and you have the generals and you have certain people that you like.'' He later added that he was a fan of former Ambassador John R. Bolton and retired Col. Jack Jacobs.
  When it came to criticizing his Republican rivals, Mr. Trump mentioned only one by name: Jeb Bush.
  He went after Mr. Bush repeatedly and unprompted, calling him a ''puppet'' to donors and arguing that Mr. Bush's comment regarding federal funding for women's health was his ''47 percent'' moment -- a comparison to a comment made by Mitt Romney during the 2012 presidential campaign that many said made him appear out of touch with voters.
  ''He's made so many flubs, I don't even understand it,'' Mr. Trump said of Mr. Bush.
  Mr. Trump again was the topic du jour on the Sunday morning political talk shows, even those on which he did not appear.
  Two candidates whose profiles have risen in the past week after the first Republican debate -- Carly Fiorina and Gov. John Kasich of Ohio -- were both asked about Mr. Trump.
  Mr. Kasich made no direct comments about Mr. Trump, and even avoided saying his name when answering a question about the real estate mogul's view of the electorate.
  ''I want people to know what I'm all about right now, because I think the country needs lifting,'' Mr. Kasich said in an interview with CBS's ''Face the Nation.'' ''I think it needs uniting.''
  Mrs. Fiorina, who has been the subject of criticism from Mr. Trump, took a slightly different tone when asked about him on ABC's ''This Week.''
  ''Honestly, you know, I find it sort of amusing,'' Ms. Fiorina said of Mr. Trump's attacks against her. She claimed not to have spent much time thinking about Mr. Trump, but added that ''insults are not helpful to the political process.''
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.

http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/17/us/politics/trump-releases-plan-to-combat-illegal-immigration.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Donald J. Trump at the Iowa State Fair on Saturday. His plan to combat illegal immigration appeared on his website on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIC THAYER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)        
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: IMMIGRATION (96%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (95%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (89%); NEGATIVE NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); IMMIGRATION OF MINORS (78%); IMMIGRATION REFORM (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); WAGE GROWTH (75%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (73%); FAMILY (71%); TAXES & TAXATION (69%); TAX LAW (68%); PREVAILING WAGES (66%); TAX CREDITS (52%)

Industry: PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (73%)

Person: DONALD TRUMP (79%)

Geographic: MEXICO (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); NORTH AMERICA (79%)

Load-Date: August 17, 2015


End of Document
